STREBY LALATUN
STRACCE
DOTC
2
6
- 2
9
you dorit expect 10
a seaman'
married to a
Crippled woman
to line forener
do you?
12
can do nothing
w
It's on account of the Red Cap.
with this cap
$5.95
STRANGE
DOINGS
These sixteen previously uncollected
stories range from bizarre humor to sheer
horror. All are off-beat with the wry, play-
ful, wide-ranging imagination that has
gained R. A. Lafferty a steadily increasing
following of delighted readers.
Featured is the Nebula and Hugo
Award-contending story "Continued on
Next Rock," which describes the most
unforgettable "dig" ever made as the
excavators are beguiled and led by a
stranger with remarkable talents as a
"reader" of lost cultures.
Stories such as "World Abounding,"
"The Man with the Speckled Eyes,”
"Camels and Dromedaries, Clem," "En-
tire and Perfect Chrysolite” and “Cliffs
That Laughed” reveal Lafferty penetrat-
ing to the zany realities of the human and
inhuman condition.
You will move through strange worlds
of personality literally splitting itself, of
nightmares becoming true and preferred,
of the perils of doubting and the hazards
of believing. And in each story you will
move through the individual and beauti-
ful styles of a master of the unexpected
turn of phrase, idea and situation.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
R. A. LAFFERTY is the author of Arrive
at Easterwine, Past Master, Fourth Man-
sions and The Reefs of Earth as well as a
collection of stories, Nine Hundred
Grandmothers,
He was born in lowa and now lives in
Tulsa, Oklahoma, where he is an electri-
cal engineer.
Lafferty's stories have appeared not
only in major science fiction magazines,
but in The New Mexico Quarterly and
Literary Review.
Jacket design by ONI
Scribners
E'S
Charles Scribner's Sons
New York
STRANGE DOINGS
Doings
Books by R. A. Lafferty
Strange Doings
The Fall of Rome
Arrive at Easterwine
Nine Hundred Grandmothers
Past Master
Fourth Mansions
The Reefs of Earth
Space Chantey
STRANGE Doings
Stories by R. A. Lafferty
Charles Scribner's Sons
New York
Copyright © 1972 R. A. Lafferty.
The following stories were first published in the magazines
indicated below:
a
Galaxy: “All But the Words," "Aloys," “Dreamworld,”
"Rainbird," "Sodom and Gomorrah, Texas."
Copyright © 1971 UPD Corporation. Copyright © 1961,
1962 Galaxy Publishing Corporation.
If: "Ride a Tin Can."
Copyright © 1970 UPD Corporation.
The Literary Review: "The Ugly Sea.”
Copyright © 1961 Fairleigh Dickinson University.
The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction: "Camels
and Dromedaries, Clem," "The Man with the Speckled
Eyes," "World Abounding."
Copyright © 1967 1964, 1971 Mercury Press, Inc.
The Magazine of Horror: "Cliffs That Laughed.”
Copyright © 1968 Health Knowledge, Inc.
Orbit (6, 7): "Entire and Perſect Chrysolite," "Continued
on Next Rock."
Copyright © 1970 Damon Knight.
Quark 2: “Incased in Ancient Rind.”
Copyright © 1971 Coronet Communications, Inc.
Worlds of Tomorrow: “The Transcendent Tigers."
Copyright © 1964 Galaxy Publishing Corporation.
.
This book published simultaneously in the United States
of America and in Canada -
Copyright under the Berne Convention
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form without the permission of
Charles Scribner's Sons.
A-12.71 [C]
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 72-162759
SBN 684-12530-7 (Trade cloth)
The Stories
1 Rainbird
16
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem
32
Continued on Next Rock
63
Once on Aranea
77
Sodom and Gomorrah, Texas
87
The Man with the Speckled Eyes
99
All but the Words
112
The Transcendent Tigers
126
World Abounding
168
Dream
177
Ride a Tin Can
194
Aloys
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite
205
222
Incased in Ancient Rind
242
The Ugly Sea
Cliffs that Laughed
260
Rainbird
Were scientific firsts truly tabulated the name of the
Yankee inventor, Higgston Rainbird, would surely be
without
peer. Yet today he is known (and only to a few
specialists, at that) for an improved blacksmith's bellows
in the year 1785, for a certain modification (not fun-
damental) in the moldboard plow about 1805, for a
better (but not good) method of reefing the lateen sail,
for a chestnut roaster, for the Devil's Claw Wedge for
splitting logs, and for a nutmeg grater embodying a new
safety feature; this last was either in the year 1816 or
1817. He is known for such, and for no more.
Were this all that he achieved his name would still be
secure. And it is secure, in a limited way, to those who
hobby in technological history.
But the glory of which history has cheated him, or of
which he cheated himself, is otherwise. In a different
sense it is without parallel, absolutely unique.
For he pioneered the dynamo, the steam automobile,
the steel industry, ferro-concrete construction, the inter-
nal combustion engine, electric illumination and power,
the wireless, the televox, the petroleum and petro-
chemical industries, monorail transportation, air travel,
worldwide monitoring, fissionable power, space travel,
2 Strange Doings
>
group telepathy, political and economic balance; he
built a retrogressor; and he made great advances towards
corporal immortality and the apotheosis of mankind. It
would seem unfair that all this is unknown of him.
Even the once solid facts—that he wired Philadelphia
for light and power in 1799, Boston the following year,
and New York two years later-are no longer solid. In a
sense they are no longer facts.
For all this there must be an explanation; and if not
that, then an account at least; and if not that, well-
something anyhow.
Higgston Rainbird made a certain decision on a June
afternoon in 1779 when he was quite a young man, and
by this decision he confirmed his inventive bent.
He was hawking from the top of Devil's Head Moun-
tain. He flew his falcon (actually a tercel hawk) down
through the white clouds, and to him it was the highest
sport in the world. The bird came back, climbing the
blue air, and brought a passenger pigeon from below the
clouds. And Higgston was almost perfectly happy as he
hooded the hawk.
He could stay there all day and hawk from above the
clouds. Or he could go down the mountain and work on
his sparker in his shed. He sighed as he made the
decision, for no man can have everything. There was a
fascination about hawking. But there was also a fascina-
tion about the copper-strip sparker. And he went down
the mountain to work on it.
Thereafter he hawked less. After several years he was
forced to give it up altogether. He had chosen his life,
the dedicated career of an inventor, and he stayed with
it for sixty-five years.
His sparker was not a success. It would be expensive,
its spark was uncertain and it had almost no advantage
over flint. People could always start a fire. If not, they
Rainbird 3
a
could borrow a brand from a neighbor. There was no
market for the sparker. But it was a nice machine,
hammered copper strips wrapped around iron teased
with lodestone, and the thing turned with a hand crank.
He never gave
it up entirely. He based other things upon
it; and the retrogressor of his last years could not have
been built without it.
But the main thing was steam, iron, and tools. He
made the finest lathes. He revolutionized smelting and
mining. He brought new things to power, and started
the smoke to rolling. He made mistakes, he ran into
dead ends, he wasted whole decades. But one man can
only do so much.
He married a shrew, Audrey, knowing that a man
cannot achieve without a goad as well as a goal. But he
was without issue or disciple, and this worried him.
He built a steamboat and a steamtrain. His was the
first steam thresher. He cleared the forests with wood-
burning giants, and designed towns. He destroyed south-
ern slavery with a steampowered cotton picker, and
power and wealth followed him.
For better or worse he brought the country up a long
road, so there was hardly a custom of his boyhood that
still continued. Probably no one man had ever changed a
country so much in his lifetime.
He fathered true machine-tool industry, and
brought rubber from the tropics and plastic from the
laboratory. He pumped petroleum, and used natural gas
for illumination and steam power. He was honored and
enriched; and, looking back, he had no reason to regard
his life as wasted.
“Yes, I've missed so much. I wasted a lot of time. If
only I could have avoided the blind alleys, I could have
done
many times as much. I brought machine tooling to
its
apex. But I neglected the finest tool of all, the mind.
a
4 Strange Doings
I used it as it is, but I had not time to study it, much
less modify it. Others after me will do it all. But I rather
wanted to do it all myself. Now it is too late.”
He went back and worked on his old sparker and its
descendents, now that he was old. He built toys along
the line of it that need not always have remained toys.
He made a televox, but the only practical application
was that now Audrey could rail at him over a greater
distance. He fired up a little steam dynamo in his house,
ran wires and made it burn lights in his barn.
And he built a retrogressor.
“I would do much more along this line had I the
time. But I'm pepper-bellied pretty near the end of the
road. It is like finally coming to a gate and seeing a
whole greater world beyond it, and being too old and
feeble to enter."
He kicked a chair and broke it.
"I never even made a better chair. Never got around
to it. There are so clod-hopping many things I meant to
do. I have maybe pushed the country ahead a couple of
decades faster than it would otherwise have gone. But
what couldn't I have done if it weren't for the blind
alleys! Ten years lost in one of them, twelve in another.
If only there had been a way to tell the true from the
false, and to leave to others what they could do, and to
do myself only what nobody else could do. To see a link
(however unlikely) and to go out and get it and set it in
its place. Oh, the waste, the wilderness that a talent can
wander in! If I had only had a mentor! If I had had a
map, a clue, a hatful of clues. I was born shrewd, and I
shrewdly cut a path and went a grand ways. But always
there was a clearer path and a faster way that I did not
see till later. As my name is Rainbird, if I had it to do
over, I'd do it infinitely better.”
a
Rainbird
5
He began to write a list of the things that he'd have
done better. Then he stopped and threw away his
pen
in
disgust.
“Never did even invent a decent ink
pen.
Never
got
around to it. Dog-eared damnation, there's so much I
didn't do!”
He poured himself a jolt, but he made a face as he
drank it.
“Never got around to distilling a really better whis-
key. Had some good ideas along that line, too. So many
things I never did do. Well, I can't improve things by
talking to myself here about it.”
Then he sat and thought.
“But I burr-tailed can improve things by talking to
myself there about it."
He turned on his retrogressor, and went back sixty-
five
years
and up two thousand feet.
Higgston Rainbird was hawking from the top of
Devil's Head Mountain one June afternoon in 1779. He
flew his bird down through the white fleece clouds, and
to him it was sport indeed. Then it came back, climbing
the shimmering air, and brought a pigeon to him.
“It's fun,” said the old man, “but the bird is tough,
and you have a lot to do. Sit down and listen, Higgs-
ton.'
“How do you know the bird is tough? Who are you,
and how did an old man like
you
climb
up
here without
my seeing you? And how in hellpepper did you
know
that my name was Higgston?”
“I ate the bird and I remember that it was tough. I
am just an old man who would tell you a few things to
avoid in your life, and I came up here by means of an
invention of my own. And I know your name is Higgs-
6 Strange Doings
ton, as it is also my name; you being named after me, or
I after you, I forget which. Which one of us is the older,
anyhow?”
“I had thought that you were, old man. I am a little
interested in inventions myself. How does the one that
carried you up here work?”
“It begins, well it begins with something like your
sparker, Higgston. And as the years go by you adapt and
add. But it is all tinkering with a force field till you are
able to warp it a little. Now then, you are an ewer-eared
galoot and not as handsome as I remembered you; but I
happen to know that you have the makings of a fine
man. Listen now as hard as ever you listened in your
life. I doubt that I will be able to repeat. I will save you
years and decades; I will tell you the best road to take
over a joumey which it was once said that a man could
travel but once. Man, I'll pave a path for you over the
hard places and strew palms before your feet.”
.
“Talk, you addlepated old gaff. No man ever listened
so hard before."
The old man talked to the young one for five hours.
Not a word was wasted; they were neither of them given
to wasting words. He told him that steam wasn't every-
thing, this before he knew that it was anything. It was a
giant power, but it was limited. Other powers, perhaps,
were not. He instructed him to explore the possibilities
of amplification and feedback, and to use always the
lightest medium of transmission of power: wire rather
than mule-drawn coal cart, air rather than wire, ether
rather than air. He warned against time wasted in shor-
ing up the obsolete, and of the bottomless quicksand of
cliché, both of word and of thought.
He admonished him not to waste precious months in
trying to devise the perfect apple corer; there will never
be a perfect apple corer. He begged him not to build a
>
Rainbird 7
a
а
battery bobsled. There would be things far swifter than
a bobsled.
Let others make the new hide scrapers and tanning
salts. Let others aid the carter and the candle molder
and the cooper in their arts. There was need for a better
hame, a better horse block, a better stile, a better whet-
stone. Well, let others fill those needs. If our button-
hooks, our firedogs, our whiffletrees, our bootjacks, our
cheese presses are all badly designed and a disgrace, then
let someone else remove that disgrace. Let others aid the
cordwainer and the cobbler. Let Higgston do only the
high work that nobody else would be able to do.
There would come a time when the farrier himself
would disappear, as the fletcher had all but disappeared.
But new trades would open for a man with an open
mind.
Then the old man got specific. He showed young
Higgston a design for a lathe dog that would save time.
He told him how to draw, rather than hammer wire; and
advised him of the virtues of mica as insulator before
other material should come to hand.
“And here there are some things that you will have to
take on faith,” said the old man, “things of which we
learn the 'what' before we fathom the 'why'.”
He explained to him the shuttle armature and the
self-exciting field, and commutation; and the possibili-
ties that anternation carried to its ultimate might open
up. He told him a bejammed lot of things about a
confounded huge variety of subjects.
“And a little mathematics never hurt a practical
man,” said the old gaffer. “I was self-taught, and it
slowed me down.”
They hunkered down there, and the old man cy-
phered it all out in the dust on the top of Devil's Head
Mountain. He showed him natural logarithms and rotat-
8 Strange Doings
ing vectors and the calculi and such; but he didn't push
it too far, as even a smart boy can learn only so much in
a few minutes. He then gave him a little advice on the
treatment of Audrey, knowing it would be useless, for
the art of living with a shrew is a thing that cannot be
explained to another.
“Now hood your hawk and go down the mountain
and go to work,” the old man said. And that is what
young Higgston Rainbird did.
>
a
The career of the Yankee inventor, Higgston Rain-
bird, was meteoric. The wise men of Greece were little
boys to him, the Renaissance giants had only knocked
at the door but had not tried the knob. And it was
unlocked all the time.
The milestones that Higgston left are breathtaking.
He built a short high dam on the flank of Devil's Head
Mountain, and had hydroelectric power for his own
shop in that same year (1779). He had an arc light
burning in Horse-Head Lighthouse in 1781. He read by
true incandescent light in 1783, and lighted his native
village, Knobknocker, three years later. He drove a char-
coal fueled automobile in 1787, switched to a distillate
of whale oil in 1789, and used true rock oil in 1790. His
gasoline powered combination reaper-thresher was in
commercial production in 1793, the same year that he
wired Centerville for light and power. His first diesel
locomotive made its trial run in 1796, in which
also converted one of his earlier coal burning steamships
to liquid fuel.
In 1799 he had wired Philadelphia for light and
power, a major breakthrough, for the big cities had
manfully resisted the innovations. On the night of the
turn of the century he unhooded a whole clutch of new
things, wireless telegraphy, the televox, radio trans-
year he
Rain bird 9
>
mission and reception, motile and audible theatrical
reproductions, a machine to transmit the human voice
into print, and a method of sterilizing and wrapping
meat to permit its indefinite preservation at any tem-
perature.
And in the spring of that new year he first flew a
heavier-than-air vehicle.
“He has made all the basic inventions,” said the
many-tongued people. “Now there remains only their
refinement and proper utilization.”
“Horse hokey,” said Higgston Rainbird. He made a
rocket that could carry freight to England in thirteen
minutes at seven cents a hundredweight. This was in
1805. He had fissionable power in 1813, and within
four years had the price down where it could be used
for desalting seawater to the eventual irrigation of five
million
square miles of remarkably dry land.
He built a Think Machine to work out the problems
that he was too busy to solve, and a Prediction Machine
pose him with new problems and new areas of break-
through.
In 1821, on his birthday, he hit the moon with a
marker. He bet a crony that he would be able to go up
personally one year later and retrieve it. And he won the
bet.
In 1830 he first put on the market his Red Ball Pipe
Tobacco, an aromatic and expensive crimp cut made of
Martian lichen.
In 1836 he founded the Institute for the Atmospheric
Rehabilitation of Venus, for he found that place to be
worse than a smokehouse. It was there that he devel-
oped that hacking cough that stayed with him till the
end of his days.
He synthesized a man of his own age and disrepute
who would sit drinking with him in the after-midnight
to
10 Strange Doings
hours and say, “You're so right, Higgston, so incontes-
tably right.”
His plan for the Simplification and Eventual Elimina-
tion of Government was adopted (in modified form) in
1840, a fruit of his Political and Economic Balance
Institute.
Yet, for all his seemingly successful penetration of
the field, he realized that man was the one truly can-
tankerous animal, and that Human Engineering would
remain one of the never completely resolved fields.
He made a partial breakthrough in telepathy, starting
with the personal knowledge that shrews are always able
to read the minds of their spouses. He knew that the
secret was not in sympathetic reception, but in arrogant
break-in. With the polite it is forever impossible, but he
disguised this discovery as politely as he could.
And he worked toward corporal immortality and the
apotheosis of mankind, that cantankerous animal.
He designed a fabric that would embulk itself on a
temperature drop, and thin to an airy sheen in summery
weather. The weather itself he disdained to modify, but
he did evolve infallible prediction of exact daily rainfall
and temperature for decades in advance.
And he built a retrogressor.
One day he looked in the mirror and frowned.
“I never did get around to making a better mirror.
This one is hideous. However (to consider every possi-
bility) let us weigh the thesis that it is the image and not
the mirror that is hideous.”
He called up an acquaintance.
“Say, Ulois, what year is this anyhow?”
,
“1844.”
Rain bird
11
“Are you sure?”
“Reasonably sure.”
“How old am I?”
“Eighty-five, I think, Higgston.”
“How long have I been an old man?”
“Quite a while, Higgston, quite a while.”
Higgston Rainbird hung up rudely.
“I wonder how I ever let a thing like that slip up on
me?” he said to himself. “I should have gone to work on
corporal immortality a little earlier. I've bungled the
whole business now.
He fiddled with his prediction machine and saw that
he was to die that very year. He did not seek a finer
reading.
“What a saddle-galled splay-footed situation to find
myself in! I never got around to a tenth of the things I
really wanted to do. Oh, I was smart enough; I just ran
up too many blind alleys. Never found the answers to
half the old riddles. Should have built the Prediction
Machine at the beginning instead of the end. But I
didn't know how to build it at the beginning. There
ought to be a way to get more done. Never got any
advice in my life worth taking except from that nutty
old man on the mountain when I was a young man.
There's a lot of things I've only started on. Well, every
man doesn't hang, but every man does come to the end
of his rope. I never did get around to making that rope
extensible. And I can't improve things by talking to
myself here about it.”
He filled his pipe with Red Ball crimp cut and
thought a while.
“But I hill-hopping can improve things by talking to
myself there about it.”
>
12 Strange Doings
Then he turned on his retrogressor and went back and
up.
a
a
Young Higgston Rainbird was hawking from the top
of Devil's Head Mountain on a June afternoon in 1779.
He flew his hawk down through the white clouds, and
decided that he was the finest fellow in the world and
master of the finest sport. If there was earth below the
clouds it was far
away
and unimportant.
The hunting bird came back, climbing the tall air,
with a pigeon from the lower regions.
“Forget the bird,” said the old man, “and give a listen
with those outsized ears of yours. I have a lot to tell you
in a very little while, and then you must devote yourself
to a concentrated life of work. Hood the bird and clip
him to the stake. Is that bridle clip of your own inven-
tion? Ah yes, I remember now that it is.”
"I'll just fly him down once more,
old
man,
and then
I'll have a look at what you're selling.”
“No. No. Hood him at once. This is your moment of
decision. That is a boyishness that you must give up.
Listen to me, Higgston, and I will orient your life for
you.”
“I rather intended to orient it myself. How did you
get up here, old man, without my seeing you? How, in
fact, did you get up here at all? It's a hard climb.”
“Yes, I remember that it is. I came up here on the
wings of an invention of my own. Now
for a few hours. It will take all your considerable wit.”
“A few hours and a perfect hawking afternoon will be
gone. This may be the finest day ever made.”'
“I also once felt that it was, but I man fully gave it
up.
So must you.”
“Let me fly the hawk down again and I will listen to
you while it is gone.” "
pay attention
> >
Rainbird
13
“But you will only be listening with half a mind, and
the rest will be with the hawk.”
But young Higgston Rainbird flew the bird down
through the shining white clouds, and the old man
began his rigmarole sadly. Yet it was a rang-dang-do of a
spiel, a mummywhammy of admonition and exposition,
and young Higgston listened entranced and almost for-
got his hawk. The old man told him that he must stride
half a dozen roads at once, and yet never take a wrong
one; that he must do some things earlier that on the
alternative had been done quite late; that he must point
his technique at the Think Machine and the Prediction
Machine, and at the unsolved problem of corporal im-
mortality.
“In no other way can you really acquire elbow room,
ample working time. Time runs out and life is too short
if you let it take its natural course. Are you listening to
me, Higgston?"
But the hawk came back, climbing the steep air, and
it had a gray dove. The old man sighed at the interrup-
tion, and he knew that his project was in peril.
“Hood the hawk. It's a sport for boys. Now listen to
me, you spraddling jack. I am telling you things that
nobody else would ever be able to tell you! I will show
you how to fly falcons to the stars, not just down to the
meadows and birch groves at the foot of this moun-
tain.”
“There is no prey up there,” said young Higgston.
“There is. Gamier prey than you ever dreamed of.
Hood the bird and snaffle him."
“I'll just fly him down one more time and listen to
you till he comes back."
The hawk went down through the clouds like a
golden bolt of summer lightning.
Then the old man, taking the cosmos, peeled it open
14 Strange Doings
a
layer by layer like an onion, and told young Higgston
how it worked. Afterwards he retumed to the techno-
logical beginning and he lined out the workings of steam
and petro- and electromagnetism, and explained that
these simple powers must be used for a short interval in
the invention of greater power. He told him of waves
and resonance and airy transmission, and fission and
flight and over-flight. And that none of the doors re-
quired keys, only a resolute man to turn the knob and
push them open. Young Higgston was impressed.
Then the hawk came back, climbing the towering air,
and it had a rainbird.
The old man had lively eyes, but now they took on a
new light.
“Nobody ever gives up pleasure willingly,” he said,
“and there is always the sneaking feeling that the bar-
gain may not have been perfect. This is one of the things
I have missed. I haven't hawked for sixty-five years. Let
me fly him this time, Higgston.”
“You know how?”
“I am adept. And I once intended to make a better
gauntlet for hawkers. This hasn't been improved since
Nimrod's time.”
“I have an idea for a better gauntlet myself, old
man.”
“Yes. I know what your idea is. Go ahead with it. It's
practical.”
“Fly him if you want to, old man.'
And old Higgston flew the tercel hawk down through
the gleaming clouds, and he and young Higgston
watched from the top of the world. And then young
Higgston Rainbird was standing alone on the top of
Devil's Head Mountain, and the old man was gone.
"I wonder where he went? And where in apple-
Rain bird
15
knocker's heaven did he come from? Or was he ever
here at all? That's a danged funny machine he came in,
if he did come in it. All the wheels are on the inside. But
I can use the gears from it, and the clock, and the
copper
wire. It must have taken weeks to hammer that
much wire out that fine. I wish I'd paid more attention
to what he was saying, but he poured it on a little thick.
I'd have gone along with him on it if only he'd have
found a good stopping place a little sooner, and hadn't
been so insistent on giving up hawking. Well, I'll just
hawk here till dark, and if it dawns clear I'll be up again
in the morning. And Sunday, if I have a little time, I
may work on my sparker or my chestnut roaster.”
Higgston Rainbird lived a long and successful life.
Locally he was known best as a hawker and horse racer.
But as an inventor he was recognized as far as Boston.
He is still known, in a limited way, to specialists in
the field and period: known as contributor to the de-
velopment of the moldboard plow, as the designer of
the Nonpareil Nutmeg Grater with the safety feature,
for a bellows, for a sparker for starting fires (little used),
and for the Devil's Claw Wedge for splitting logs.
He is known for such, and for no more.
a
Camels and Dromedaries,
Clem
“Greeks and Armenians, Clem. Condors and buzzards.”
“Samoyeds and Malemutes, Clem. Galena and molyb-
denite."
Oh here, here! What kind of talk is that?
That is definitive talk. That is fundamental talk.
There is no other kind of talk that will bring us to the
core of this thing.
Clem Clendenning was a traveling salesman, a good
one. He had cleared $35,000 the previous year. He
worked for a factory in a midwestern town. The plant
produced a unique product, and Clem sold it over one-
third of the nation.
Things were going well with him. Then a little thing
happened, and it changed his life completely.
Salesmen have devices by which they check and
double-check. One thing they do when stopping at
hotels in distant towns; they make sure they're regis-
tered. This sounds silly, but it isn't. A salesman will get
calls from his home office and it is important that the
office be able to locate him. Whenever Clem registered
at a hotel he would check back after several hours to be
sure that they had him entered correctly. He would call
in from somewhere, and he would ask for himself. And
16
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem
17
it sometimes did happen that he was told he was not
registered. At this Clem would always raise a great noise
to be sure that they had him straight thereafter.
Arriving in a town this critical day, Clem had found
himself ravenously hungry and tired to his depths. Both
states were unusual to him. He went to a grill and ate
gluttonously for an hour, so much so that people stared
at him. He ate almost to the point of apoplexy. Then he
taxied to the hotel, registered, and went up to his room
at once. Later, not remembering whether he had even
undressed or not (it was early afternoon), he threw
himself onto the bed and slept, as it seemed, for hours.
But he noted that it was only a half hour later that he
woke, feeling somehow deprived, as though having a
great loss. He was floundering around altogether in a
daze, and was once more possessed of an irrational
hunger. He unpacked a little, put on a suit, and was
surprised to find that it hung on him quite loosely.
He went out with the feeling that he had left some-
thing on the bed that was not quite right, and yet he
had been afraid to look. He found a hearty place and
had another great meal. And then (at a different place
so that people would not be puzzled at him) he had still
another one. He was feeling better now, but mighty
queer, mighty queer.
Fearing that he might be taken seriously ill, he de-
cided to check his bearings. He used his old trick. He
found a phone and called his hotel and asked for him-
self.
“We will check,” said the phone girl, and a little bit
later she said, “Just a minute, he will be on the line in a
minute.”
“Oh, great green goat,” he growled, “I wonder how
they have me mixed
up
this time.”
And Clem was about to raise his voice unpleasantly to
18
Strange Doings
>
be sure that they got him straight, when a voice came
onto the phone.
This is the critical point.
It was his own voice.
The calling Clendenning laughed first. And then he
froze. It was no trick. It was no freak. There was no
doubt that it was his own voice. Clem used the dicta-
phone a lot and he knew the sound of his own voice.
And now he heard his own voice raised higher in all
its unmistakable aspects, a great noise about open idiots
a
who call on the phone and then stand silent without
answering
“It's me all right,” Clem grumbled silently to himself.
“I sure do talk rough when I'm irritated.”
There was a law against harassment by telephone, the
voice on the phone said. By God, the voice on the
phone said, he just noticed that his room had been
rifled. He was having the call monitored right now, the
voice on the phone swore. Clem knew that this was a
lie, but he also recognized it as his own particular style
of lying. The voice got really wooly and profane.
Then there was a change in the tone.
“Who are you?” the voice asked hollowly. “I hear
you breathing scared. I know your sound. Gaaah-it's
me!” And the voice on the phone was also breathing
scared.
“There has to be an answer,” he told himself. “I'll
just go to my room and take a hot bath and try to sleep
it off.”
Then he roared back: “Go to my room! Am I crazy?
I have just called my room. I am already there. I would
not go to my room for one million one hundred and five
thousand dollars."
He was trembling as though his bones were too loose
for his flesh. It was funny that he had never before
a
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem
19
noticed how bony he was. But he wasn't too scared to
think straight on one subject, however crooked other
things might be.
“No, I wouldn't go back to that room for any sum.
But I will do something for another sum, and I'll do it
damned quick.”
He ran, and he hasn't stopped running yet. That he
should have another self-made flesh terrified him. He
ran, but he knew where he was running for the first
stage of it. He took the night plane back to his home-
town, leaving bag and baggage behind.
He was at the bank when it opened in the morning.
He closed out all his accounts. He turned everything
into cash. This took several hours. He walked out of
there with $83,000. He didn't feel like a thief; it was his
own; it couldn't have belonged to his other self, could
it? If there were two of them, then let there be two sets
of accounts.
Now to get going fast.
He contined to feel odd. He weighed himself. In spite
of his great eating lately, he had lost a hundred pounds.
That's enough to make anyone feel odd. He went to
New York City to lose himself in the crowd and to
think about the matter.
And what was the reaction at his firm and at his
home when he turned up missing? That's the second
point. He didn't turn up missing. As the months went
by he followed the doings of his other self. He saw his
pictures in the trade papers; he was still with the same
firm; he was still top salesman. He always got the
hometown paper, and he sometimes found himself
therein. He saw his own picture with his wife Veronica.
She looked wonderful and so, he had to admit, did he.
They were still on the edge of the social stuff.
“If he's me, I wonder who I am?” Clem continued to
20
Strange Doings
ask himself. There didn't seem to be any answer to this.
There wasn't any handle to take the thing by.
Clem went to an analyst and told his story. The
analyst said that Clem had wanted to escape his job, or
his wife Veronica, or both. Clem insisted that this was
not so; he loved his job and his wife; he got deep and
fulfilling satisfaction out of both.
“You don't know Veronica or you wouldn't suggest
it,” he told the analyst. “She is-ah-well, if you
don't
know her, then hell, you don't know anything.”
The analyst told him that it had been his own id
talking to him on the telephone.
“How is it that my id is doing a top selling job out of
a town five hundred miles from here, and I am here?”
Clem wanted to know. “Other men's ids aren't so tal-
ented.”
The analyst said that Clem was suffering from a
tmema or diairetikos of an oddly named part of his
psychic apparatus.
“Oh hell, I'm an extrovert. Things like that don't
happen to people like me,” Clem said.
Thereafter Clem tried to make the best of his com-
promised life. He was quickly well and back to normal
weight. But he never talked on the telephone again in
his life. He'd have died most literally if he ever heard his
own voice like that again. He had no phone in any room
where he lived. He wore a hearing aid which he did not
need; he told people that he could not hear over the
phone, and that any unlikely call that came for him
would have to be taken down and relayed to him.
He had to keep an eye on his other self, so he did
renew one old contact. With one firm in New York
there was a man he had called on regularly; this man had
>
Ca m els and Dromedaries, Clem
21
a cheerful and open mind that would not be spooked by
the unusual. Clem began to meet this man (Why should
we lie about it? His name was Joe Zabotsky.) not at the
firm, but at an after-hours place which he knew Joe
frequented.
Joe heard Clem's story and believed it-after he had
phoned (in Clem's presence) the other Clem, located
him a thousand miles away, and ordered an additional
month's supply of the unique product which they didn't
really need, things being a little slow in all lines right
then.
After that, Clem would get around to see Joe
Zabotsky an average of once a month, about the time he
figured the other Clem had just completed his monthly
New York call.
“He's changing a little bit, and so are you,” Joe told
Clem one evening. “Yeah, it was with him just about
like with you. He did lose a lot of weight a while back,
what you call the critical day, and he gained it back
pretty quick just like you did. It bugs me, Clem, which
of
you
I used to know. There are some old things
between us that he recalls and you don't; there are some
that you recall and he doesn't; and dammit there are
some you both recall, and they happened between
myself and one man only, not between myself and two
men.
“But these last few months your face seems to be
getting a little fuller, and his a little thinner. You still
look just alike, but not quite as just-alike as you did at
first.”
“I know it,” Clem said. “I study the analysts now
since they don't do any good at studying me, and I've
learned an old analyst's trick. I take an old face-on
22
Strange Doings
photo of myself, divide it down the center, and then
complete each half with its mirror image. It gives
two faces just a little bit different. Nobody has the
two sides of his face quite alike. These two different
faces are supposed to indicate two different aspects
of the personality. I study myself, now, and I see
that I am becoming more like one of the construc-
tions; so he must be becoming more like the other
construction. He mentions that there are disturbances
between Veronica and himself, does he? And neither
of them quite understands what is the matter? Neither
do I.”
Clem lived modestly, but he began to drink more
than he had. He watched, through his intermediary Joe
and by other means, the doings of his other self. And he
waited. This was the most peculiar deal he had ever met,
but he hadn't been foxed on very many deals.
“He's no smarter than I am,” Clem insisted. “But, by
cracky, if he's me, he's pretty smart at that. What would
he do if he were in my place? And I guess, in a way,
he
is.”
Following his avocation of drinking and brooding and
waiting, Clem frequented various little places, and one
day he was in the Two-Faced Bar and Grill. This was
owned and operated by Two-Face Terrel, a double-
dealer and gentleman, even something of a dandy. A
man had just seated himself at a dim table with Clem,
had been served by Two-Face, and now the man began
to talk.
“Why did Matthew have two donkeys?” the man
asked.
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem 23
>
“Matthew who?” Clem asked. “I don't know what
you're talking about.”
“I'm talking about 21:1–9, of course,” the man said.
“The other Gospels have only one donkey. Did you ever
think about that?”
“No, I'd never given it a thought,” Clem said.
“Well, tell me then, why does Matthew have two
demoniacs?”
“What?”
“8:28–34. The other evangelists have only one crazy
man."
“Maybe there was only one loony at first, and he
drove the guy drinking next to him crazy.”
“That's possible. Oh, you're kidding. But why does
Matthew have two blind men?"
“Number of a number, where does this happen?”
Clem asked.
“9:27—31, and again 20:29–34. In each case the
other gospelers have only one blind man. Why does
Matthew double so many things? There are other in-
stances of it.'
“Maybe he needed glasses,” Clem said.
“No," the man whispered, “I think he was one of us.
“What ‘us' are you talking about?” Clem asked. But
already he had begun to suspect that his case was not
unique. Suppose that it happened one time out of a
million? There would still be several hundred such sun-
dered persons in the country, and they would tend to
congregate-in such places as the Two-Faced Bar and
Grill. And there was something deprived or riven about
almost every person who came into the place.
“And remember," the man
the man was continuing, “the
name or cognomen of one of the other Apostles was
>
24 Strange Doings
'The Twin.' But of whom was he twin? I think there was
the beginning of a group of them there already.”
>
“He wants to see you,” Joe Zabotsky told Clem when
they met several months later. “So does she.”
“When did he begin to suspect that there was another
one of me?"
“He knew something was wrong from the first. A
man doesn't lose a hundred pounds in an instant with-
out there being something wrong. And he knew son
thing was very wrong when all his accounts were cleaned
out. These were not forgeries, and he knew it. They
were not as good as good forgeries, for they were
hurried and all different and very nervous. But they
were all genuine signatures, he admitted that. Damn,
you are a curious fellow, Clem!”
“How much does Veronica know, and how? What
does she want? What does he?”
“He says that she also began to guess from the first.
'You act like you're only half a man, Clem,' she would
say to him, to you, that is. She wants to see more of her
husband, she says, the other half. And he wants to trade
places with you, at least from time to time on a trial
basis.”
"I won't do it! Let him stew in it!” Then Clem called
Clem a name so vile that it will not be given here.
“Take it easy, Clem,” Joe remonstrated. “It's your-
self you are calling that."
There was a quizzical young-old man who came some-
times into the Two-Faced Bar and Grill. They caught
each other's eye this day, and the young-old began to
talk.
“Is not consciousness the thing that divides man from
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem 25
>
>
>
>
>
the animals?” he asked. “But consciousness is a double
thing, a seeing one's self; not only a knowing, but a
knowing that one knows. So the human person is of its
essence double. How this is commonly worked out in
practice, I don't understand. Our present states are
surely not the common thing."
“My own consciousness isn't intensified since my
person is doubled,” Clem said. “It's all the other way.
My consciousness is weakened. I've become a creature
of my own unconscious. There's something about you
that I don't like, man.”
“The animal is simple and single,” the young-old man
said. “It lacks true reflexive consciousness. But man is
dual (though I don't understand the full meaning of it
here), and he has at least intimations of true conscious-
ness. And what is the next step?”
“I fathom you now," Clem said. “My father would
.
have called you a Judas Priest."
“I don't quite call myself that. But what follows the
singularity of the animal and duality of man? You recall
the startling line of Chesterton?-'we trinitarians have
known it is not good for God to be alone.' But was His
case the same as ours? Did He do a violent double take,
or triple take, when He discovered one day that there
were Three of Him? Has He ever adjusted to it? Is it
possible that He can?”
“Aye, you're a Judas Priest. I hate the species.'
“But I am not, Mr. Clendenning. I don't understand
this sundering any more than you do. It happens only
one time in a million, but it has happened to us. Perhaps
it would happen to God but one time in a billion billion,
but it has happened. The God who is may
be much rarer
than any you can imagine.
“Let me explain: my other person is a very good
a
>
a
а
26 Strange Doings
man, much better than when we were conjoined. He's a
dean already, and He'll be a bishop within five years.
Whatever of doubt and skepticism that was in me origi-
nally is still in the me here present, and it is somehow
intensified. I do not want to be dour or doubting. I do
not want to speak mockingly of the great things. But
the bothering things are all in the me here. The other me
is freed of them.
"Do
you think that there might have a been a sun-
dered-off Napoleon who was a bumbler at strategy and
who was a nervous little coward? Did there remain in
backwoods Kentucky for many years a sundered-off
Lincoln who gave full rein to his inborn delight in the
dirty story, the dirty deal, the barefoot life, the lout-
ishness ever growing? Was there a sundered-off Au-
gustine who turned ever more Manichean, who refined
more and more his arts of false logic and fornication,
who howled against reason, who joined the cultishness
of the crowd? Is there an anti-Christ, the man who fled
naked from the garden at dusk leaving his garment
behind? We know that both do not keep the garment at
the moment of sundering."
“Damned if I know, Judas Priest. Your own father-
name abomination, was there another of him? Was he
better or worse? I leave you.”
>
>
“She is in town and is going to meet you tonight,”
Joe Zabotsky told Clem at their next monthly meeting.
“We've got it all set up.”
“No, no, not Veronica!" Clem was startled. “I'm not
ready for it.”
“She is. She's a strong-minded woman, and she knows
what she wants."
>
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem
27
“No she doesn't, Joe. I'm afraid of it. I haven't
.
touched a woman since Veronica."
“Damn it, Clem, this is Veronica that we're talking
about. It isn't as though you weren't still married to
her.”
“I'm still afraid of it, Joe. I've become something
unnatural now. Where am I supposed to meet her? Oh,
oh, you son of a snake! I can feel her presence. She was
already in the place when I came in. No, no, Veronica,
I'm not the proper one. It's all a case of mistaken
identity.”
“It sure is, Clem Clam,” said the strong-minded Ve-
ronica as she came to their table. “Come along now.
You're going to have more explaining to do than any
man I ever heard of.”
“But I can't explain it, Veronica. I can't explain any
of it.”
“You will try real hard, Clem. We both will. Thank
you, Mr. Zabotsky, for your discretion in an odd situa-
,
tion.”
Well, it went pretty well, so well in fact there had to
be a catch to it. Veronica was an unusual and desirable
woman, and Clem had missed her. They did the town
mildly. They used to do it once a year, but they had
been apart in their present persons for several years. And
yet Veronica would want to revisit “that little place we
were last year, oh, but that wasn't you, was it, Clem?-
that was Clem,” and that kind of talk was confusing.
They dined grandly, and they talked intimately but
nervously. There was real love between them, or among
them, or around them somehow. They didn't under-
stand how it had turned grotesque.
“He never quite forgave you for clearing out the
accounts,” Veronica said.
>
28 Strange Doings
“But it was my money, Veronica,” Clem insisted. “I
earned it by the sweat of my tongue and my brain. He
had nothing to do with it.”
“But you're wrong, dear Clem. You worked equally
for it when you were one. You should have taken only
half of it.”
They came back to Veronica's hotel, and one of the
clerks looked at Clem suspiciously.
“Didn't you just go up, and then come down, and
then go up again?” he asked.
“I have my ups and downs, but you may mean
something else,” Clem said.
“Now don't be nervous, dear,” Veronica said. They
were up in Veronica's room now, and Clem was looking
around very nervously. He had jumped at a mirror, not
being sure that it was.
“I am still your wife,” Veronica said, “and nothing
has changed, except everything. I don't know how, but
I'm going to put things together again. You have to have
missed me! Give now!” And she swept him off his feet
as though he were a child. Clem had always loved her
for her sudden strength. If you haven't been up
Veronica's arms, then you haven't been anywhere.
“Get your pumpkin-picking hands off my wife, you
filthy oaf!” a voice cracked out like a bullwhip, and
Veronica dropped Clem thuddingly from the surprise of
it.
“Oh, Clem!” she said with exasperation, “you
”
shouldn't have come here when I was with Clem. Now
you've spoiled everything. You can't be jealous of each
other. You're the same man. Let's all pack up and
go
home and make the best of it. Let people talk if they
want to."
“Well, I don't know what to do,” Clem said. “This
in
>
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem
29
isn't the way. There isn't any way at all. Nothing can
ever be right with us when we are three."
“There is a way,” Veronica said with sudden steel in
her voice. “You boys will just have to get together
again. I am laying down the law now. For a starter each
of
you lose a hundred pounds. I give you a month for it.
You're both on bread and water from now on. No,
come to think of it, no bread! No water either; that may
be fattening, too. You're both on nothing for a month.'
“We won't do it,” both Clems said. “It'd kill us.'
“Let it kill you then," Veronica said. “You're no
good to me the way you are. You'll lose the weight. I
think that will be the trigger action. Then we will all go
back to Rock Island or whatever town that was and get
the same hotel room where one of you rose in a daze
and left the other one unconscious on the bed. We will
recreate those circumstances and see if you two can't
get together again."
“Veronica,” Clem said, “it is physically and biologi-
cally impossible.”
'Also topologically absurd.'
“You should have thought of that when you came
apart.
All
you have to do now is get together again. Do
it! I'm laying down an ultimatum. There's no other way.
You two will just have to get together again.”
“There is another way,” Clem said in a voice so sharp
that it scared both Veronica and Clem.
“What? What is it?” they asked him.
“Veronica, you've got to divide,” Clem said. “You've
got to come apart.”
“Oh, no. No!”
“Now you put on a hundred pounds just as fast as
you can, Veronica. Clem,” Clem said, “go get a dozen
steaks
up here for her to start on. And about thirty
a
30 Strange Doings
>
pounds of bone meal, whatever that is. It sounds like it
might help.”
“I'll do it, I'll do it,” Clem cried, “and a couple of
gallons of blood-pudding. Hey, I wonder where I can get
that much blood-pudding this time of night?”
“Boys, are you serious? Do you think it'll work?”
Veronica gasped. “I'll try anything. How do I start?”
“Think divisive thoughts,” Clem shouted as he started
out for the steaks and bone meal and blood-pudding.
“I don't know any,” Veronica said. “Oh, yes I do! I'll
think them. We'll do everything! We'll make it work.”
“You have a lot going for you, Veronica,” Clem said.
“You've always been a double-dealer. And your own
mother always said that you were two-faced.”
“Oh, I know it, I know it! We'll do everything. We'll
make it work. We'll leave no stone unthrown.'
“You've got to become a pair, Veronica,” Clem said
at one of their sessions. “Think of pairs."
“Crocodiles and alligators, Clem,” she said, “frogs
and toads. Eels and lampreys.”
“Horses and asses, Veronica,” Clem said, “elk and
moose. Rabbits and hares."
“Mushrooms and toadstools, Veronica,” Clem said.
“Mosses and lichens. Butterflies and moths.'
“Camels and dromedaries, Clem,” Veronica said.
“Salamanders and newts, dragonfly and damselfly.”
Say, they thought about pairs by the long ton. They
thought every kind of sundering and divisive thought.
They plumbed the depths of psychology and biology,
and called in some of the most respected quacks of the
city for advice.
No people ever tried anything harder. Veronica and
Clem and Clem did everything they could think of.
They gave it a month. “I'll do it or bust,” Veronica said.
>
>
>
>
Camels and Dromedaries, Clem
31
>
And they came close, so close that you could feel it.
Veronica weighed up a hundred pounds well within the
month, and then coasted in on double brandies. It was
done all but the final thing.
Pay homage to her, people! She was a valiant woman!
They both said that about her after it was over with.
They would admire her as long as they lived. She had
given it everything.
“I'll do it or bust,” she had said.
And after they had gathered her remains together and
buried her, it left a gap in their lives, in Clem's more
than in Clem's, since Clem had already been deprived of
her for these last several years.
And a special honor they paid her.
They set two headstones on her grave. One of them
said ‘Veronica' And the other one said 'Veronica.'
She'd have liked that.
Continued on Next Rock
Up in the Big Lime country there is an up-thrust, a
chimney rock that is half fallen against a newer hill. It is
formed of what is sometimes called Dawson sandstone
and is interlaced with tough shale. It was formed during
the glacial and recent ages in the bottom lands of Crow
Creek and Green River when these streams (at least five
times) were mighty rivers.
The chimney rock is only a little older than mankind,
only a little younger than grass. Its formation had been
up-thrust and then eroded away again, all but such
harder parts as itself and other chimneys and blocks.
A party of five persons came to this place where the
chimney rock had fallen against a still newer hill. The
people of the party did not care about the deep lime-
stone below: they were not geologists. They did care
about the newer hill (it was man-made) and they did
care a little about the rock chimney; they were arche-
ologists.
Here was time heaped up, bulging out in casing and
accumulation, and not in line sequence. And here also
was striated and banded time, grown tall, and then
shattered and broken.
32
Continued on Next Rock
33
The five party members came to the site early in the
afternoon, bringing the working trailer down a dry creek
bed. They unloaded many things and made a camp
there. It wasn't really necessary to make a camp on the
ground. There was a good motel two miles away on the
highway; there was a road along the ridge above. They
could have lived in comfort and made the trip to the site
in five minutes every morning. Terrence Burdock, how-
ever, believed that one could not get the feel of a
digging unless he lived on the ground with it day and
night.
The five persons were Terrence Burdock, his wife
Ethyl, Robert Derby, and Howard Steinleser: four
beautiful and balanced people. And Magdalen Mobley,
who was neither beautiful nor balanced. But she was
electric; she was special. They rouched around in the
formations a little after they had made camp and while
there was still light. All of them had seen the formations
before and had guessed that there was promise in them.
“That peculiar fluting in the broken chimney is al-
most like a core sample,” Terrence said, “and it differs
from the rest of it. It's like a lightning bolt through the
whole length. It's already exposed for us. I believe we
will remove the chimney entirely. It covers the perfect
access for the slash in the mound, and it is the mound in
which we are really interested. But we'll study the
chimney first. It is so available for study.”
“Oh, I can tell you everything that's in the chimney,"
Magdalen said crossly. “I can tell you everything that's
in the mound, too.”
“I wonder why we take the trouble to dig if you
already know what we will find,” Ethyl sounded archly.
“I wonder, too,” Magdalen grumbled. “But we will
need the evidence and the artifacts to show. You can't
34
Strange Doings
get appropriations without evidence and artifacts.
Robert, go kill that deer in the brush about forty yards
northeast of the chimney. We may as well have deer
meat if we're living primitive."
“This isn't deer season, Robert Derby objected.
“And there isn't any deer there. Or, if there is, it's down
in the draw where you couldn't see it. And if there's one
there, it's probably a doe.”
“No, Robert, it is a two-year-old buck and a very big
one. Of course it's in the draw where I can't see it.
Forty yards northeast of the chimney would have to be
in the draw. If I could see it, the rest of you could see it,
too. Now
go kill it! Are you a man or a mus microtus?
Howard, cut poles and set up a tripod to string and dress
the deer on.”
“You had better try the thing, Robert,” Ethyl Bur-
dock said, “or we'll have no peace this evening."
>
Robert Derby took a carbine and went northeastward
of the chimney, descending into the draw forty yards
away. There was the high ping of the carbine shot. And,
after some moments, Robert returned with a curious
grin.
“You didn't miss him, Robert, you killed him,” Mag-
dalen called loudly. “You got him with a good shot
through the throat and up into the brain when he tossed
his head high like they do. Why didn't you bring him?
Go back and get him!”
“Get him? I couldn't even lift the thing. Terrence and
Howard, come with me and we'll lash it to a pole and
get it here somehow."
“Oh, Robert, you're out of your beautiful mind,”
Magdalen chided. “It only weighs a hundred and ninety
pounds. Oh, I'll get it."
,
Continued on Next Rock
35
Magdalen Mobley went and got the big buck. She
brought it back, carrying it listlessly across her shoulders
and getting herself bloodied, stopping sometimes to
examine rocks and kick them with her foot, coming on
easily with her load. It looked as if it might weigh
two hundred and fifty pounds; but if Magdalen said it
weighed a hundred and ninety, that is what it weighed.
Howard Steinleser had cut poles and made a tripod.
He knew better than not to. They strung the buck up,
skinned it off, ripped up its belly, drew it, and worked it
,
over in an almost professional manner.
“Cook it, Ethyl,” Magdalen said.
Later, as they sat on the ground around the fire and it
had turned dark, Ethyl brought the buck's brains to
Magdalen, messy and not half-cooked, believing that she
was playing an evil trick. And Magdalen ate them avidly.
They were her due. She had discovered the buck.
If you wonder how Magdalen knew what invisible
things were where, so did the other members of the
party always wonder.
“It bedevils me sometimes why I am the only one to
notice the analogy between historical geology and depth
psychology," Terrence Burdock mused as they grew
lightly profound around the campfire. “The isostatic
principle applies to the mind and the under-mind as well
as it does to the surface and under-surface of the earth.
The mind has its erosions and weatherings going on
along with its deposits and accumulations. It also has its
up-thrusts and its stresses. It floats on a similar magma.
In extreme cases it has its volcanic eruptions and its
mountain building.”
“And it has its glaciations,” Ethyl Burdock said, and
perhaps she was looking at her husband in the dark.
>
36 Strange Doings
“The mind has its hard sandstone, sometimes trans-
muted to quartz, or half-transmuted into flint, from the
drifting and floating sand of daily events. It has its shale
from the old mud of daily ineptitudes and inertias. It
has limestone out of its more vivid experiences, for lime
is the remnant of what was once animate: and this
limestone may be true marble if it is the deposit of rich
enough emotion, or even travertine if it has bubbled
sufficiently through agonized and evocative rivers of the
under-mind. The mind has its sulphur and its gem-
stones—" Terrence bubbled on sufficiently, and Magda-
len cut him off.
“Say simply that we have rocks in our heads,” she
said. “But they're random rocks, I tell you, and the
same ones keep coming back. It isn't the same with us as
it is with the carth. The world gets new rocks all the
time. But it's the same people who keep turning up, and
the same minds. Damn, one of the samest of them just
turned up again! I wish he'd leave me alone. The answer
is still no.”
Very often Magdalen said things that made no sense.
Ethyl Burdock assured herself that neither her husband,
nor Robert, nor Howard had slipped over to Magdalen
in the dark. Ethyl was jealous of the chunky and surly
girl.
“I am hoping that this will be as rich as Spiro
Mound,” Howard Steinleser hoped. “It could be, you
know. I'm told that there was never a less prepossessing
site than that, or a trickier one. I wish we had someone
who had dug at Spiro.”
“Oh, he dug at Spiro,” Magdalen said with contempt.
“He? Who?” Terrence Burdock asked. “No one of us
was at Spiro. Magdalen, you weren't even born yet when
that mound was opened. What could you know about
it?”
Continued on Next Rock
37
“Yeah, I remember him at Spiro,” Magdalen said,
“—always turning up his own things and pointing them
out."
“Were you at Spiro?” Terrence suddenly asked a
piece of the darkness. For some time, they had all been
vaguely aware that there were six, and not five persons
around the fire.
“Yeah, I was at Spiro,” the man said. “I dig there. I
dig at a lot of the digs. I dig real well, and I always know
when we come to something that will be important.
You give me a job.”
“Who are you?” Terrence asked him. The man was
pretty visible now. The flame of the fire seemed to lean
toward him as if he compelled it.
“Oh, I'm just a rich old poor man who keeps follow-
ing and hoping and asking. There is one who is worth it
all forever, so I solicit that one forever. And sometimes I
am other things. Two hours ago I was the deer in the
draw. It is an odd thing to munch one's own flesh.” And
the man was munching a joint of the deer, unasked.
“Him and his damn cheap poetry!” Magdalen cried
angrily.
“What's your name?” Terrence asked him.
“Manypenny. Anteros Manypenny is my name for-
ever."
“What are you?”
“Oh, just Indian. Shawnee, Choc, Creek, Anadarko,
Caddo and pre-Caddo. Lots of things."
“How could anyone be pre-Caddo?”
”Like me. I am.”
“Is Anteros a Creek name?”
“No. Greek. Man, I am a going Jessie, I am one
digging man! I show you tomorrow.”
! I
Man, he was one digging man! He showed them
tomorrow. With a short-handled rose hoe he began the
38 Strange Doings
gash in the bottom of the mound, working too swiftly
to be believed.
“He will smash anything that is there. He will not
know what he comes to,” Ethyl Burdock complained.
“Woman, I will not smash whatever is there,” Anteros
said. “You can hide a wren's egg in one cubic meter of
sand. I will move all the sand in one minute. I will
uncover the egg, wherever it is. And I will not crack the
egg. I sense these things. I come now to a small pot of
the proto-Plano period. It is broken, of course, but I do
not break it. It is in six pieces and they will fit together
perfectly. I tell you this beforehand. Now I reveal it.”
And Anteros revealed it. There was something wrong
about it even before he uncovered it. But it was surely a
find, and perhaps it was of the proto-Plano period. The
six shards came out. They were roughly cleaned and set.
It was apparent that they would fit wonderfully.
“Why, it is perfect!" Ethyl exclaimed.
“It is too perfect,” Howard Steinleser protested. “It
was a turned pot, and who had turned pots in America
without the potter's wheel? But the glyphs pressed into
it do correspond to proto-Plano glyphs. It is fishy.”
Steinleser was in a twitchy humor today and his face
was livid.
“Yes, it is the ripple and the spinosity, the fish-
glyph,” Anteros pointed out. “And the sun-sign is riding
upon it. It is fish-god.”
“It's fishy in another way.” Steinleser insisted. “No-
body finds a thing like that in the first sixty seconds of
a dig. And there could not be such a pot. I wouldn't
believe it was proto-Plano unless points were found in
the exact site with it.”
“Oh, here,” Anteros said. “One can smell the very
shape of the flint points already. Two large points, one
Continued on Next Rock
39
small one. Surely you get the whiff of them already?
Four more hoe cuts and I come to them”
Four more hoe cuts, and Anteros did come to them.
He uncovered two large points and one small one, spear-
heads and arrowhead. Lanceolate they were, with rib-
bon flaking. They were late Folsom, or they were
proto-Plano; they were what you will.
“This cannot be,” Steinleser groaned. “They're the
missing chips, the transition pieces. They fill the missing
place too well. I won't believe it. I'd hardly believe it if
mastodon bones were found on the same level here."
“In a moment,” said Anteros, beginning to use the
hoe again. “Hey, those old beasts did smell funny! An
elephant isn't in it with them. And a lot of it still clings
to their bones. Will a sixth thoracic bone do? I'm pretty
sure that's what it is. I don't know where the rest of the
animal is. Probably somebody gnawed the thoracic here.
Nine hoe cuts, and then very careful.”
Nine hoe cuts; and then Anteros, using a mason's
trowel, unearthed the old gnawed bone very carefully.
Yes, Howard said almost angrily, it was a sixth thoracic
of a mastodon. Robert Derby said it was a fifth or a
sixth; it was not easy to tell.
“Leave the digging for a while, Anteros,” Steinleser
said. “I want to record and photograph and take a few
measurements here."
Terrence Burdock and Magdalen Mobley were work-
ing at the bottom of the chimney rock, at the bottom of
the fluting that ran the whole height of it like a core
sample.
“Get Anteros over here and see what he can uncover
in sixty seconds,” Terrence offered.
“Oh, him! He'll just uncover some of his own things."
40 Strange Doings
“What do you mean, his own things? Nobody could
have made an intrusion here. It's hard sandstone."
“And harder flint here,” Magdalen said. “I might have
known it. Pass the damned thing up. I know just about
what it says, anyhow.”
“What it says? What do you mean? But it is marked!
and it's large and dressed rough. Who'd carve in flint?”
“Somebody real stubborn, just like flint," Magdalen
said. “All right then, let's have it out. Anteros! Get this
out in one piece. And do it without shattering it or
tumbling the whole thing down on us. He can do it, you
know, Terrence. He can do things like that.
“ “What do you know about his doings, Magdalen? You
never saw or heard about the poor man till last night.”
“Oh well, I know that it'll turn out to be the same
damned stuff.”
Anteros did get it out without shattering it or bring-
ing down the chimney column. A cleft with a digging
bar, three sticks of the stuff and a cap, and he touched
the leads to the battery when he was almost on top of
the charge. The blast, it sounded as if the whole sky
were falling down on them, and some of those sky-
blocks were quite large stones. The ancients wondered
why fallen pieces of the sky should always be dark
rockstuff and never sky-blue clear stuff. The answer is
that it is only pieces of the night sky that ever fall, even
though they may sometimes be most of the daytime in
falling, such is the distance. And the blast that Anteros
set off did bring down rocky hunks of the night sky
even though it was broad daylight. They brought down
darker rocks than any of which the chimney was com-
posed.
Still, it was a small blast. The chimney tottered but
did not collapse. it settled back uneasily on its base.
And the flint block was out in the clear.
Continued on Next Rock 41
>
“A thousand spearheads and arrowheads could be
shattered and chipped out of that hunk,” Terrence
marveled. “That flint block would have been a primitive
fortune for a primitive man.”
“I had several such fortunes,” Anteros said dully,
“and this one I preserved and dedicated."
They had all gathered around it.
“Oh, the poor man!” Ethyl suddenly exclaimed. But
she was not looking at any of the men. She was looking
at the stone.
“I wish he'd get off that kick,” Magdalen sputtered
angrily. “I don't care how rich he is. I can pick up better
stuff than him in the alleys.”
“What are the women chirping about?” Terrence
asked. “But those do look like true glyphs. Almost like
Aztec, are they not, Steinleser?”
“Nahuat-Tanoan, cousins-german to the Aztec, or
should I say cousins-yaqui?”
“Call it anything, but can you read it?”
“Probably. Give me eight or ten hours on it and I
should come up with a contingent reading of many of
the glyphs. We can hardly expect a rational rendering of
the message, however. All Nahuat-Tanoan translations
so far have been gibberish.”
“And remember, Terrence, that Steinleser is a slow
reader,” Magdalen said spitefully. “And he isn't very
good at interpreting other signs either.'
Steinleser was sullen and silent. How had his face
come to bear those deep livid clawmarks today?
>
They moved a lot of rock and rubble that morning,
took quite a few pictures, wrote up bulky notes. There
were constant finds as the divided party worked ир
the
shag-slash in the mound and the core-flute of the chim-
ney. There were no more really startling discoveries; no
42
Strange Doings
a
more turned pots of the proto-Plano period; how could
there be? There were no more predicted and perfect
points of the late Folsom, but there were broken and
unpredictable points. No other mastodon thoracic was
found, but bones were uncovered of bison latifrons, of
dire wolf, of coyote, of man. There were some anoma-
lies in the relationship of the things discovered, but it
was not as fishy as it had been in the early morning, not
as fishy as when Anteros had announced and then dug
out the shards of the pot, the three points, the masto-
don bone. The things now were as authentic as they
were expected, and yet their very profusion had still the
smell of a small fish.
And that Anteros was one digging man. He moved the
sand, he moved the stone, he missed nothing. And at
noon he disappeared.
An hour later he reappeared in a glossy station
wagon, coming out of a thicketed ravine where no one
would have expected a way. He had been to town. He
brought a variety of cold cuts, cheeses, relishes and
pastries, a couple of cases of cold beer, and some V.O.
“I thought you were a poor man, Anteros,” Terrence
chided.
“I told you that I was a rich old poor man. I have
nine thousand acres of grassland, I have three thousand
head of cattle, I have alfalfa land and clover land and
corn land and hay-grazer land—”
“Oh, knock it off!" Magdalen snapped.
“I have other things," Anteros finished sullenly.
They ate, they rested, they worked the afternoon.
Magdalen worked as swiftly and solidly as did Anteros.
She
was young, she was stocky, she was light-
burned-dark. She was not at all beautiful (Ethyl was).
Continued on Next Rock
43
She could have any man there any time she wanted to
(Ethyl couldn't). She was Magdalen, the often unpleas-
ant, the mostly casual, the suddenly intense one. She
was the tension of the party, the string of the bow.
“Anteros!” she called sharply just at sundown.
“The turtle?” he asked. “The turtle that is under the
ledge out of the current where the backwater curls in
reverse? But he is fat and happy and he has never
harmed anything exept for food or fun. I know you
do
not want me to get that turtle."
“I do! There's eighteen pounds of him. He's fat. He'll
be good. Only eighty yards, where the bank crumbles
down to Green River, under the lower ledge that's shale
that looks like slate, two feet deep—"
“I know where he is. I will go get the fat turtle,”
Anteros said. “I myself am the fat turtle. I am the Green
River.” He went to get it.
“Oh, that damned poetry of his!” Magdalen spat
when he was gone.
Anteros brought back the fat turtle. He looked as if
he'd weigh twenty-five pounds; but if Magdalen said he
weighed eighteen pounds, then it was eighteen.
“Start cooking, Ethyl,” Magdalen said. Magdalen was
a mere undergraduate girl permitted on the digging by
sheer good fortune. The others of the party were all
archeologists of moment. Magdalen had no right to give
orders to anyone-except her born right.
“I don't know how to cook a turtle,” Ethyl com-
plained.
“Anteros will show
you
how."
>
“The late evening smell of newly exposed excava-
tion!” Terrence Burdock burbled as they lounged a-
44 Strange Doings
>
round the campfire a little later, full of turtle and V.O.
and feeling rakishly wise. “The exposed age can be
guessed by the very timbre of the smell, I believe.”
“Timbre of the smell! What is your nose wired up
to?” from Magdalen.
And, indeed, there was something time-evocative
about the smell of the diggings: cool, at the same time
musty and musky, ripe with old stratified water and
compressed death. Stratified time.
“It helps if you already know what the exposed age
is,” said Howard Steinleser. “Here there is an anomaly.
The chimney sometimes acts as if it were younger than
the mound. The chimney cannot be young enough to
include written rock, but it is.'
“Archeology is made up entirely of anomalies,” said
Terrence, “rearranged to make them fit in a fluky pat-
tern. There'd be no system to it otherwise.”
“Every science is made up entirely of anomalies rear-
ranged to fit,” said Robert Derby. “Have you
unriddled
the glyph-stone, Howard?”
“Yes, pretty well. Better than I expected. Charles
August can verify it, of course, when we get it back to
the university. It is a nonroyal, nontribal, nonwarfare,
nonhunt declaration. It does not come under any of the
usual radical signs, any of the categories. It can only be
categorized as uncategoried or personal. The translation
will be rough.”
“Rocky is the word,” said Magdalen.
“On with it, Howard,” Ethyl cried.
'You are the freedom of wild pigs in the sour-grass,
and the nobility of badgers. You are the brightness of
serpents and the soaring of vultures. You are passion of
mesquite bushes on fire with lightning. You are serenity
of toads.""
Continued on Next Rock
45
> >
“You've got to admit he's got a different line," said
Ethyl. “Your own love notes were less acrid, Terrence.”
“What kind of thing is it, Steinleser?” Terrence ques-
tioned. “It must have a category.”
“I believe Ethyl is right. It's a love poem. 'You are
the water in rock cisterns and the secret spiders in that
water. You are the dead coyote lying half in the stream,
and you are the old entrapped dreams of the coyote's
brains oozing liquid through the broken eye socket. You
are the happy ravening flies about that broken socket.'
“Oh, hold it, Steinleser,” Robert Derby cried. “You
can't have gotten all that from scratches on flint. What
is ‘entrapped dreams' in Nahuat-Tanoan glyph-writing?”
“The solid-person sign next to the hollow-person sign,
both enclosed in the night sign-that has always been
interpreted as the dream glyph. And here the dream
glyph is enclosed in the glyph of the dead-fall trap. Yes,
I believe it means entrapped dreams. To continue: 'You
are the corn-worm in the dark heart of the corn, the
naked small bird in the nest. You are the pustules on the
sick rabbit, devouring life and flesh and turning it into
your own serum. You are stars compressed into char-
coal. But you cannot give, you cannot take. Once again
you will be broken at the foot of the cliff, and the word
will remain unsaid in your swollen and purpled
tongue.'
“A love poem, perhaps, but with a difference,” said
Robert Derby.
“I never was able to go his stuff, and I tried, I really
tried,” Magdalen moaned.
“Here is the change of person-subject shown by the
canted-eye glyph linked with the self-glyph,” Steinleser
explained. “It is now a first-person talk. 'I own ten
thousand back-loads of corn. I own gold and beans and
> >
46 Strange Doings
)
nine buffalo horns full of watermelon seeds. I own the
loincloth that the sun wore on his fourth journey across
the sky. Only three loin cloths in the world are older
and more valued than this. I cry out to you in a big
voice like the hammering of herons (that sound-verb-
particle is badly translated, the hammer being not a
modern pounding hammer but a rock angling, chipping
hammer) ‘and the belching of buffaloes. My love is
sinewy as entwined snakes, it is steadfast as the sloth, it
is like a feathered arrow shot into your abdomen,such
-
is my love. Why is my love unrequited?'
“I challenge you, Steinleser,” Terrence Burdock cut
in. “What is the glyph for ‘unrequited'?”
“The glyph of the extended hand-with all the fingers
bent backwards. It goes on, 'I roar to you. Do not throw
yourself down. You believe you are on the hanging sky
bridge, but you are on the terminal cliff. I grovel before
you. I am no more than dog-droppings.'
“You'll notice he said that and not me,” Magdalen
burst out. There was always a fundamental incoherence
about Magdalen.
“Ah, continue, Steinleser,” said Terrence. “The girl
is daft, or she dreams out loud.”
“That is all of the inscription, Terrence, except for a
final glyph which I don't understand. Glyph writing
takes a lot of room. That's all the stone would hold."
“What is the glyph that you don't understand, How-
ard?”
“It's the spear-thrower glyph entwined with the time-
glyph. It sometimes means 'flung forward or beyond.'
But what does it mean here?”
“It means “continued,' dummy, “continued,' ” Magda-
len said. “Do not fear. There'll be more stones.”
“I think it's beautiful,” said Ethyl Burdock,“– in its
own context, of course."
> >
Continued on Next Rock 47
“Then why don't you take him on, Ethyl, in his own
context, of course?” Magdalen asked. “Myself, I don't
care how
many
back-loads of corn he owns. I've had it.”
“Take whom on, dear?”' Ethyl asked. “Howard Stein-
leser can interpret the stones, but who can interpret our
Magdalen?”
“Oh, I can read her like a rock," Terrence Burdock
smiled. But he couldn't.
>
But it had fastened on them. It was all about them
and through them: the brightness of serpents and the
serenity of toads, the secret spiders in the water, the
entrapped dreams oozing though the broken eye socket,
the pustules of the sick rabbit, the belching of buffalo,
and the arrow shot into the abdomen. And around it all
was the night smell of flint and turned earth and chuck-
ling streams, the mustiness, and the special muskiness
which bears the name Nobility of Badgers.
They talked archaeology and myth talk. Then it was
steep night, and the morning of the third day.
Oh, the sample digging went well. This was already a
richer mound than Spiro, though the gash in it was but a
small promise of things to come. And the curious twin
of the mound, the broken chimney, confirmed and
confounded and contradicted. There was time
gone
wrong in the chimney, or at least in the curious fluted
core of it; the rest of it was normal enough, and sterile
enough.
Anteros worked that day with a soft sullenness, and
Magdalen brooded with a sort of lightning about her.
“Beads, glass beads!” Terrence Burdock exploded an-
grily. “All right! Who is the hoaxer in our midst? I will
not tolerate this at all.” Terrence had been angry of face
all day. He was clawed deeply, as Steinleser had been
>
48 Strange Doings
>
>
the day before, and he was sour on the world.
“There have been glass-bead caches before, Terrence,
hundreds of them” Robert Derby said softly.
“There have been hoaxers before, hundreds of them,”
Terrence howled. “These have ‘Hong Kong Contempora-
ry' written all over them, damned cheap glass beads sold
by the pound. They have no business in a stratum of
around the year seven hundred. All right, who is guil-
ty?”
“I don't believe that any one of us is guilty, Ter-
rence,” Ethyl put in mildly. “They are found four feet
in from the slant surface of the mound. Why, we've cut
through three hundred years of vegetable loam to get to
them, and certainly the surface was eroded beyond
that.'
“We are scientists,” said Steinleser. “We find these.
Others have found such. Let us consider the improbabil-
ities of it.”
It was noon, so they ate and rested and considered
the improbabilities. Anteros had brought them a great
joint of white pork, and they made sandwiches and
drank beer and ate pickles.
“You know,” said Robert Derby, “that beyond the
rank impossibility of glass beads found so many times
where they could not be found, there is a real mystery
about all early Indian beads, whether of bone, stone, or
antler. There are millions and millions of these fine
beads with pierced holes finer than any piercer ever
found. There are residues, there are centers of every
other Indian industry, and there is evolution of every
other tool. Why have there been these millions of
pierced beads, and never one piercer? There was no
technique to make so fine a piercer. How were they
done?”
Magdalen giggled. “Bead-spitter,” she said.
Continued on Next Rock 49
“Bead-spitter! You're out of your fuzzy mind,” Ter-
rence erupted. “That's the silliest and least sophisticated
of all Indian legends."
“But it is the legend,” said Robert Derby, “the legend
of more than thirty separate tribes. The Carib Indians of
Cuba said that they got their beads from Bead-spitters.
The Indians of Panama told Balboa the same thing. The
Indians of the pueblos told the same story to Coronado.
Every Indian community had an Indian who was its
Bead-spitter. There are Creek and Alabama and Koasati
stories of Bead-spitter; see Swanton's collections. And
his stories were taken down within living memory.
“More than that, when European trade-beads were
first introduced, there is one account of an Indian
receiving some and saying 'I will take some to Bead-
spitter. If he sees them, he can spit them too.' And that
Bead-spitter did then spit them by the bushel. There was
never any other Indian account of the origin of their
beads. All were spit by a Bead-spitter.”
“Really, this is very unreal,” Ethyl said. Really it was.
“Hog hokey! A Bead-spitter of around the year seven
hundred could not spit future beads, he could not spit
cheap Hong Kong glass beads of the present time!”
Terrence was very angry.
“Pardon me, yes sir, he could,” said Anteros. “A
Bead-spitter can spit future beads, if he faces north
when he spits. That has always been known.”
Terrence was angry, he fumed and poisoned the day
for them, and the claw marks on his face stood out livid
purple. He was angrier yet when he said that the curious
dark capping rock on top of the chimney was danger-
ous, that it would fall and kill someone; and Anteros
said that there was no such capping rock on the chim-
ney, that Terrence's eyes were deceiving him, that Ter-
rence should go sit in the shade and rest.
50 Strange Doings
And Terrence became excessively angry when he dis-
covered that Magdalen was trying to hide something
that she had discovered in the fluted core of the chim-
ney. It was a large and heavy shale-stone, too heavy even
for Magdalen's puzzling strength. She had dragged it out
of the chimney flute, tumbled it down to the bottom,
and was trying to cover it with rocks and scarp.
.
“Robert, mark the extraction point!” Terrence called
loudly. “It's quite plain yet. Magdalen, stop that! What-
ever it is, it must be examined now.”
“Oh, it's just more of the damned same thing! I wish
he'd let me alone. With his kind of money he can get
.
plenty of girls. Besides, it's private, Terrence. You don't
have
any business reading it.”
“You are hysterical, Magdalen, and you may have to
leave the digging site."
“I wish I could leave. I can't. I wish I could love. I
can't. Why isn't it enough that I die?”
“Howard, spend the afternoon on this,” Terrence
ordered. “It has writing of a sort on it. If it's what I
think it is, it scares me. It's too recent to be in any
eroded chimney rock formation, Howard, and it comes
from far below the top. Read it.”
“A few hours on it and I may come up
may come up with some-
thing. I never saw anything like it, either. What do
you
think it is, Terrence?”
“What do you think I think it is? It's much later than
the other, and that one was impossible. I'll not be the
one to confess myself crazy first.”
Howard Steinleser went to work on the incised stone;
and two hours before sundown they brought him anoth-
er one, a gray soapstone block from higher up. Whatever
a
Continued on Next Rock 51
>
this was covered with, it was not at all the same thing
that covered the shale-stone.
And elsewhere things went well, too well. The old
fishiness was back on it. No series of finds could be so
perfect, no petrification could be so well ordered.
“Robert,” Magdalen called down to Robert Derby
just at sunset, “in the high meadow above the shore,
about four hundred yards down, just past the old fence
line-"
there is a badger hole, Magdalen. Now you have
me doing it, seeing invisible things at a distance. And if I
take a carbine and stroll down there quietly, the badger
will stick his head out just as I get there (I being
strongly downwind of him), and I'll blam him between
the eyes. He'll be a big one, fifty pounds.
“Thirty. Bring him, Robert. You're showing a little
.
understanding at last.”
“But, Magdalen, badger is rampant meat. It's seldom
eaten.”
“May not the condemned girl have what she wishes
for her last meal? Go get it, Robert.”
Robert went. The voice of the little carbine was
barely heard at that distance. Soon, Robert brought
back the dead badger.
“Cook it, Ethyl,” Magdalen ordered.
“Yes, I know. And if I don't know how, Anteros will
show me.” But Anteros was gone. Robert found him on
a sundown knoll with his shoulders hunched. The old
man was sobbing silently and his face seemed to be
made out of dull pumice stone. But he came back to aid
Ethyl in preparing the badger.
>
“If the first of today's stones scared you, the second
should have lifted the hair right off your head, Ter­ rence," Howard Steinleser said. "It does, it does. All the stones are too recent to be in a chimney formation, but this last one is an insult. It isn't two hundred years old, but there's a thousand years of strata above it. What time is deposited there?" They had eaten rampant badger meat and drunk inferior whiskey (which Anteros, who had given it to them, didn't know was inferior), and the muskiness was both inside them and around them. The campfire some­ times spit angrily with small explosions, and its glare reached high when it did so. By one such leaping glare, Terrence Burdock saw that the curious dark capping rock was once more on the top of chimney. He thought he had seen it there in the daytime; but it had not been there after he had sat in the shade and rested, and it had absolutely not been there when he climbed the chimney itself to be sure. "Let's have the second chapter and then the third, Howard," Ethyl said. "It's neater that way." "Yes. Well, the second chapter (the first and lowest and apparently the earliest rock we came on today) is written in a language that no one ever saw written before; and yet it's no great trouble to read it. Even Terrence guessed what it was and it scared him. It is Anadarko-Caddo hand-talk graven in stone. It is what is called the Sign Language of the Plains Indians copied down in formalized pictographs. And it has to be very recent, within the last three hundred years. Hand-talk was fragmentary at the first coming of the Spanish, and well developed at the first coming of the French. It was an explosive development, as such things go, worked out within a hundred years. This �ock has to be younger than its situs but it was absolutely found in place." " Read it, Howard, read it," Robert Derby called.
52 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
Robert was feeling fine and the rest of them were gloomy tonight. " 'I own three hundred ponies,' " Steinleser read the rock out of his memory. " I own two days' ride north and east and south, and one day's ride west. I give you all. I blast out with a big voice like fire in tall trees, like the explosion of crowning pine trees. I cry like closing­ in wolves, like the high voice of the lion, like the hoarse scream of torn calves. Do you not destroy yourself again! You are the dew on crazy-weed in the morning. You are the swift crooked wings of the night-hawk, the dainty feet of the skunk, you are the juice of the sour squash. Why can you not take or give? I am the hump­ backed bull of the high plains, I am the river itself and the stagnant pools left by the river, I am the raw earth and the rocks. Come to me, but do not come so violent­ ly as to destroy yourself.' "Ah, that was the text of the first rock of the day, the Anadarko-Caddo hand-talk graven in stone. And final pictographs which I don't understand: a shot-arrow sign, and a boulder beyond." " 'Continued on next rock,' of course," said Robert Derby. "Well, why wasn 't hand-talk ever written down? The signs are simple and easily stylized and they were understood by many different tribes. It would have been natural to write it." "Alphabetical writing was in the region before hand­ talk was well developed," Terrence Burdock said. "In fact, it was the coming of the Spanish that gave the impetus to hand-talk. It was really developed for com­ munication between Spanish and Indian, not between Indian and Indian. And yet, I believe, hand-talk was written down once; it was the beginning of the Chinese pictographs. And there also it had its beginning as com­ munication between differing peoples. Depend on it, if
C o n t i n u e d o n N e x t R o c k 53
all mankind had always been of a single language, there would never have been any written language developed at all. Writing always began as a bridge, and there had to be some chasm for it to bridge." "We have one to bridge here," said Steinleser. "That whole chimney is full of rotten smoke. The highest part of it should be older than the lowest part of the mound, since the mound was built on a base eroded away from the chimney formation. But in many ways they seem to be contemporary. We must all be under a spell here. We've worked two days on this, parts of three days, and the total impossibility of the situation hasn't struck us yet. "The old Nahutlan glyphs for Time are the Chimney glyphs. Present time is a lower part of a chimney and fire burning at the base. Past time is black smoke from a chimney, and future time is white smoke from a chim­ ney. There was a signature glyph running through our yesterday's stone which I didn't and don't understand. It seemed to indicate something coming down out of the chimney rather than going up it." "It really doesn't look much like a chimney," Magda­ len said. "And a maiden doesn't look much like dew on crazy­ weed in the morning, Magdalen," Robert Derby said, "but we recognize these identities."
54 S t r a n g c
They talked a while about the impossibility of the whole business. "There are scales on our eyes," Steinleser said. "The fluted core of the chimney is wrong. I'm not even sure the rest of the chimney is right." "No, it isn't," said Robert Derby. "We can identify
D o i n g s
most of the strata of the chimney with known periods of the river and stream. I was above and below today. There is one stretch where the sandstone was not eroded at all, where it stands three hundred yards back from the shifted river and is overlaid with a hundred years of loam and sod. There are other sections where the stone is cut away variously. We can tell when most of the chimney was laid down, we can find its correspondences up to a few hundred years ago. But when were the top ten feet of it laid down? There were no correspondences anywhere to that. The centuries represented by the strata of the top of the chimney, people, those centuries haven't happened yet." "And when was the dark capping rock on top of it all formed- ?" Terrence began. "Ah, I'm out of my mind. It isn't there. I'm demented." "No more than the rest of us," said Steinleser. "I saw it too, I thought, today. And then I didn't see it again." "The rock-writing, it's like an old novel that I only half remember," said Ethyl. "Oh, that's what it is, yes," Magdalen murmured. "But I don't remember what happened to the girl in it." "! remember what happened to her, Ethyl,". Magda­ len said. "Give us the third chapter, Howard," Ethyl asked. "I want to see how it comes out." "First you should all have whiskey for those colds," Anteros suggested humbly. "But none of us have colds," Ethyl objected. "You take your own medical advice, Ethyl, and I'll take mine," Terrence said. "I will have whiskey. My cold is not rheum but fear-chill."
C o n t i n u e d o n N e x
t R o c k 55
56 Strange Doings
They all had whiskey. They talked a while, and some
of them dozed.
“It's late, Howard,” Ethyl said after a while. “Let's
have the next chapter. Is it the last chapter? Then we'll
sleep. We have honest digging to do tomorrow.”
“Our third stone, our second stone of the day just
past, is another and even later form of writing, and it
has never been seen in stone before. It is Kiowa picture
writing. The Kiowas did their out-turning spiral writing
on buffalo skins dressed almost as fine as vellum. In its
more sophisticated form (and this is a copy of that) it is
quite late. The Kiowa picture writing probably did not
arrive at its excellence until influenced by white artists.”
“How late, Steinleser?” Robert Derby asked.
“Not more than a hundred and fifty years old. But I
have never seen it copied in stone before. It simply isn't
stone-styled. There's a lot of things around here lately
that I haven't seen before.
“Well then, to the text, or should I say the picto-
graphy? 'You fear the earth, you fear rough ground and
rocks, you fear moister earth and rotting flesh, you fear
the flesh itself, all flesh is rotting flesh. If you
love not
rotting flesh, you love not at all. You believe the bridge
hanging in the sky, the bridge hung by tendrils and
woody vines that diminish as they go up
and
up
are no thicker than hairs. There is no sky-bridge, you
cannot go up on it. Did you believe that the roots of
love grow upside down? They come out of deep earth
that is old flesh and brains and hearts and entrails, that
is old buffalo bowels and snakes' pizzles, that is black
blood and rot and moaning underground. This is old and
worn-out and bloody Time, and the roots of love grow
out of its gore.
“You seem to give remarkably detailed translations of
till they
> >
Continued on Next Rock 57
the simple spiral pictures, Steinleser, but I begin to get
in the mood of it,” Terrence said.
“Ah, perhaps I cheat a little,” said Steinleser.
“You lie a lot,” Magdalen challenged.
“No I do not. There is some basis for every phrase
I've used. It goes on: 'I own twenty-two trade rifles. I
own ponies. I own Mexico silver, eight-bit pieces. I am
rich in all ways. I give all to you. I cry out with big voice
I
like a bear full of mad-weed, like a bullfrog in love, like
a stallion rearing against a puma. It is the earth that calls
you. I am the earth, woolier than wolves and rough
than rocks. I am the bog earth that sucks you in. You
cannot give, you cannot take, you cannot love, you
think there is something else, you think there is a
sky-bridge you may loiter on without crashing down. I
am bristled-bear earth, there is no other. You will come
to me in the morning. You will come to me easy and
with grace. Or you will come to me reluctant and you
be shattered in every bone and member of
broken by our encounter. You be shattered as by a
lightning bolt striking up from the earth. I am the red
calf which is in the writings. I am the rotting red earth.
Live in the morning or die in the morning, but remem-
ber that love in death is better than no love at all.'”
“Oh brother! Nobody gets that stuff from such kid
pictures, Steinleser,” Robert Derby moaned.
“Ah well, that's the end of the spiral picture. And a
Kiowa spiral pictograph ends with either an insweep or
an outsweep line. This ends with an outsweep, which
means,
“ 'Continued on next rock,' that's what it means,”
Terrence cried roughly.
“You won't find the next rocks,” Magdalen said.
“They're hidden, and most of the time they're not there
you. You be
>
>
58
Strange Doings
yet, but they will go on and on. But for all that, you'll
read it in the rocks tomorrow morning. I want it to be
over with. Oh, I don't know what I want!"
“I believe I know what you want tonight, Magdalen,"
Robert Derby said.
But he didn't.
The talk trailed off, the fire burned down, they went
to their sleeping sacks.
Then it was long jagged night, and the morning of the
fourth day. But wait! In Nahuat-Tanoan legend, the
world ends on the fourth morning. All the lives we lived
or thought we lived had been but dreams of third night.
The loincloth that the sun wore on the fourth day's
journey was not as valuable as one has made out. It was
worn for no more than an hour or so.
And, in fact, there was something terminal about
fourth morning. Anteros had disappeared. Magdalen had
disappeared. The chimney rock looked greatly dimin-
ished in its bulk (something had gone out of it) and
much crazier in its broken height. The sun had come up
a garish gray-orange color through fog. The signature-
glyph of the first stone dominated the ambient. It was
as if something were coming down from the chimney, a
horrifying smoke; but it was only noisome morning fog.
No it wasn't. There was something else coming down
from the chimney, or from the hidden sky: pebbles,
stones, indescribable bits of foul oozings, the less fastidi-
ous pieces of the sky; a light, nightmare rain had begun
to fall there; the chimney was apparently beginning to
crumble.
“It's the damnedest thing I ever heard about,” Robert
Derby growled. “Do you think that Magdalen really
went off with Anteros?” Derby was bitter and fumatory
this morning and his face was badly clawed.
Continued on Next Rock
59
“Who is Magdalen? Who is Anteros?” Ethyl Burdock
asked.
Terrence Burdock was hooting from high on the
mound. “All come up,” he called. “Here is a find that
will make it all worthwhile. We'll have to photo and
sketch and measure and record and witness. It's the
finest basalt head I've ever seen, man-sized, and I sus-
pect that there's a man-sized body attached to it. We'll
soon clean it and clear it. Gah! What a weird fellow he
was!”
But Howard Steinleser was studying a brightly col-
ored something that he held in his two hands.
“What is it, Howard? What are you doing?” Derby
demanded.
“Ah, I believe this is the next stone in the sequence.
The writing is alphabetical but deformed-there is an
element missing. I believe it is in modern English, and I
will solve the deformity and see it true in a minute. The
text of it seems to be-
Rocks and stones were coming down from the chim-
ney, and fog, amnesic and wit-stealing fog.
“Steinleser, are you all right?” Robert Derby asked
with compassion. “That isn't a stone that you hold in
your hand.”
“It isn't a stone? I thought it was. What is it then?”
“It is the fruit of the Osage orange tree, an American
moraceous. It isn't a stone, Howard.” And the thing was
a tough, woody, wrinkled mock-orange, as big as a small
melon.
“You have to admit that the wrinkles look a little bit
like writing, Robert."
“Yes, they look a little like writing, Howard. Let us
go up where Terrence is bawling for us. You've read too
60
Strange Doings
many stones. And it isn't safe here.”
“Why go up, Howard? The other thing is coming
down.”
It was the bristled-boar earth reaching up with a
rumble. It was a lightning bolt struck upward out of the
earth, and it got its prey. There was explosion and roar.
The dark capping rock was jerked from the top of the
chimney and slammed with terrible force to the earth,
shattering with a great shock. And something else that
had been on that capping rock. And the whole chimney
collapsed about them.
She was broken by the encounter. She was shattered
in every bone and member of her. And she was dead.
“Who, who is she?” Howard Steinleser stuttered.
“Oh God! Magdalen, of course!” Robert Derby cried.
“I remember her a little bit. Didn't understand her.
She put out like an evoking moth but she wouldn't be
had. Near clawed the face off me the other night when I
misunderstood the signals. She believed there was a sky
bridge. It's in a lot of the mythologies. But there isn't
one, you know. Oh well.”
“The girl is dead! Damnation! What are you doing
grubbing in those stones?”
“Maybe she isn't dead in them yet, Robert. I'm going
to read what's here before something happens to them.
This capping rock that fell and broke, it's impossible, of
course. It's a stratum that hasn't been laid down
yet.
I
always did want to read the future and I may never get
another chance.”
“You fool! The girl's dead! Does nobody care? Ter-
rence, stop bellowing about your find. Come down. The
girl's dead.”
“Come up, Robert and Howard,” Terrence insisted.
“Leave that broken stuff down there. It's worthless. But
nobody ever saw anything like this.”
Continued on Next Rock
61
“Do come up, men,” Ethyl sang. “Oh, it's a wonder-
ful piece! I never saw anything like it in my life.”
“Ethyl, is the whole morning mad?” Robert Derby
demanded as he came up to her. “She's dead. Don't you
really remember her? Don't you remember Magdalen?”
“I'm not sure. Is she the girl down there? Isn't she the
same girl who's been hanging around here a couple of
days? She should't have been playing on that high rock.
I'm sorry she's dead. But just look what we're uncover-
ing here!”
“Terrence. Don't you remember Magdalen?”
“The girl down there? She's a little bit like the girl
that clawed the hell out of me the other night. Next
time someone goes to town they might mention to the
sheriff that there's a dead girl here. Robert, did you ever
see a face like this one? And it digs away to reveal the
shoulders. I believe there's a whole man-sized figure
here. Wonderful, wonderful!”
“Terrence, you're off your head. Well, do you re-
member Anteros?”
“Certainly, the twin of Eros, but nobody ever made
much of the symbol of unsuccessful love. Thunder!
That's the name for him! It fits him perfectly. We'll call
him Anteros.'
Well, it was Anteros, lifelike in basalt stone. His face
was contorted. He was sobbing soundlessly and frozenly
and his shoulders were hunched with emotion. The
carving was fascinating in its miserable passion, his stony
love unrequited. Perhaps he was more impressive now
than he would be when he was cleaned. He was earth, he
was earth itself. Whatever period the carving belonged
to, it was outstanding in its
power.
“The live Anteros, Terrence. Don't you remember
our digging man, Anteros Manypenny?"
62 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
"Sure. He didn't show up for work this morning, did he? Tell him he's fired." "Magdalen is dead! She was one of us! Dammit, she was the main one of us!" Robert Derby cried. Terrence and Ethyl Burdock were earless to his outburst. They were busy uncovering the rest of the carving. And down below, Howard Steinleser was studying dark broken rocks before they would disappear, study­ ing a stratum that hadn't been laid down yet, reading a foggy future.
One fine spider silk, no more than 1/80,000 of an inch thick, could this bind and kill a man? He would soon know. It would be a curious death, to be done in by fine spider silk. "-but then mine has been a curious life," Scarble muttered from a tight throat, "and it might as well have an ironic end to it. I wonder if you know, you mother­ loving spiders," he called out with difficulty, "that every death is ironic. The arachnidian irony has a pretty fine edge, though."
It had begun on Aranea a week earlier. In their surveying of the planet-sized asteroids of the Cercyon Belt, their practice was (after the team had completed the Initial Base Survey) to leave a lone man on the asteroid for a short period. The theory was that any malevolent force, which might n.ot move against a group, could come into the open against a lone man. In practice it had given various results. Donners said that nothing at all happened on his world when he was there alone, and that nothing had 63
ONCE ON ARANEA
64
Strange Doings
-
happened to him. But Donners had developed a gro-
tesque facial tic and an oddity of speech and manner.
Something had happened to him which he had not
realized.
Procop had simply disappeared from his world, com-
pletely and with no residue. He couldn't have traveled a
hundred kilometers on foot in the time he had, and
there was no reason for him to travel even ten. He
should have left traces-of the calcium which was hardly
on that world at all, of cellular decomposition, of amino
acids. If a gram of him had been left on that world in
any form, the scanners would have found it, and they
hadn't. But exploratory parties grow used to such puz-
zles.
Bernheim said that he had gone to pieces when left
alone. He did not know whether there had been strange
happenings on his world or in his head. He had straight-
ened up only with a great effort when he saw them
come back for him, he said. Bernheim had always been a
man of compulsive honesty.
Marin said that it hadn't been a picnic when he was
left alone, but that nothing had happened there that he
wouldn't be able to find an answer to if he could devote
a thousand years to it. He said it was more a test of a
man than of a world. But it was the test that the Party
was to use for the livab leness of a world.
On Aranea it was Scarble who would remain alone
and make the test. On Aranea, the Spider Asteroid,
there were two sorts of creatures-at first believed to be
three. But two of these first apparent forms were dif-
ferent stages of the same species.
There were the small four-legged scutters. There were
the two-legged, two-armed, upright straddling finger-
lings. Finally there were the “Spiders”-actually dode-
capods, the largest of them as big as a teacup. The
a
Once on Aran e a
65
>
>
>
two-legged fingerlings were the spiders, after their meta-
morphosis.
Bernheim was reading his report, the final bit for the
Initial Base Survey:
“The basic emotion of the small quadrupeds, Scut-
terae Bernheimiensis, is subservience. They register that
they are owned by the spider complex, and that they
must serve it."
“So, there are two species, one slave to the other,”
said Marin. “It's a common pattern.”
“The biped fingerlings, Larva Arachnida Marin, do
not realize their relationship to the 'Spiders,'” Bernheim
continued. “When forced into the metamorphosis, their
reaction is stark consternation."
“So would mine be,” said Scarble. “And what's the
basic emotion of the adult spiders, the Arachne Dode-
capode Scarble?”
“It is mother-love, lately reoriented by an intrusion
and intensified many-fold.”
“By what intrusion? And how intensified?” Marin
asked.
“We are the intrusion. We are the intensification,"
Bernheim explained. “They are intensely excited only
since our arrival. That murmuring and chirping of mil-
lions of them is all for us. This is maternal affection
gone hysterical—for us!”
They exploded in the first real laughter ever heard on
Aranea, and even the spiders giggled in million-voiced
accord.
“Oh, those mother-loving spiders!” became their
byword for their stay there, and it had to go into the
report.
So it was with rare good humor that three of them
(Bernheim, Marin, Donners) took off and left Scarble
66
Strange Doings
alone on the Spider World, himself chortling every time
he thought of the maternal spiders. For companion,
Scarble had only a dog named Dog, which is to say
Cyon; it was a classical dog.
This would be easy. Scarble liked spiders and even
looked like one-a spindly, wiry man covered with black
hair almost everywhere except on the top of his head; a
man who ran much to long legs and arms and had not a
great amount of body to him. When he waved his arms,
as he did when he talked, he gave the impression of
,
having more than two of them. Even his humor was
spiderlike.
And what was there to scare any man in the golden
daylight of Aranea? Scarble had the name of not being
afraid of anything; he had been diligent to give himself
that name. And courage is the normal complement of
the male animal everywhere. Individual exceptions are
common in every species, but they are abnormal. Scar-
ble was normal.
And, should normal courage fail, they had left him a
supply of Dutch Courage, and French, Scotch, Cana-
dian, and Kentucky; as well as a distilled-on-the-wing
drink known as Rocket Red. They always left a man
with a good bottled stock.
It was on this prime stock that the shadow of the
coming thing first fell—and Scarble didn't recognize it.
He was delighted when he woke from his first sleep on
Aranea and saw the stuff as covered with cobwebs as
though it had been a hundred years in a cellar. He
sampled it with exceptional pleasure. Mellow! Even the
Rocket Red had acquired age and potent dignity.
Then he walked all over Aranea with the dog Cyon.
That whole world was covered with golden cobwebs;
and it brought out the song in Scarble. Man afoot! Here
Once on Aranea 67
a
was a whole echoing world to sing in! The full voice is
also the normal complement of the male animal, and
Scarble had a voice (a bad one) that would fill a world.
“The Spaceman frolicked with his girl
Though all his friends could not abide her.
She was a pippin and a pearl,
She was a comely twelve-legged spider."
Scarble added dozens of verses, most of them ob-
scene, while the spider audience in its millions chirped
and murmured appreciation. He sang them to the tune
of ‘ mede Saturday Night.' He sang all his ballads to
that tune. It was the only tune he knew.
Marin had been wrong; it was a picnic after all.
Scarble sat on the edge of one of the silken ringed spider
ponds and communed with the mother-loving spiders.
The cycle of them, he knew, was this:
The little biped fingerlings were born in a sort of caul.
Most often the caul is only wrapped about them, and
the young ones fight their way out of it and become
aware. Sometimes they look as if they arrived wearing
space helmets. Often the young are truly live-born, with
only scraps on them of the egg they should have arrived
in. The spiders had been surprised in their era of transi-
tion.
The newborn bipeds refuse the care of the adult
spiders, and run wild at this stage of their being. They
destroy everything of the spider nettings and handicrafts
that they are able to, and the adult spiders regard them
patiently with that abiding mother-love.
And sometime later, when it is time for the change,
the adults drug these young, bind them, weave a silk
shell around them, and then put a cap on it. Into the
cap (it is the hood of the cocoon) is placed one of ths
small four-legged scutters, freshly killed and made putre-
68 Strange Doings
scent in some manner. This is the whole purpose in life
of the scutters, to feed the pupa form of the spiders.
The pupa spider is somnolent for a long time. Then it
begins to eat of the putrescence in the hood, and to
change. Four little notches grow out of each of its sides.
With these it saws away the cocoon and emerges as a
new being. Soon the notches will grow to full members,
and the creature then takes its place as a full adult of
the Nation of Spiders.
.
The Spiders were master engineers, and the pattern of
the spider ponds built by them covered the whole world
of Aranea. They controlled the waters of that world
with their silken dams, weirs, levees, and hurdles. The
spiders were littoral creatures and had to maintain a
controllable water level.
The lakes and ponds were divided by silken barriers
into small plots, some of them so completely covered by
blue-green vegetation as to have the appearance of lush
meadows, others adjacent to them being clear of all
growth. The spiders seeded and they harvested. At some
of their major dams there were anchoring cables as
much as an inch in diameter. Scarble estimated that
there might be as many as seven billion individual spider
silks making up such a cable.
a
Scarble sat on the silken edge of one of the pools
while the spiders in their myriads twittered about him.
Then an expert crew of them performed certain rites at
that pool, sweeping it, making it clearer, inviting him to
drink.
"Thank you,” said Scarble. He leaned into it and
drank deeply. Then he stretched out to rest on the
silken shore. He went to sleep.
He dreamed that it was snowing, but in a new and
a
>
Once on Aranea 69
pleasant manner. It was not like Earth snow, and not at
all like the biting snow of Priestly Planet or the blue
horror that is the lethal snow on Arestor: This was
warm snow, light and full of sun, snowflakes with
beards on them like mote-sized comets. Scarble was
being covered over by a warm snow that was half
sunshine.
He awoke lazily and discovered that it was true. The
spiders had been covering him with gossamer and silk, as
children on a beach will cover one another with sand.
They shot the silks out over him like millions of stream-
ers of serpentine. It was a party, a ball given for him;
and the spider song had now reached a point of excite-
ment and jubilation.
Scarble tried to raise his head and found that he
could not. He gave it up and lay back, deliciously lazy.
This was something new in ease. Whether he was sleep-
ing or waking it was all the same. A picnic after all, to
be so pleasantly drugged-
To be what? An ugly thought came into Scarble's
mind and he chased it away. It came again and sat like a
little black animal on the edge of his golden dream.
Why hadn't he been able to raise his head?
He cleared his mind of the beginnings of panic.
“Here, here!” he called out. “You're covering me too
deep with that damned sand. Fun's fun, but that's
enough.”
But it was more cohesive than sand. This might be
only a noonday dream that would slide away. Well, it
wasn't. It was stark afternoon reality. The spiders had
him pegged down to the ground with their billion-
stranded silk bonds and he could hardly move a muscle.
And the mother-loving little abominations had
drugged him by whatever they had put into the inviting
>
70
Strange Doings
drinking pool. The taste in his mouth reminded him of
the knock-out drops they used to pass out free as water
on New Shanghai.
The spider song became more complex. There were
elements of great change in it, the motifs of one world
falling away and another one being born. The golden
daylight of Aranea was coming to an end. Scarble had
enjoyed his luxurious drugged sleep for more hours than
he had believed. Completely weary of his struggle with
his bonds, he dropped to sleep again; and the spiders
continued to work through the night.
The first thing that Scarble saw in the morning-out
of the corner of one eye fixed in his unmoving head-
was the spiders maneuvering a large golden ball towards
him. They tipped it with lines from the tops of gin
poles. They rolled it over and over, reset their rigging,
and rolled it again.
It was the dog Cyon, dead, and cocooned in a sack of
silk. The stench of it was unbearable. The dog was not
only dead but decayed, almost liquid in its putrefaction,
and with the high hair still on it.
Scarble was sickened by this, but he understood the
nature of the happening. He was a naturalist, and he
knew that anger was an unnaturalist response, and that
murder and putrefaction are natural workings. But Cyon
wasn't merely a dog. He was also a personal friend of
Scarble.
Scarble could not turn to see what was behind his
own head, but he knew that spiders had been working
on something there all night. He realized now what it
was: a snood, a capuchin like a friar's, the hood to be
his own cocoon. He knew with horror what thing they
were rolling into that hood now, and how the hood
Once on Aranea
71
a
would be joined onto his own cocoon. It happened
quickly.
Scarble's screams were drowned in the near liquid
mass; they had a drumlike sound even to his own ears as
though they were coming from under water. They
merged easily with the spider music which had just the
place for that screaming motif.
Then overpowering sickness sent Scarble into merci-
ful unconsciousness after the dead and rotting dog was
rolled into his face and closed in with him as their
cocoons became one.
How long does it take a man to die in such circum-
stances? Scarble set his mind to do it as quickly as
possible, but he was too tough for his own good. By
second night he still could not arrive at death, but he
welcomed the dark. The dog's carcass had become high-
er and more pungent, and the agony of Scarble took on
new refinements. He was thirsty to the point of mad-
ness, and so hungry that he could eat anything-almost
anything.
It frightened him that he could now understand the
spider mind so clearly. The spiders worked by analogy.
They believed Scarble to be an unfinished two-legged
strider, come to them with his quadruped that was born
for one purpose-to feed him when he went into pupa
form before being metamorphosed into a giant Emperor
Spider. Aye, they believed Scarble to be the Emperor
Spider promised to them from the beginning of time.
The spider song was a dirge now, the passing of the
old life, the death and decay fugue. But in the complex
of the dirge there were introductory passages of some-
thing much higher: the Anastasis, the Resurrection
Song.
“You mother-loving spiders!” Scarble called out in
fury. "You think I'm going to eat Cyon and then turn into a spider. You're wrong, I tell you! The biology of the thing is impossible, but how do you explain biology to spiders?" To be dying of thirst and there no liquid to mouth except that! To be starving and there no food available but this soft putridity pressed into his face! There -was a change in the tempo of the spider song. It rose in the crescendo of transition and made Scarble angry. '' Yo u presumptive little twelve-legged crawlers, you're getting ahead of me! Don't tell me what to do! Don't act as though I had already done it." But the hours had taken their price, and Scarble had already passed through madness and into the world on the other side. He didn't know when it began, but the spiders knew of the change about third dawn. The spiders' soaring incantation rose to new heights, and Scarble was able to follow it. He was hearing tones above the range of the human ear. Scarble began to eat of the putrefied mass-and to change. The Hallelujah Chorus of the Spider Song rose in a vast symphony.
72 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
In the Spaceman's Survival Handbook there is one instruction which some have believed to be written in humor: 'Never die till you have considered every alter­ native to a situation.' Well, how does a man get out of a situation like this? He doesn't. Well then, how does a spider get out of a situation like this? He grows eight more short little notches of legs, and
Once on Aranea
73
he shuffles and saws his way out of the cocoon with
them.
“It's worth a try,” Scarble said. “I'll see if I've turned
into a spider.”
He had. He did it. It worked.
They disabilitied Scarble from the active service. He
could give no intelligent account of his lone stay on
Aranea. He gave out with nothing but sick quips like:
“Cyon was a good dog, but only after he had become
very bad,” and “The Spiders tied me up and made me
eat the dog, and then they turned me into a spider.”
Scarble was plainly insane, but pleasantly so. And
there was nothing left of the dog except curiously
softened bones.
They sent Scarble back to Earth and kept him under
observation. Such men were handled with sympathy.
They called him the Spider Man around the wards. But
after a while that sympathy ran a little thin. Earth was
having her own troubles with spiders.
>
“I've never seen anything like them," an earthside
doctor told Scarble in examining him one day, as he
brushed some of that floating stuff out of his eyes. “The
growths are not malignant, but they will be mighty
unhandy. Since they are not malignant, I cannot remove
I
them without your permission, Scarble. They're getting
larger, you know.”
“Certainly they're getting larger,” Scarble main-
tained. “I'm quite pleased with the way they're coming
along. They get to be as big as the spiders' other legs.
And don't remove them! I'd as soon lose one of my
other limbs as one of them. They saved my life. I
74 Strange Doings
couldn't have gotten out of my cocoon without them.”
“You're going to have to get off this spider jag,
Scarble. Have you been reading the crank reports about
the spiders and have they upset you?”
“Why should they upset me, Doctor? Everything is
going as smooth as-ah-spidersilk. Naturally I have my
own intelligence setup on these matters. And the fact
that
you
refer to them as 'crank reports' likewise pleases
me. I'm on the top of the heap, Doctor. Who else has a
hundred billion soldiers ready to strike? We live in
exciting times, do we not?”
“As to that sickness of yours, Scarble, I'll gladly leave
it to your other doctor, your psycho doctor; and now it
is time for you to go and see him. But I wish you'd let
me remove those growths before they become larger.
They're almost like other limbs."
“Quite like,” said Scarble. He left the room majesti-
cally in the flowing robes which he now affected and
went down the corridor to see his other doctor. The
robes served a purpose. They did cover Scarble's afflic-
tions, the four strange growths on each side of his body.
And also:
“An Emperor always wears flowing robes,” Scarble
said. “You can't expect him to go dressed like a com-
moner."
>
Doctor Mosca, Scarble's other doctor, was a quiet and
patient man. He was also a dull fellow who had to have
simple things explained to him over and over again.
“What are you today, Scarble?" Doctor Mosca asked
again as he brushed some of the floating stuff away.
“Why, I'm the Emperor of the Dodecapod Spiders of
Aranea,” Scarble said pleasantly. “I explain that to you
every day, doctor, but you don't seem to remember. I
am also Prefect Extraordinary to the Aranea Spiders of
Once on Aranea
75
the Dispersal. And I am Proconsul to the Spiders of
Earth."
“Scarble, I'll be plain with you. Your planet probe
experience (whatever it was) has unhitched your mind.
And you have somehow connected whatever happened
on Aranea to the recent spider incidents on Earth. I will
admit that some of these incidents are peculiar and
almost insane-"
“No, no, Doctor, not insane. They are absolutely
reasonable-according to the Higher Reason. They are
organized and directed and strictly on schedule. To call
the incidents insane would be almost like calling me
insane."
“Mr. Scarble, we don't keep you here for your pool-
shooting ability, though you're good at that. We keep
you here because you're very sick-mentally. Now listen
to me carefully: You are a man, and not a spider.”
“I'm glad you think so, doctor. Our high council
decided that it would be better if I retained the basic
man-appearance until our present military operation is
completed. It should be completed today.”
“Scarble, you've got to get hold of yourself!” Doctor
Mosca insisted. He brushed heaps of the accumulated
silkstuff off his desk. “You are a man, and an intelligent
man. We have to get you off this insane spider jag of
yours. And it's not my department, but somebody had
better get the world off its jag, too. Every year has its
own peculiar sort of nuttiness, but the Spider Incidents
have become downright silly. Do you know that, with
the recent astronomical increases of the spiders,”
“That may be an unconscious pun," Scarble inter-
rupted.
"—that it is estimated there are now a hundred billion
spiders in this country alone.”
“Multiply that figure by a thousand if you wish,”
>
76
Strange Doings
Scarble said. “Last night was the Night of the Great
Hatching, and the young ones grow to effective size in
hours, all stages of them quickly now. The time is at
hand. I give the word now!"
“Great thumping thunder!" Doctor Mosca howled.
“I'm bitten badly! Another spider bite."
“Not just another bite,” Scarble said. “That was the
critical bite. I'm sincerely sorry for the pain: but, with
so many people to impregnate, I could not equip all my
creatures with painless probes. It eases off now, though,
doesn't it? The injection contains a narcotic and a
soporific.”
It did. Doctor Mosca drowsed. He half-dreamed that
it was snowing, but in a new and pleasant manner. It
was warm snow, light and full of sun, flakes with beards
on them like mote-sized comets.
The suddenly appearing spiders were covering Doctor
Mosca with gossamer and silk, as children will cover
each other with sand on a beach. And they were cov-
ering many millions of others, all stung and sunk into
pleasant lethargy and drowsiness, with billions of
streamers of serpentine silk.
It was deliciously lazy for Doctor Mosca to lie back
in the chair and hear that demented Scarble drone on
that he was no longer a man-(Doctor Mosca found that
he could no longer move his head: there was something
odd about that)—that Scarble was no longer a man,
whatever his appearance, that he was really the Emperor
of the Dodecapod Spiders of Aranea, and of all Spiders
everywhere.
Sodom and GOMORRAH,
TEXAS
Manuel shouldn't have been employed as a census taker.
He wasn't qualified. He couldn't read a map. He didn't
know what a map was. And he only grinned when they
told him that North was at the top. He knew better.
But he did write a nice round hand-like a boy's
hand. He did know Spanish, and enough English. For
the sector that was assigned to him, he would not need a
map. He knew it better than anyone else, certainly
better than any mapmaker.
Besides, he was poor and needed the work.
They instructed him and sent him out. Or they
thought that they had instructed him. They couldn't be
sure.
“Count everyone? All right. Fill them all in? I need
more papers.”
“We will give you more papers
if you need more,
Manuel, but there aren't so many
in
your sector.”
“Lots of them, lobos, tejones, zorros, even people.”
“People only, Manuel. Do not take the animals. How
would
you
write them up? They have no names.'
“Oh, yes. All have names. Might as well take them
all.”
.
77
78 Strange Doings
>
>
“Only people, Manuel.”
“Mulos?”
"No."
“Conejos?”
“No, Manuel, no.”
“No trouble. Might as well take them all.”
“Only people-God give me strength!-only people,
Manuel.”
“How about little people?”
“Children, yes, that has been explained to you.”
“Little people. Not children. Little people.”
“If they are people, take them.”
“How big they have to be?”
“It doesn't make any difference how big they are. If
they are people, take them.”
Manuel took Mula and went. His sector was the Santa
Magdalena-a scarp of baldheaded and desolate moun-
tains, steep but not high, and so torrid in the afternoons
that it was said that the old lava sometimes began to
writhe and flow again from the sun's heat alone.
In the Center Valley, there were five thousand acres
of slag and glassified rock from some forgotten old blast
that had melted the hills and destroyed their mantle,
reducing all to a terrible flatness. This was Sodom,
strewn with low-lying ghosts as of people and objects,
formed when the granite bubbled like water.
Away from the dead center, the ravines were body-
deep in chapparal, and the mountains stood gray-green
in old cactus. The stunted trees were lower than the
giant bushes and yuccas.
Manuel went with Mula-a round easy man and a
spare gaunt mule. Mula was a mule, but there were other
inhabitants of the Santa Magdalena whose genus was less
certain.
Sodom and Gomorrah, Texas
79
Yet even about Mula there was an ancestral oddity.
Her paternal grandfather had been a goat. Manuel once
told Mr. Marshal about this, but Marshal had not ac-
cepted it.
“She is a mule,” he said. “Therefore, her father was a
jack. Therefore his father was also a jack, a donkey. It
could not be any other way, Manuel.”
Manuel often wondered about this, for he had raised
the whole strain of animals and he remembered who had
been with whom.
“A donkey! A jack! Two feet tall, and with a beard
and horns! I always thought he was a goat.
Manuel and Mula stopped at noon on Lost Soul
Creek. There would be no travel in the hot afternoon.
But Manuel had a job to do and he did it. He took the
forms from one of the packs that he had unslung from
Mula and counted out nine of them. He wrote down all
the data on nine people. He knew all there was to know
about them their nativities and their antecedents. He
knew that there were only nine regular people in the
nine hundred square miles of the Santa Magdalena.
But he was systematic, so he checked the list over
again and again. There seemed to be somebody missing.
Oh
yes, himself. He got another form and filled out all
the data on himself.
Now-in one way of looking at it-his part in the
census was finished. If only he had looked at it that
way, he would have saved worry and trouble for every-
one, and also ten thousand lives. But the instructions
they had given him were ambiguous, for all that they
had tried to make them clear.
So very early the next morning, Manuel rose and
cooked beans and said, “Might as well take them all."
80
Strange Doings
He called Mula from the thorn patch where she was
grazing and gave her salt and loaded her again. Then
they went to take the rest of the census-but in fear.
There was a clear duty to get the job done, but there
was also a dread of it that the superiors did not under-
stand. There was reason also why Mula was loaded with
packs of census forms till she could hardly walk.
Manuel prayed out loud as they climbed the purga-
torial
scarp
above Lost Soul Creek “-ruega por nosotros
pecadores ahora"–the very gulches stood angry and
stark in the hot early morning-“y en la hora de nuestra
muerte.
>>
Three days later an incredible dwarf staggered into
the outskirts of High Plains, Texas. He was followed by
a dying wolf-sized animal that did not look like a wolf.
A lady called the police to save the pair from rock-
throwing kids who would have killed them; and the two
as yet unclassified things were taken to the station
house.
The dwarf was three feet high-a skeleton stretched
over with brown-burnt leather. The other was an un-
canine looking dog-sized beast so full of burs and thorns
that it might have been a porcupine. But it was more a
nightmare replica of a shrunken mule.
The midget was mad. The animal had more presence
of mind; she lay down quietly and died. That was all she
could do considering the state she was in.
“Who is census chief now?” asked the mad midget.
“Is Mr. Marshal's little boy the census chief?”
“Mr. Marshal is, yes. Who are you? How do you know
of Marsha!? And what is that which you are pulling out
of your pants—if they are pants?”
a
Sodom and Gomorrah, Texas S 81
“Census list. Names of everyone in town. I had to
steal it."
“It looks like microfilm-the writing is so small. And
the roll goes on and on. There must be a million names
here."
“Little bit more, little bit more. I get two bits a
name.”
They got Marshal there. He was very busy, but he
came. He had been given a deadline by the mayor and
the citizen' group. He had to produce a population of
ten thousand persons for High Plains, Texas. This was
difficult, for there weren't that many people in the
town. He had been working hard on it, though. But he
came when the police called him.
“You Marshal's little boy?" the mad midget asked
him. “You look just like your father.”
“That voice-I should know that voice even if it's
cracked to pieces,” said Marshall. “That has to be Manu-
el's voice.”
“Sure, I'm Manuel, just like when I left thirty-five
years ago.”
“You can't be Manuel-shrunk three feet and two
hundred pounds and aged a million.”
“You look here at my census slip, Mr. Marshal. It says
I'm Manuel. And here are nine more of the regular
people, and one million of the little people. I couldn't
get the little ones on the regular forms. I had to steal
their list.”
“You can't be Manuel,” said Marshal.
“He can't be Manuel," said the big policemen and the
little policemen.
“Maybe not then. I thought I was. Who am I then?
Let's look at the other papers to see which one I am.”
>
82 Strange Doings
.
>
“No, you can't be any of them either, Manuel. And
you surely can't be Manuel.”
“Give him a name anyhow and get him counted,”
said the head of the citizens' group. “We got to get to
that ten thousand mark."
“Tell us what happened, Manuel-if you are—which
you aren't-but tell us."
“After I counted the regular people, I went to count
the little people. I took a spade and spaded the top off
their town to get in. But they put an encanto on me and
made me and Mula run a treadmill for thirty-five years."
“Where was this, Manuel?”
“At the Little People Town-Nuevo Danae. But after
thirty-five years, the encanto wore off, and Mula and I
stole the list of names and ran away.”
“But where did you really get this list of so many
names written so small, Manuel?”
“Suffering saddle sores, Marshal, don't ask the little
bug so many questions! You got a million names in your
hand. Certify them! Send them in! There's enough of us
right here to pass a resolution. We declare that place
annexed forthwith. This will make High Plains the big-
get town in Texas.
So Marshal certified the names and sent them in to
Washington. This gave High Plains the largest percent
increase of any city in the nation-but it was challenged.
There were some soreheads in Houston who said that it
wasn't possible—that High Plains had nowhere near that
many people and that there must have been a miscount.
In the days that the argument was going on, they
cleaned up and fed Manuel-if it were he–and tried to
-
get from him a cogent story.
“How do you know it was thirty-five years, Manuel?”
,
“On the treadmill, it seemed like thirty-five years.”
“It could have been only about three days.”
"
Sodom and Gomorrah, Texas
83
up. You
>
“How come I'm so old then?”
“We don't know that Manuel. We sure don't know
that. How big were these people?”
“Who knows. A finger long, maybe two.”
“And what is their town?”
“It's an old prairie dog town that they fixed
have to dig down with a spade to get to the streets."
“Maybe they really were prairie dogs, Manuel. Maybe
the heat got you and you only dreamed that they were
little people."
“Prairie dogs can't write as good as on that list,” said
Manuel. “Prairie dogs can't write hardly at all.”
“That's true. The list is hard to explain. And such
odd names on it, too."
“Where is Mula? I don't see Mula since I came back."
“Mula just lay down and died, Manuel.”
“Gave me the slip. Why didn't I think of that? I'll do
it too. I'm too worn out for anything else.”
“Before you do, Manuel, just a couple of last ques-
tions."
“Make them real fast then. I'm on my way.”
“Did you know there little people were there be-
fore?”
“Oh sure. Everybody in the Santa Magdalena see them.
Eight, nine people know they are there. “Who wants
to be laughed at?' they say. They never talked about it.”
“And, Manuel, how do we get to the place? Can you
show us on a map?”
Manuel made a grimace and died quietly. He didn't
understand those maps, and he took the easy way out.
They buried him-not knowing for sure whether he was
Manuel or not. There wasn't much of him to bury.
It was the same night-very late, and after he had
84 Strange Doings
>
been asleep-that Marshal was awakened by the ring of
an authoritative voice. He was being harangued by a
four-inch-tall man on his bedside table-a man of domi-
nating presence and acid voice.
“Come out of that cot, you clown! Give me your
name and station!”
“I'm marshal, and I suspect that you're a late pig
sandwich. I shouldn't eat so late.”
“Say 'Sir' when you reply to me! I am no pig sand-
wich and I do not commonly call on fools. Get on your
feet, you clod!” Wondering, Marshal did.
“I want the list that was stolen. Don't gape. Get it!
Don't stall, don't stutter. Get me that tax list! It isn't
words I want from you."
“Listen, you cicada," said Marshal with his last brav-
ery, “I'll take you and—”
“You will not! You will notice that you are now
paralyzed from the neck down. I suspect that you were
always so from there up. Where is it?”
"S-sent it to Washington.”
“You bug-eyed behemoth! Do you realize what a trip
that will be? You grandfather of inanities, it will be a
pleasure to destroy you."
“I don't know what you are,” said Marshal. “I don't
believe you even belong on the world.”
“Not belong on the world? We own the world. We
can show written title to the world. Can you?”
“I doubt it. Where did you get the title?”
“We got it from a promoter of sorts, a con man
really. I have to admit that we were taken, but we were
in a spot and needed a world. He said that the larger
bifurcates were too stupid to be a nuisance. We should
have known that the stupider the creature the more of a
nuisance it is.'
“I have decided the same thing about the smaller the
>
Sodom and Gomorrah, Texas
85
>
creature. We may have to fumigate that old mountain
mess.”
“Oh, you can't harm us. We're too powerful. But we
can obliterate you in an instant."
“Hah!” exploded Marshal.
“Say ‘hah, sir' when you address me. Do you know
the place in the mountain that is called Sodom?"
"I know the place. It was caused by a large meteor."
“It was caused by one of these,” said the small
creature, and what he held up was the size of a grain of
sand. “There was another city of you bug-eyed beasts
there,” continued the small martinet. “You wouldn't
know about it. It's been a few hundred years. We
decided it was too close. Now I have decided that you
are too close.”
“A thing that size couldn't crack a walnut,” said
Marshal.
“You floundering fop, it will blast this town flat.”
“And if it does, what will happen to you?”
“Nothing. I don't even blink for things like that. I
haven't time to explain it to you, you gaping goof. I
have to get to Washington.”
It
may
be that Marshal did not believe himself quite
awake. He certainly didn't take the threat seriously
enough. For, in a manner still not understood, the little
man did trigger it off.
>
When the final count was in, High Plains did not have
the highest percentage gain in the Nation. Actually it
showed the sharpest decline of any town-from 7313 to
nothing. It is believed that High Plains was destroyed by
a giant meteor. But there are eight, nine people in the
Santa Magdalena who know what really happened, and
they won't tell.
They were going to make a forest preserve out of the
86 Strange Doings
place, except that it has no trees worthy of the name.
Now it is proposed to make it the Sodom and Gomorrah
State Park from the two mysterious scenes of desolation
there just seven miles apart.
It is an interesting place, as wild a region as you will
ever find, and is recommended for the man who has
seen everything.
The Man with the
Speckled Eyes
In those days there had been a clique of six men who
controlled it all. Any new thing went to one of them-or
it went nowhere. Discovery and invention cannot be
allowed to break out all over the lot.
These six men did not work in particular harmony.
They were called the clique because they were set apart
from others by their influence; and because of their
names, which were: Claridge, Loric, Immermann,
Quinn, Umholtz, and Easter.
Now the six men were reduced to two. On successive
days, Claridge, Loric, Immermann, and Quinn had disap-
peared-and they had done it pretty thoroughly. In each
case, somebody had to know something about their
disappearance; and in each case, that somebody refused
to tell.
Claridge's man, Gueranger, had been with Claridge at
the time of the disappearance or shortly before. He
admitted that much. But nothing intelligent could be
got from him.
"The truth of it is that I don't know the truth of it,"
Gueranger insisted. “Yes, I was there, but I don't know
what happened.”
>
87
88 Strange Doings
“Don't you know what you saw?” asked the investi-
gator.
“No, I don't. That's the whole point of the matter: I
will not accept, and will not tell, what I saw. Certainly I
know that I'm held on suspicion of murder. But where
is the body? You find it-anywhere-in any shape and
I'll sure sleep better.”
In the second case, Ringer and Mayhall both seemed
to know something of the disappearance of their em-
ployer, Loric. The three of them had walked in the
plaza at evening. Only two of them had come back-and
they much shaken.
“I know what I seemed to see,” Ringer ventured,
"and I will not tell it. I'm not stubborn and I'm not
sensitive to laughter, but I've sealed the whole thing off
in a corner of my mind and I won't disturb it. I've hopes
of hanging on to some pieces of my reason, and to open
this again would set me back.'
“Loric?" Mayhall grunted. “I guess the damned fool
swallowed himself. He's sure gone completely. Yes, I
was with him, and I won't say any nearer than that what
happened.”
“I simply will not explain,” said Immermann's advisor,
Hebert. “He is gone, and I do not believe he will be
back. No. If it was a hoax, I wasn't in on it, and I don't
understand it. Do I believe that he wished to disappear
for a private reason? Did he– wherever he has gone-go
willingly? No, gentlemen, he did not go willingly! I
never saw a man so reluctant to go."
“I wili not say what happened to Mr. Quinn,” said
Pacheco, Quinn's assistant. “Of course I know that he
was an important man–the most important in the world
The Man with the Speckled Eyes 89
to me. You say that you will have answers out of me
one way or the other? Then you'll have nothing but
babbling out of a crazy man.
“Why, yes,
I
suppose
that
you can hang me for
murder. I don't know how those things are worked. It
seems extreme, however. I thought there was a Latin
phrase involved, about a body being required. Lay off
now, fellows. I'm cracking up,
I tell you."
The investigators didn't lay off, but so far they had
got nothing out of any of the witnesses. The four
disappearances had to be as one, and the witnesses were
certainly of a pattern.
“Are Extraterrestrials Kidnapping Our Top Talent?”
the news banners read.
“Oh, hell,” said Umholtz in his cluttered office.
“Hell,” said Easter in his clean one. They both knew
that they were not men of any particular talent, and
that the four men who had disappeared were not. They
were shufflers and dealers in talent, that is all. In popu-
lar idea, they were responsible for the inventions they
marketed. But off-Earth people-bent on such showy
kidnappings-would have picked off seminal geniuses
and not talent brokers.
Four gone, two to go. Would the next one be Um-
holtz or Easter? Umholtz felt that it would be himself.
He and his assistant, Planter, were worrying about it
together when Shartel the aide came in to them.
“There's one to see you, Mr. Umholtz,” said Shartel
with diffidence, for he was only half the bulk of his
employer.
“An inventor?” Umholtz always sneered with his
eyebrows when he spoke that word, although inventors
were the only stock he dealt in.
“Who else comes to see us, Mr. Umholtz? This one
90 Strange Doings
may be worth investigating, though probably not for
any invention he has.'
“A crackie? What does he have?”
“A crackie from end to end, and he won't say
what
he has.”
“We're not scanning clients these days, Shartel. I
explain that to you every ten minutes. We're spending
all our time worrying about the disappearances. Creative
worry, Planter here calls it, and I don't appreciate his
humor. I haven't time for a crackie today.”
“He got to see Claridge, Loric, Immermann, and
Quinn-all à couple of hours before their disappear-
.
“All inventors make the same rounds. There's nobody
else they can go to. And weren't there a couple of
others who saw them all?”
“The others have all been checked out clean. This is
the last one. The authorities have been looking for him
and have left word to call if he showed. I'll ring them as
soon as he's in here. There's a slim chance that he knows
something, but he sure doesn't look it.”
“Send him in, Shartel. Has he a name?”
“Haycock. And he looks as though he had slept in
one.”
ance."
Haycock didn't really have hay in his hair-that was
only the color and lay of it. He had blue eyes with
happy, dangerous gold specks in them, and a friendly
and humorous sneer. He looked rather an impudent
comedian, but inventors come in all sizes. He had some-
thing of the back-country hayseed in him. But also
something of the panther.
“I have here what may turn out to be a most useful
device,” Haycock began. “Good. You have sent the
The Man with the Speckled Eyes 91
>
underlings away. I never talk in their presence. They're
inclined to laugh at me. I am offering you the opportu-
nity to get in on the top floor with my device, Mr.
Umholtz.”
“Haycock, you have the aspect of a man entranced
by one of the four basic fallacies. If so, you are wasting
my time. But I want to question you on a side issue. Is
it true that you visited all four of them-Claridge, Loric,
Immermann, and Quinn-on the days of their disap-
pearances?”
“Sounds like their names. Four blind bats! None of
them could see my invention at first. All of them
laughed at it. Forget those fools, Umholtz. You can
grow new fools, but what I have here is unique. It is the
impossible invention.”
“By the impossible inventor, from the looks of you. I
I
hold up four fingers, and one is it. Tell it in one word,
Haycock!”
“Anti-grav."
“Fourth finger. It's not even the season for anti-grav,
Haycock. These things go in cycles. We get most of the
anti-gravs in early winter. All right, I give you four
seconds to demonstrate. Raise that table off the floor
with your device.”
“It's barely possible that I could raise it, Umholtz,
but not in four seconds. It would take several hours;
instant demonstration is out. It's a pretty erratic piece
of machinery, though I've had good luck on my last
several attempts. It isn't really very impressive, and a lot
of what I tell you you'll have to take on faith.”
“Haven't any, Haycock. Even a charlatan can usually
put on a good show. Why the two pieces? One looks like
a fishing tackle box, and the other like a sheaf of
paper.”
92 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
"The papers are the mathematics of it, Umholtz. Look at the equations carefully and you'll be convinced without a demonstration." "All right. I pride myself on the speed I bring to spotting these basic errors, Haycock. They seem very commonplace equations, and then they break off when it's plain that you're getting nowhere. What happened to the bottom of these sheets?" "Oh, my little boy ate that part of them. Just go ahead and you'll pick up the continuity again. Ah, you're at the end of it and you laugh! Yes, is it not funny how simple every great truth is?" "I've seen them all, Haycock, and this is one of the most transparent. The only thing wrong with it is that it won't work and it's as full of holes as a seine." "But it does work part of the time, Umholtz, and we'll fill up the holes till it's practical. Well, is it a deal? It'll take a couple of years; but if you'll start plenty of money rolling, I'll get on with the project in a big way. Why do you roll your eyes like that, Umholtz? Is there a history of apoplexy in your family?" "I will be all right in a moment, Haycock. I am afflicted by inventors, but I recover quickly. Let us set the gadget aside for the moment. Do you know where the four now-celebrated men have gone?" "Papers said it was as if they had disappeared from the Earth. I imagine they sent a reporter or someone to check on it." "Take Claridge, for instance," said Umholtz, "Did he seem disturbed when you last saw him?" "I think he was the little one. He was kind of boggle­ eyed, just like you were a minute ago. Kind of mad at me for wasting his time. Well pig's pants ! I wasted my
time, too! Blind as a bat, that man. Don't think he was convinced that my thing would work till maybe right at the end. Now let's get back to my instrument. It will do a variety of jobs. Even you can see where it would be useful." "It would be, if it worked, and it won't. Your piece of rna thematics is childish, Haycock." "Might be. I don't express myself well in that medi­ um. But my machine does work. It creates negative gravity. That is, it works quite a bit of the time." Umholtz laughed. He shouldn't have, but he didn't know. And he did have an ugly sort of laugh. "You laugh at me!" Haycock howled out. Gold fire popped from his eyes and he was very angry. The hayseed hagan to look like the panther. He touched his machine, and it responded with a sympathetic ping! to the anger of its master. Umholtz \Vas having fun with the now-blazing inven­ tor. "What do you do, Haycockandbull, tum that ma­ chine on and point it at something?" he guffawed. Umholtz enjoyed deriding a fellow. "You hopeless hulk ! I turned it on a minute ago when you laughed at me. It's working on you now. You'll be convinced in the end," Haycock threatened. "Do you not know, Haycock, that anti-grav is the standing joke in our profession? But they still come in with it, and they all have that same look in their eyes." "Umholtz, you lie! Nobody else ever had this look in his eye!" That was true. The gold specks in the blue eyes glinted in a mad way. The eyes did not focus properly. It seemed to Umholtz that Haycock did not look at
T h e M a n w i t h t h e S p e c k 1 e d E y e s 9 3
94 Strange Doings
>
him, but through him and beyond. The man might well
be a maniac-the sort of maniac who could somehow be
involved in the four disappearances. Never mind, they
were coming for him. They'd be here any
minute.
“Anti-grav is a violation of the laws of mass and
energy,” Umholtz needled.
"To change the signature of a mass from plus to
minus is not a violation of any law I recognize," said
Haycock evenly. “It is no good for you to justify now,
Umholtz, or to find excuses. It is no use to plead for
your life. Are you deaf as well as blind and stupid? I
told you plainly that the demonstration had already
begun. You were all a stubborn lot, but I convinced all
four of them in the end, and I'll convince you. I tell
you, Umholtz, that entrenched stupidity makes me
mad, and when I get mad I sure do get mean. I've
cancelled you out, you open idiot! Umholtz, I'll send
you away screaming!”
“Rather I'll send you away in that act,” Umholtz
purred, for the men in black were now into the room,
and they laid legal hands on Haycock.
“Take him away,” Umholtz grunted out. 'He's fishier
than Edward's Ichthyology."
Haycock didn't go away screaming, but he went roar-
ing and fighting. That man was very mean, and those
gold specks in his eyes were really sulphur.
Say, they couldn't get a thing out of that fellow.
Haycock was an odd one, but that was all. They went
over him from the beginning. He was known in his own
neighborhood for his unsuccessful inventions and for his
towering temper, but he hadn't
any
bodies lying around,
and he hadn't been anywhere near any of the four men
The Man with the Speckled Eyes 95
at the time of their disappearances.
He was a crackie from end to end, but he hadn't a
handle they could get hold of.
“I am not ghoulish,” Umholtz said to his men Planter
and Shartel, “but the disappearance of four of my five
competitors has opened up some pretty obvious oppor-
tunities for me. Oh, other men will be designated to
replace them, but it'll be a long time before they get
that sharp.”
“What did the crackie have this afternoon, Mr. Um-
holtz?” Planter asked him.
“It isn't worth mentioning. One of the oldest and
silliest.”
The three of them were walking in the park in the
evening.
“I suddenly feel odd,” said Umholtz and he placed
one hand on his head and the other on his paunch.
“Something I ate for supper didn't agree with me.'
“It's the worry,” said Planter. “The disappearances
have upset you. With the thought that you might be
next on the list, there has been a great weight on you.”
“I really feel as though a great weight has been lifted
off me,” said Umholtz, “but I don't like the feeling.
I'm light-headed.”
“The walk will do you good,” Planter told him. “You
look well to me. I've never seen you move with so light
a step.”
“No, no, I'm sick,” Umholtz moaned, and he began
to look
up in the air as though fearful of an attack from
that sector. “My feet don't track right. There's a light-
ness in me. My stomach is turning inside out. Lord, but
it would be a long way to fall!
>
96 Strange Doings
Umholtz flopped his way forward, his feet slipping on
the grass as though he had lost traction. He got hold of
the tree-a small elm.
“I'm starting to go!” he howled in real terror.
He put a bear hug around the tree, locking on to it
with both arms and legs. “Great dancing dogfish, don't
let me fall,” he sobbed. “How did I ever get so high
up?"
“Umholtz, you are six inches from the ground,”
Planter told him. “The man's gone mad, Shartel. Let's
pry his legs loose first. When we get his feet on the
ground he may get over his mania about falling."
“Fools! Fools! You'll let me fall all the way down,”
Umholtz screamed, but he was looking upward, and his
face was flushed as though all the blood had run to his
head.
“He was right,” Umholtz sniffled wetly in an inter-
lude from his screaming and sobbing. “I'm finally con-
vinced.”
“There's one leg loose, Shartel,” said Planter as he
worked on Umholtz, “but for some reason it seems
pretty difficult to hold it to the ground. Now the other
leg, and we'll set him down on his feet. Whoops! What's
wrong? You're going up with him, Shartel!”
Shartel did go up with him at first, for Umholtz was
much the heavier man. But Shartel broke away and fell
a dozen feet down to the grass.
Umholtz grabbed a precarious lodging in the tree top,
but he was shearing off fronds and branches and going
fast.
“For God's sake, get me up from here!” Umholtz
screamed, hanging upward from the topmost branch. He
was like a tethered balloon tugging at its mooring.
The Man with the Speckled Eyes
97
“Throw a rope down to me! Do something!” he
sobbed upsidedownly from the tree top. “I'll fall all the
way, and I can't even see bottom.”
The topmost branch broke, and Umholtz fell off the
world.
He fell upward into the evening sky, his scream drop-
ping in pitch as he accelerated. He fell end over end,
diminishing till he was only a dot in the sky. Then he
was gone.
-
“What will we tell people-what-what can we say,
however explain-how explain what we seen seem-”
Shartel rattled, the bones in his body shaking like
poker dice in a toss box.
“You tell your lie and I'll tell mine,” Planter grum-
bled. “I'm crazy, but I'm not crazy enough to have seen
that."
>
Of the clique, only Easter was left. He was the most
even-minded of the bunch and the least inclined to
worry. It had been a peculiar series of events that had
devoured his competitors, but he hadn't been able to
base any theory on the disappearances. If he continued,
he would be next.
শ “I may try a little worrying myself,” he mused. “A
man of my sort shouldn't neglect any field of cogita-
tion. I'll give it a try. It should come easy for me
today.”
So Easter worried, but he didn't do it well. It isn't
easy
if
you haven't the lifetime habit of it.
Then a man came in to him unannounced.
This was a man with hay-colored hair, with blue eyes
98
Strange Doings
with happy dangerous gold specks in them, a man with a
friendly and humorous sneer. He had something of the
hayseed in him. But also something of the panther.
“I have here what may turn out to be a most useful
device,” Haycock began.
All but the Words
The IDT Project had been going on for a dozen years
with no real advance toward its ends. It would have been
abandoned long before except for its collateral discov-
eries in other fields. The accidental offshoots that it had
produced were well worth the considerable expense of
the Project.
The Project had assigned to it one great mind and
several very good minds; no other project at that time
could say as much. The great mind was that of Gregory
Smirnov, and his greatness lay in his instant perception
of the possibilities of an idea. He always knew whether
an idea or a notion had a spark in it. He discerned where
the flightiest, most apparent idiocy carried the ultimate
spark, and where the most brilliant and most plausible
thesis did not. He played his colleagues like a hand of
cards, and he scored every possible point with them
The several very good minds associated with the Pro-
ject were those of: Charles Cogsworth, the inventor of
the Recapitulation Correlator, as well as the Cerebral
Scanner; Aloysius Shiplap, who had been associated
with the late Cecil Corn in the experiment which ended
Corn's life-which may have been a dead end and may
99
100 Strange Doings
have been an opening door; the stiff-necked Gerald
Glasser, the designer of the E.P. Locator; Valery Mok, a
woman of vivid eido-creation whose mind had put
Cogsworth into a state of shock when he first went into
it with his scanner.
Also associated with the Project was Energine Eimer.
Although she had a good mind by ordinary standards,
she was not in the class with the others; for it was really
an understatement to speak of them as having very good
minds. Energine herself was flighty to seeming idiocy,
but Smirnov had detected that from her might come the
ultimate spark.
The purpose of the IDT Project was to devise an
Instant Distant Translation device, which might be ei-
ther mechanical or psychic, or something of an entirely
different aspect. It was to reach and establish rapport
with a distant-a very distant-mind, any mind any.
where beyond the pale. It would have to combine and
go far beyond such tools as were already available.
Extrasensory Perception, now that it was known to
be but another aspect of simple sensory perception and
of disappointing limitations, was one very inadequate
tool. The translation devices themselves would be ade-
quate for ordinary work. They could now interpret
roughly the thought processes of earthworms and ferns
and even crystals. They could record and even verbalize
the apprehensions of metals under stress and, to an
extent, the group consciousness of gathering thunder-
heads. Any language, terrestrial or distant, could be
given a cogent interpretation. But something more was
required.
It was the six hundred and twelfth weekly progress
meeting of the group.
“Energine,” said Gregory Smirnov, “it has just come
All but the Words 101
to me how you are different from the rest of us."
“In one way she's different from the rest, except
myself,” said Valery, “but I'm not sure that you've ever
noticed that difference.”
"I've known about the difference of the sexes for a
long time, Valery,” said Smirnov. “I was a precocious
child and an early reader of biology. In my own life I
have relegated the implications of the difference to a
minor corner. There is little enough time in even a long
life to do the work I have set for myself, and the
ramifications of the sex complex are time-consuming.
No, the difference is that Energine likes to talk to
people.”
“Does not almost everyone?” asked Shiplap.
“Many do, but none of us on the Project except
Energine,” said Smirnov. “We are not the sort of people
who like people, and we talk to them as little as possi-
ble. Mostly we talk to ourselves, even when we are
nominally talking to others. There is an inhibition in
the-ah-cultivated minds. We are a withdrawn bunch,
and we tend to become more so as we follow our
specialties and our studies. That is the irony of it.”
.
“Where is the irony?” asked Cogsworth.
“We are trying to talk to 'people' over cosmic dis-
tances, and we do not even like to talk to people near at
hand. We do not like to talk to people at all. We aren't
the ones for the job. Mostly we are bored with people.”
“Then who are the ones for the job?” asked Glasser.
“Logorrhea is rampant in the world. We could find a
billion low folks who love to talk to other low folks.”
“Possibly those we will ultimately contact will also be
low folks,” said Smirnov. “It is likely that the lowest
common denominator of the Universe will be both low
and common. Rapport is what we want, and we don't
>
102 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
have it. We can study the dragonfly, but are we ever really concerned with the dragonfly's concern for his family? We don't really like the monstrous miniatures. We've no sympathy with the terrified arrogance of the arachnid; how can we have sympathy for really strange creatures? How can we talk to an alien if we don't even like to talk to our own kind?" "I have a landlady who even talks to bugs," said Glasser. "Shall I get her? She'd droodle to a vole on a planet just as well if we pointed her that way. And you believe that she would be better than ourselves who have all the techniques and information?" "We have Energine," said Smirnov. "She has the techniques, such as we all have. And she likes to talk to people. She might just be able to break us out of our restriction." "Then why hasn't she done it?" asked Valery. "She's had as much time on the senders and scanners as any of us, and no more luck." "Because she hasn't let herself go. She has been constrained to use our own approach and formulae. Energine, let yourself go and talk to those people! Now! Tonight! Talk to them!" " I will, I will. But how? You mean just like I talk? I've thought of that, but I didn't think you'd allow it. I bet those folks have gotten awful bored with our saluta­ tions and mathematical symbols. A circle is a circle, and a square is a square, and so are we. Hey-me third planet out. Who you?-I bet they think we're nutty to use that kind of stuff. "I'll get hold of one of them tonight and tell him all about the new Indonesian restaurant I found. Maybe he found a new restaurant up there and can tell me some of the dishes. Whoever he is I bet he likes to eat, too."
"Energine, do you still belong to a Lonely Hearts Club?" "Why, I belong to all of them ! Just let me read you one letter I got this morning. Why, it's the nicest let­ ter-" "Spare us! Protect us! Earth swallow us!" cried Glass­ er. "That, Glasser, is an illustration of what is holding us back," said Smirnov. "We don't like to talk to people and we don't like to listen to people. It may be that they have been talking to us for a long time and we were not in tune to listen." "Well then, you will surely listen, Mr. Smirnov,", cried Energine. "This is a letter from Eugene upstate-" "No, as a matter of fact I will not listen," said Smirnov. "I am now too old to develop a sympathy for the vital things of life. But what I want you to do, Energine, is to let yourself go; to talk, to send, just as if you were writing to one of your lonely hearts people. Go all the way out, girl. If it doesn't work, only the stars will laugh at you." "Oh, I never minded being laughed at. It shows that people are having fun. I'll tell him about Charley; that's just to make him jealous. You don't know about Char­ ley? Let me read you-well, never mind then. This might be the first extraterrestrial lonely hearts club. I could be president." "Yes, you could be president of it, Energine. Now, the first live blip you get on the scanner, you just let yourself go with all you've got. Send him one of those lonely hearts letters. Make it lavender." "Purple. Oh, I will, I will."
And that evening on the scanner Energine picked up
A l l b u t t h e W o r d s 1 03
either a minor blip or a minor malfunction; it was always impossible to tell which. Those little egg-shaped anomalies-they looked egg-shaped, they sounded egg­ shaped, they broke into egg-shaped sine curves-were the only evidence ever of the sort of target they were seeking. Energine let herself go on the sender. "Dear Albert-since I must call you something and I am sure that your name is very like that-I will try quite hard to reach you, and I beg that you answer me. Your name in the Project now becomes Albert-(Tentative) . To others you are only an egg-shaped anomaly, but you are more than that to me. "This is the first essay to the establishment of a stellar lonely hearts club, and it just has to be a success. In the lonely hearts clubs we write in love and affection to those we would like to know, and we would like to know everyone. "I will tell you about our world, and you tell me about yours. I hope that we can get very close together. There is an ecstasy on me when I can grow very close to another. I believe that the only thing of any importance on this world is love. Is not that the only thing of importance on yours? "I had another picture of Charley today. He is not as handsome a man as he was in the first picture that he sent. I do not believe that the first picture was even a picture of Charley. But sometimes the first picture that I send is not a picture of me, either. Do you want to see a picture of me? I will send one as soon as I find out how. "I went to a Mexican restaurant last night. They had roast kid stuffed with almonds and sauced all over with burnt brown sugar. And they had those little flat pan­ cake things that taste like cardboard. I love them. I
1 04 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
wonder if you enjoy eating as much as I do. "Albert, please answer me with anything at all, and we will begin to establish rapport. I feel that we could grow very close together. Albert, I will treasure your answers with those of Fred and Harold and Richard­ that one turned out badly but he did write nice letters­ and Selby and Roger and Norbert. Do you also save old letters? Answer me. I will stay right here till morning, and if I do not hear from you by then I will wait again to morrow even ing and every evening. Signed­ Energine."
She waited, but she didn't have to wait as long as she had feared. It was only about an hour till the response began to come through. The first sign of it was the dimming of the lights and the vibration of the building as the auxiliary generators cut in, for the translation device seemed to be laboring under a heavy, unaccus­ tomed load. But the machine had amazing resources. It could translate anything, anything. Then the answer came. "Energine," came the answer. "That call letter? That name? That world? That people? That what? "] ubilation here to learn that there is friendly life on your world. Your world previously ignored as little bit sick. You know sick? Word sick? Possibly first word mutually understanding. "Comprehending all your communication except the words. What is lonely? What is hearts? What is club? What is grow very close together? What is a Charley? What is picture? What is Mexican? What is kid? What is little flat pancake thing? What is cardboard? What is a Fred and Harold and other entities? "Word love understood intuitively. Explain mechan-
A I I b u t t h e W o r d s 1 05
106 Strange Doings
ics of thing with you. Extreme variation in different
sectors. In ecstasy of symbiosis which one swallow who?
“Yes, answer, answer, answer, whatever that means.
What is Selby? What is Norbert? What means wait right
here? What means morning? Rapport also understood
intuitively. We be so completely. We how many? You
group or integer? Send how to roast kid stuffed. What is
roast kid stuffed? Delirious interest here in subject, sure
to increase when we know what subject consist of. Also
love you already passionately. What is passionately?
What is already?-
KGG3LP*Y UU-Albert-(Tentative).”
He had answered. Albert-(Tentative) had answered.
He had understood all of her communication except the
words. They were in perfect rapport.
The translation device shuddered and groaned after
the effort. Then it panted softly and fell to sibilant
silence. The building was quiet and the night gathered
lovely about it.
The first and most difficult step of the IDT Project
had been achieved after twelve years. The rest would
follow. Others would venture where Energine had pio-
neered. The glad news of the achievement was given to
the world.
The matter and exact wording of the two messages
were not, however, given to the world. These remained
classified. In the early contacts with aliens there are
always details which will seem incongruous to the un-
learned.
Others tried the feat with some success, and Energine
repeated it again and again. The rapport grew. Soon
Albert Tentative began to understand some of the words
as well as the feeling of the messages. Small misunder-
standings were gradually set right, as one from Albert-
All but the Words
107
“You ask if we can be sure that we are of opposite
sex? How not opposite? With us are five sexes. Every-
body partake of several, so everybody a little opposite.
This make for clarity. Surely you drollery when you say
there only two on your world.
“You wish to see me but say it is impossible. Why in
kss@#rr*WQ”—mild profanity'.—Trans. note="it not
possible? Travel no problem with us. It problem with
you? You want me-I be there. Like in little verse we
find in Block Massive Cultural Transmission Corpus
from your world, ‘Brush your tooth, say your prayer, go
to sleep, I be there. What brush? What tooth? What
prayer? What sleep? What it mean, understanding that
great poetry not always to be taken literally? Profound
poetry from your world having great appeal here. Also
Aristotle Joke Book and fragments of Sport Page Statis-
tic Epic Cycle. Decline in your civilization, huh? No
.400 hitters for years.
.
“Who I see buy stock on exchange? Always looking
for sound investment. All difficulties erased when we
see each other. Albert Tentative.”
“He is coming to see me,” said Energine dreamily.
“It is possibly a translation error, cautioned Smir-
nov. “Perhaps there has been omitted a phrase such as
'What mean come see me?' You know it would be
impossible that he should come. Our Block Massive
Cultural Transmission will not be digested by them all at
once. I am pleased at the success it has already had.”
“He is coming to see me,” said Energine.
“No, no, girl. That couldn't be. You are deluded, but
I can never tell you how much I appreciate what you
have done.”
“He is coming to see me.
108 Strange
Strange Doings
“No, he is not. It is completely out of the question.”
He came to see her.
It was known that he had arrived, that something had
arrived. Instruments of a dozen sorts had recorded him.
“Albert Tentative arrives” was the glad word, but where
was he, what was he? He seemed to be invisible and
inaudible. But for the evidence of the instruments there
were some who would have doubted the arrival of
Albert in the world.
“I want a week off,” said Energine to Gregory Smir-
nov. “No, I want a year off. Albert and I have so much
to say to each other that we will never get it all said.
And we're going to get married if we can figure out how
to go about it. I really need some private advice on that.
But look, just look!"
“A
very
beautiful and odd ring, Energine. Did he give
it to you?”
“Did he give what to me?”
The ring was a sort of furry metal. It glowed and it
changed colors. It circled the chubby little finger of
Energine, and she held it up to her cheek.
“I had no idea that anything could be so wonderful,”
she raptured. “We're so happy together. We went to the
new Syrian restaurant last night and had camel purée.
It's so cute the way he eats it.”
“How, Energine?”
“Gets right down in the bowl.”
“Ah-Energine-let's get to the point. Where is Albert
Tentative? It's important that we see him and examine
him. Where is he?"
“Why, right here, Mr. Smirnov. Did you ever see
anyone like him?”
“No, I never did, mainly because I can't see him at
,
all."
All but the Words
109
“Can't you see him? Why, I never suspected that.
You mean that I'm the only one who can see him?”
“Patience, Patience, thou universal regent, do not
desert me now! What does he look like, Energine?”
?
“Why, he's round and shining and furry, and he
changes color.”
“Energine, the ring he gave you
“Mr. Smirnov, that is no ring. That is my Albert. Oh,
Albert, he thought you were a ring. How funny!”
Albert Tentative was of great interest for about three
weeks. There was first of all the epic press conference
that Gregory Smirnov set up for him as soon as the
method of plugging Albert in and giving him amplifica-
tion was discovered. It might be said that there was first
and last of all the epic press conference.
It was a success, let there be no doubt of that. It was
a total success. There were those who came to wonder if
the success was not too total.
There was resentment at first that foreign correspond-
ents were not alerted and given a chance to attend it.
Some came anyhow to see what they could pick up after
it was over with, and found that it was not over with.
Albert was still talking when they got there; he had been
talking for a week.
Albert was a fine talker, now that he knew the words.
The pidgin of the translation device had been that of the
device, not of Albert. He answered all questions com-
pletely, oh how completely! He went into a spate and
answered questions that had never been asked, and the
newsmen and personages listened to him in relays, fasci-
nated.
After a week of standing by, Energine-whose finger
Albert had long since abandoned for many others-said
that she thought she would go out to get something to
a
110 Strange
Strange Doings
>
eat. She looked dazed. She did not come back.
Albert answered the questions of the Chinese and the
Arabs. He answered the questions of all the newsmen of
Earth. He also had a Block Massive Cultural Trans-
mission Corpus which he wanted to communicate. He
recited the Epic Gilmish in which is comprised all wis-
dom. That took him thirty hours, perhaps not too long a
period to be given to a work that comprises all wisdom.
But the listeners were of flesh and blood, and nobody
knew what Albert was.
Gregory Smirnov stayed with it two weeks and then
walked out. He shouldn't have done it as he was the
host, but there was a weakness in the great man that
manifested itself here. He went to see the President of
the Republic.
“Suggest Project's discontinuance,” he said to the
President.
“But Mr. Smirnov, is not the Project a colossal suc-
cess?”
“Quite."
“ “But you have now established rapport with a com-
pletely alien being for the first time.”
“Unfortunately. And perhaps not alien enough.”
“Possibly you yourself are burnt out by your great
labors on the Project.”
“Possibly."
“I would be unwilling to abandon the Project now
that it has proved such an outstanding success. Perhaps
we should transfer the operation to another group.
Could you suggest another group that might be able to
handle it?”
“Enfield's Automations."
“An excellent suggestion. They're a bunch of comers.
All but the Words
111
We will take steps for the transfer of authority.”
“Good-by,” said Smirnov, and left.
“Did you notice that he seemed very short-spoken
today?” the President asked one of his aides when
Smirnov had left.
Albert Tentative was a great success for about three
weeks. Then the Project was turned over to Enfield's
Automations, and the whole thing went on automatic.
Albert is still talking.
It was some time later that Gregory Smirnov met
Valery Mok on the street.
“Well?” he asked her.
“I, yes. You, I hope. News?”
“Of the bunch? Cogsworth dead. Shiplap mad. Glasser
vanished.”
“Energine?”
“Nun.
“Which?”
“Contemplative. Not talk, you know.”
“Their address?”
“Here.”
“Thanks.'
Smirnov went to have a glossotomy performed on
himself, as well as an intricate operation on the ears. So
they all arranged their lives.
In their final solution they all owed much to Albert
Tentative. For in his recitation of the Epic Gilmish he
had omitted nothing, not even the remarkable five-hour
speech on the medicinal value of silence.
This was the birthday of Carnadine Thompson. She was seven years old. Thereby she left her childhood behind her, and came into the fullness of her powers. This was her own phrase, and her own idea of the importance of the milestone. There were others, mostly adult, who thought that she was a peculiarly backward little girl in some ways, though precocious in others. She received for her birthday four presents: a hollow, white rubber ball, a green plastic frog, a red cap and a little wire puzzle. She immediately tore the plastic frog apart, consider­ ing it a child's toy. So much for that. She put on the cap, saying that it had been sent by her Genie as a symbol of her authority. In fact none of them knew who had sent her the red cap. The cap is important. If it weren't important, it wouldn't be men­ tioned. Carnadine quickly worked the wire puzzle, and then unworked it again. Then she did something with the hollow, white rubber ball that made her mother's eyes pop out. Nor did they pop all the way in again when
112
TI-lE TRANSCENdENT TiqERS
Carnadine undid it and made it as it was before. Geraldine Thompson had been looking pop-eyed for a long time. Her husband had commented on it, and . she had been to the doctor for it. No medical reason was found, but the actual reason was some of the antics of her daughter Carnadine. "I wonder if you noticed the small wire puzzle that I gave to my daughter," said Tyburn Thompson to his neighbor, H. Horn. "Only to note that it probably cost less than a quar­ ter," said Horn, "and to marvel again at the canny way you have with coin. I wouldn't call you stingy, Tyburn. I've never believed in the virtues of understatement. You have a talent for making stingy people seem bene­ volent." "I know. Many people misunderstand me. But con­ sider that wire puzzle. It's a very simple-appearing puz­ zle, but it's twenty-four centuries old. It is unworkable, of course, so it should keep Carnadine occupied for some time. She has an excess of energy. This is one of the oldest of the unworkable puzzles." "But, Tyburn, she just worked it," said his wife Geraldine. "It is one of �he nine impossible apparatus puzzles listed by Anaximandros in the fifth century before the common era," continued Tyburn. "And do you know, in all the centuries since then, there have been only two added to the list." "Carnadine," said her mother, "let me see you work that again.'' Carnadine worked it again. "The reason it is unworkable," said Tyburn, "though apparent to me as a design engineer, may not be so readily apparent to you. It has to do with odds and
T h e T r a n s c e n d e n t T i g e r s 1 1 3
1 1 4 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
evens of lays. Many of the unworkable classic puzzles are cordage puzzles, as is this actually. It is a wire miniature of a cordage puzzle. It is said that this is the construction of the Gordian knot. The same, however, is said of two other early cordage puzzles." . "But she just worked it, Tyburn, twice," said the wife. "Stop chattering, Geraldine. I am explaining some­ thing to Horn. Men have spent years on the puzzle, the Engineering Mind and the recognition of patent impossi­ bility being less prevalent in past centuries. And this, I believe, is the best of all the impossible ones. It is misleading. It looks as though there would surely be a way to do it." "I just believe that I could do it, Tyburn," said Horn. "No, you could not. You're a stubborn man, and it'd drive you crazy. It's quite impossible. You would have to take it into another dimension to work it, and then bring it back." I' Carnadine once more did something with the hollow rubber ball. "How did you make the rubber ball turn red and then white again, Carnadine ?" her mother asked her. "Turned it inside out. It's red on the inside." "But how did you turn it inside out without tearing it?" "It'd spoil it to tear it, mama." "But it's impossible to turn it inside out without tearing it." "Not if y�u have a red cap it isn't." "Dear, how do you work the puzzle that your father says can't be worked?" "Like this."
The Transcendent Tigers 115
“Oh, yes. I mean, how does it happen that you can
work it when nobody else could ever work it before?”
“There has to be a first time for everything, mama.”
“Maybe, but there has to be a first-class explanation
to go with that first time.”
"It's on account of the red
cap.
I can do
anything.'
With this cap
>
So Carnadine Thompson in the fullness of her
powers, and in her red cap, went out to find the rest of
the Bengal Tigers. This was the most exclusive society in
the world. It had only one full member, herself, and
three contingent or defective members, her little brother
Eustace, Fatty Frost, and Peewee Horn. Children all
three of them, the oldest not within three months of her
age.
The Bengal Tigers was not well known to the world at
large, having been founded only the day before. Carna-
dine Thompson was made First Stripe for life. There
were no other offices.
Yet, for a combination of reasons, the Bengal Tigers
now became the most important society in the world.
The new power was already in being. It was only a
question of what form it would take, but it seemed to
show a peculiar affiliation for this esoteric society.
Clement Chardin, writing in Bulletin de la Société
Parahistorique Française, expressed a novel idea:
a
It is no longer a question whether there be trans-
cendent powers. These have now come so near to us
that the aura of them ruffles our very hair. We are the
objects of a visitation. The Power to Move Mountains
116 Strange Doings
and Worlds is at hand. The Actuality of the Visitation
is proved, though the methods of the detection can-
not now be revealed.
The question is only whether there is any indi-
vidual or group with the assurance to grasp that
Power. It will not be given lightly. It will not come to
the craven on contabescent. There is the sad possi-
bility that there may be none ready in the World to
receive the Power. This may not be the first Visita-
tion, but it may well be the last. But the Power,
whatever its form and essence (it is real, its presence
had been detected by fine instrumentation), the
Power, the Visitation may pass us by as unworthy.
This parenthetical for those who might not have read
it in the journal.
That which struck just West of Kearney, Nebraska,
was an elemental force. The shock of it was heard
around the world, and its suction flattened farmhouses
and barns for miles.
The area of the destruction was an almost perfect
circle about two miles in diameter, so just over two
thousand acres were destroyed. The first reports said
that it was like no disaster ever known. Later reports
said that it was like every disaster ever known; and it did
have points of resemblance to all.
There was the great crater as though a meteorite had
struck; there was the intense heat and the contamina-
tion as though it had been of fissionable origin; there
was an afterflow of lava and the great ash clouds as
though it were the super volcanic explosion of another
Krakatoa. There was the sudden silence of perhaps two
seconds actually, and perhaps two hours as to human
The Transcendent Tigers 117
response. And then the noise of all sorts.
The early reports said that the hole was three miles
deep. That was said simply to have a figure and to avoid
panic. It was not known how deep the hole was. .
But it was very much more than three miles-before
the earthquake had begun to fill and mask it-before the
hot magma had oozed up from its bottom to fill those
first miles. It was still very much more than three miles
deep after the rapid gushing had declined to a slow
waxlike flowing.
Had anyone heard the preceding rush, or seen a
meteor or any other flying object? No. There hadn't
been a sound, but there had been something pitched a
little higher than sound.
There hadn't been a meteor or a flying ball. But there
had been what some called a giant shaft of light, and
others a sheen of metal: a thing too big to be believed,
and
gone too soon to be remembered.
One farmer said that it was like the point of a giant
needle quickly becoming more than a mile thick, and a
hundred thousand miles long.
Did he know how to judge distances? Certainly, he
said, I know how to judge distances. It is ninety yards to
that tree; it is seven hundred yards to that windmill.
That crow is flying at right onto eighty yards above the
earth, though most would guess him higher. And that
train whistle is coming from a distance of five and
one-quarter miles.
But did he know how to judge great distances? Did he
know how far was a hundred thousand miles? Certainly,
he said, a great distance is easier to judge than a small
one. And that sudden bright shaft was one hundred
thousand miles long.
The farmer was the only one who offered any figures.
118 Strange Doings
Few had seen the thing at all. And all who had seen it
maintained that it had lasted only a fraction of a
second.
“There should be something to take the minds of the
people from the unexplained happening near Kearney,
Nebraska,” said a group of advisors who had national
status. “It will not be good for too much notice to be
taken of this event until we have an explanation of it.”
Fortunately something did take the minds of the
people off the unexplained happenings near Kearney.
What took their minds from the unusual happenings in
Nebraska were the happenings at or near Hanksville,
Utah, Crumpton, Maryland, Locust Bayou, Arkansas,
and Pope City, Georgia. All of these sudden destructions
were absolutely similar in type and vague in origin.
National panic now went into the second stage, and it
was nearly as important to halt it as to solve the
disasters themselves.
And what in turn took the minds of the people off
these disasters were the further disasters at Highmore,
South Dakota, Lower Gilmore, New Hampshire, Cherry-
fork, Ohio, and Rowesville, South Carolina.
And what took the minds of the people off these
later disasters were still further disasters at-but this
could go on and on.
And it did.
a
So with the cataclysmic disasters erupting over the
country like a rash, there wasn't a large audience for the
academic discussions about the New Potential of Man-
kind. There were those, concerned about the current
catastrophes, who said that Mankind might not last long
enough to receive the New Potential-or anything else.
But Winkers observed from the Long Viewpoint-
The Transcendent Tigers 119
paying no more attention to the destructions than if
they had been a string of firecrackers, such not being his
field:
It is paradoxical that we know so much and yet so
little about the Power Immanent in the World: the
Visitation, the Poyavlenie, as it is now called inter-
nationaly.
It has been detected, but in ways twice removed.
An earlier statement that it had been detected by
instrumentation is inaccurate. It has not been de-
tected by instrumentation, but by para-instru-
mentation. This is the infant science of gathering data
from patterns of failure of instruments, and of
making deductions from those failure patterns. What
our finest instruments fail to detect is at least as
important as what they do detect. In some cases it is
more so. The patterns of failure when confronted
with the thesis of the Visitation have been varied, but
they have not been random. There appears to be a
validity to the deductions from the patterns.
The characteristics of the Power, the Visitation, as
projected by these methods (and always considered in
the Oeg-Hornbostel framework) is that it is Aculei-
form, Homodynamous, Homochiral, and (here the
intelligence reels with disbelief, yet I assure the
lector that I am deadly serious) Homoeoteleutic.
For there is a Verbal Element to it, incredible as it
seems. This raises old ghosts. It is almost as if we hear
the returning whisper of primitive magic or fetish. It
is as if we were dealing with the Logos-the word that
was before the world. But where are we to find the
logic of the Logos?
Truly the most puzzling aspect of all is this Verbal
120 Strange Doings
Element detected in it, even if thus remotely. Should
we believe that the Power operates homeopathically
through some sort of witches' rhyming chant? That
might be an extreme conclusion, since we know it
only by an implication. But when we consider all the
foregoing in the light of Laudermilk's Hypothesis, we
are tempted to a bit of unscientific apprehension.
How powerful is the Power? We do not know. We
cannot equate it in dynes. We can only compare
effect with effect, and here the difference is so great
that comparison fails. We can consider the effect of
the Titter-Stumpf Theory, or of the Krogman-Keil
Projection on Instrumentation and Para-instrumenta-
tion. And we humbly murmur “very powerful in-
deed."
>
Carnadine Thompson had begun to read the news-
papers avidly. This was unexpected, since reading was
her weak point. She had had so much trouble with the
story of the Kitten and the Bell in the First Reader that
her mother had come to believe that she had no verbal
facility at all. This had been belied a moment later when
Carnadine had torn the offending pages out of the
Reader and told her mother and the world just what
they could do with that kitten, and told it with great
verbal facility. But it seemed that for reading Carnadine
had no talent.
But now she read everything she could find about the
new disasters that had struck the country-read it out
loud in a ringing voice in which the names of the
destroyed places were like clanging bells.
“How come you can read the paper so well, Carna-
dine?” her mother asked her. “How do you know how
to say the names?”
The Transcendent Tigers 121
“Oh, it's no great trick, mama. You just tie into the
stuff and let go. Crumpton! Locust Bayou! Pope City!
Cherryfork! Rowesville!”
“But how can you read all those hard names in the
paper when you couldn't even read the story about the
little kitten?"
“Mama, with things going the way they are, I think
I
there's a pretty good chance that that damned kitten
will get what's coming to her.”
Far out, very far out, there was a conversation.
This was on a giant world of extreme sophistication
and nondependence on matter. It was such a world as
those on which Laudermilk's Hypothesis was built. That
such a world existed, even in a contingent sense, was a
triumph for Laudermilk.
“Then you have invested one?” asked Sphaeros, an
ancient rotundity of that advanced world.
“I have invested one,” said Acu, the eager young
sharpie, and bowed his forehead to the floor. The
expression was figurative, since there was neither fore-
head nor floor on that world.
“And you are certain that you have invested the
correct one?”
“You toy with me. Naturally I am not certain. Every
investiture may not be successful, and every seed may
not grow. One learns by experience, and this is my first
experience on such a mission.
“I examined much of that world before I found this
person. I thought first that it would be among the
masters of the contrapuntal worlds-for even there they
have such and masters of such. But none of these
persons-called by themselves actors and impresarios
and promotors and hacks,none of these qualified. None
had the calm assurance that is the first requisite. What assurance they had was of another sort, and not valid. Also, their contrapuntal worlds were not true creations in our sense-not really worlds at all." "Then where did you look?" asked Sphaeros. "I looked to the heads of the apparatus. On retarded worlds there is often an apparatus or 'government.' On that world there were many. But the leaders of these­ though most showed an avidity for power-did not show the calm assurance that should go with it. Their assur­ ance, if it could be called such, was of an hysterical sort. Also, most of them were venal persons, so I rejected them." "And then?" "Then I explored remote possibilities. Those who employ in their work a certain power over another species-j ockeys , swineherds, beekeepers, snake­ charmers. But with them I didn't find what I looked for-the perfect assurance of the truly superior being." "And then, Acu?" "Then I went into instruments, not trusting my own judgment. I set the Calm Assurance Indicator on auto­ matic and cruised about that world. And on that whole world I found only one person with perfect assurance­ one impervious to doubt of any kind and totally imper­ vious to self-doubt. On this one I made the investiture and conferred the concept of great Power and Sharp­ ness." "You have made a mistake. Fortunately it is not a great mistake as it is not a great world. You were too anxious to make a good showing on your first attempt. When nothing can be found, you should leave that world alone. On very many of them nothing can be found. Assurance is not the only quality that makes up
1 22 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
The Transcendent Tigers 123
this competence; it is simply the quality for which we
look first on alien spheres.
“The one on whom you made the Investiture, though
full of assurance, was not full of other qualities equally
important. It was in fact a pupa form, a child of the
species, known locally as a kid. Well, it's done and
cannot be undone. Fortunately such power conferred
carries its own safety factor. The worst it can do is
destroy its own world and seal it off safely from others.
You made the Investiture correctly?”
“Yes. I left the Red Cap, the symbol of authority and
power. There was instant acceptance and comprehen-
sion.”
“Now we'll do the big towns,” screamed Carnadine
Thompson in the clubhouse of the Bengal Tigers.
“Peas and Beans-
New Orleans!”
She jabbed the needle into New Orleans on the map,
and the great shaft a hundred thousand miles long came
down into the middle of the Crescent City.
A needle? Not a pin? No. No. Pins won't work.
They're of base metal. Needles! Needles!
"Candy store-
Baltimore,” howled Carnadine and jabbed in another
needle, and the old city was destroyed. But there was
never a place that screamed so loudly over its own
destruction or hated so much to go.
“Fatty's full of bolonio,
San Antonio.”
And Carnadine stuck it in with full assurance of her
powers,
red cap atilt, eyes full of green fire. There were
some of us who liked that place and wished that it could
have been spared.
124 Strange Doings
>
“Eustace is a sisty,
Corpus Christi.'
“I know one,” said Eustace, and he clapped the red
cap on his own head:
“Eggs and Batter-
Cincinnater.
He rhymed and jabbed, manfully but badly.
“That didn't rhyme very good,” said Carnadine. “I
bet
you
botched it."
He did. It wasn't a clean-cut holocaust at all. It was a
clumsy, bloody, grinding job-not what you'd like.
“Eustace, go in the house and get the big world map,'
ordered Carnadine, “and some more needles. We don't
want to run out of things.”
“Peewee is a sapolis,
Minneapolis.”
“Let me do one,” pleaded Peewee, and he snatched
,
the red cap:
"Hopping Froggo-
Chicago.
"I do wish that you people would let me handle
this,” said Carnadine. “That was awful.”
It was. It was horrible. That giant needle didn't go in
clean at all. It buckled great chunks of land and tore a
ragged gap. Nothing pretty, nothing round about it. It
was plain brutal destruction.
9
در
If you don't personally go for this stuff, then pick a
high place near a town that nobody can find a rhyme
for, and
go
there fast. But if you can't get out of town
in the next two minutes, then forget it. It will be too
late.
Carnadine plunged ahead:
“What the hecktady-
Schenectady.”
The Transcendent Tigers 125
That was one of the roundest and cleanest holes of
all.
“Flour and Crisco-
San Francisco.'
That was a good one. It got all the people at once,
and then set up, tidal waves and earthquakes all over
everywhere.
“Knife and Fork-
World Abounding
How many habitable worlds there are depends on the
meaning given to 'habitable' and to 'world.' Habitable
without special equipment and conditioning' is the usual
restriction on the first. 'Of no mean size' and 'of no no
extreme distance' are two common conditions of the
second. Thus Roulettenwelt and Kentron-Kosmon are
really asteroids, too small to be worlds. But how about
Hokey Planet and such? And how about the distant
traveler's-tale worlds?
Butler lists only seventeen habitable worlds, limiting
them to the fair-sized and generally hospitable worlds of
Sol and of the Centauri Suns. So all these were closely
grouped. The early notion that double or triple suns
would not have planets because of their irregularity had
been an erroneous estimate, fortunately.
Thus, revolving around Sol there is only Gaea (Earth).
Around the Sun Proxima (the Grian Sun) are Ken-
tauron-Mikron, Camiroi, Astrobe, and Dahae. Around
the Sun Alpha are Skandia, Pudibundia, Analos, and the
equivalently-named twins with such different superior
fauna, Proavitus and Paravata; and Skokumchuck (the
Shelni Planet). Around the sun Beta are the three trader
126
World Abounding 127
>
planets, Emporion, Apateon, and Kleptis; tricky places,
it is said. But if you think the Traders are tricky, how
about the other three Beta Planets? There are Aphtho-
nia (also called World Abounding), Bellota (Butler lists
this as a Planet, though there are larger bodies listed as
asteroids: he says, however, that Bellota in its present
creation is much larger than its size of record, a puzzling
statement), and Aranea (or the Spider Planet).
These latter three are habitable by all definition, but
they are generally uninhabited, each for its own unclear
reason. It was to clear up the reason and impediment
concerning Aphthonia or World Abounding that a party
was now in descending hover.
“We are on this mission because of one phrase,
repeated by leaders of five different parties, and main-
tained in the face of vigorous courts martial,” Fairbridge
Exendine, the singling leader, said with a sort of hooked
wonder. “I have never been able to get that phrase out
of my mind. “You'd never believe it' was the phrase, and
the men of the five parties, of the more than twenty
parties in fact, would not elaborate on it much.”
“I hardly believe it either,” Judy Brindlesby said,
“and I haven't been there yet. It almost jumps at you.
There is certainly no other world that presents so
pleasant an appearance from medium hover. The con-
tinent named Aegea and the howling beauty of those
oceans and seas that invade it so deeply! The river
named Festinatio, the largest clear river on any world!
The volcano named Misericors! Why should a river be
named 'I hurry' and a volcano be named the ‘merciful?”
“It was John Chancel who named them,” Rushmore
Planda said with that curious reverence which all use in
speaking of the great explorer. “And it was he who first
said that this was the finest world ever, and that it
128 Strange Doings
>
should be left alone to be just that.'
World Abounding has been visited by the great John
Chancel just fifty years before. He had been the first
Gaea man on very many of the worlds. It was John
Chancel who said that only men should go to work on
World Abounding, that it was no place to raise a family.
Later he repented even of this and said that nobody at
all should go
there.
Chancel had stated that World Abounding was the
most generous and fertile world ever, and that its very
generosity would blow one's mind. It was his opinion
that this was the Hasty Planet of the earliest travelers'
tales, and that there was something very much too hasty
about it. And he said that the most famous product of
World Abounding should never be used at more than
one-thousandth strength.
Gorgos, the magic animal and plant hormone (it
wasn't that, but such was the popular explanation of it),
came from World Abounding. Cut it a thousand times
and it still was the magic growth-trigger. Ah, why cut it
at all though? Why not take it at the full where it
abounded in its fullness? To be spooked off by too
much of a good thing was childish. “Let us examine it as
scientists and adults,” Fairbridge said as they came into
lower hover, “as balanced persons who know what we
are about."
The seven balanced persons who knew what they
were about were Fairbridge Exendine, the canny com-
mander; the Brindlesbys, Judy and Hilary; the Plandas,
Erma and Rushmore; the Kerwins, Lisetta and Blase.
They were three couples and one remarkable singling, a
superior microcosm.
They came down easily and safely from low hover as
twenty-two parties had come down before (twenty-
World Abounding 129
three if one counts the solo voyage of John Chancel).
They were pleasantly staggered by the sudden green
power of that place. There was no need of any caution:
Nobody of any party had ever suffered even slight
injury or sickness on World Abounding. They found
such generosity as would gladden any mind and body. It
would be difficult, initially, to be scientists and adult
about World Abounding.
Well, revel in the joy then. Afterwards, analyze it all
minutely, but without losing any of that joyousness. Do
not complain too strenuously about a stacked deck if it
is all stacked in your favor.
They were on the Terraces—“which aren't mentioned
by John Chancel at all,” Erma Planda said with a toss of
her whole golden body, “and it is only gradually that
members of the other parties begin to mention them.
Could the Terraces have grown up in fifty standard
years?”
The Terraces formed a great elongated, stepped
plateau, overcome with its own lushness. From the great
green broad height of the hover-craft landing, the Ter-
races tumbled down seventy meters in more than
twenty giant steps to the plain. This was all between the
volcano and the river, and the Terraces had shoved out
into the river to produce gracious rapids with their
musical foam.
“Yes, the Terraces have apparently grown in fifty
years, or have been spewed out by the volcano named
Merciful,” Fairbridge said. “Chancel described the plain
between the volcano and the river and he didn't men-
tion the Terraces at all. He set up a spire for monument
in the middle of the plain, and where is it now? I believe
that it is engulfed in the Terraces, and I intend to find
130
Strange Doings
>
>
it. I also intend to find why some of the latter parties
refer to the Terraces as the Graves. No member of any
party died here. All returned. I have a sudden exuber-
ance come over me and I'll start my digging now.'
And Fairbridge Exendine had already set the earth-
augers to cutting down into the Terraces.
“I have my own new exuberance,” Judy Brindlesby
shouted like a whole covey of trumpets. “Hilary, my
clay-headed hero, we will make luscious life together all
day and all night.”
Judy was large, but surpassingly shapely and graceful,
like a hover-craft. Her brindled black-red hair was so
weighty and enveloping that a lesser woman could
hardly have carried it; and it seemed to be growing by
the minute, like the grass there. One couldn't actually
quite see the World Abounding grass grow, but one
could hear it; it made a pleasant squeaking sound. And
there was a hint of quick music about Judy's heavy hair
that indicated that it was growing and growing.
“Yes, it is volcanic ash,” Rushmore Planda was saying
as he joined Fairbridge at the earth-augers. “It is quite
airy ash.” The volcanic ash was chalky white to pearl
gray. Then it had a streak of green in it, and another.
“You are through the first stratum, Fairbridge,”
Rushmore said, “and into a layer of compressed vegeta-
tion that hasn't even rotted yet. This is the vegetation
that was recently the top of the second stratum; very
recently, I believe. This is a curious pile of Terraces.'
“Oh, it's a holy pyramid,” Erma Planda told them all,
“and the Volcano built it especially for the holy people,
ourselves. John Chancel said that he always felt himself
to be a holy man when he first set foot on a good new
world. I feel myself to be a holy woman now.'
“Do not stuff yourself, holy woman,” her man Rush-
a
World Abounding 131
more told her. “Chancel preached temperance in all
things. Do you have to eat everything you see? Do you
have to eat all of everything you see?”
“Yes, I have to, I have to! And was it not the great
John Chancel, he who first warned against this place,
who said that there was no possiblity of poisoning on
World Abounding? Oh, and he said that there was no
possibility of over-indulgence here either. He stated that
the essence Gorgos has no limits, but that it pretends
that it has. Everything that can be chewed or swallowed
here is safe to eat or drink. There is no insect or animal
that bites, nor worm that gnaws, nor moth that harms.
There'll be no extreme heat or cold. The nineteen-day
polar tumble combined with the diurnal rotation keeps
the air breezy and invigorating. Invigorating, yes, yes,
extremely so. More than invigorating. It's a pretty horny
world, actually. Rather a rambunctious feeling it gives
one. More than that, it-"
“What has happened to all you girl-folk?” the leader
Fairbridge asked, rather puzzled and almost alarmed. “I
have never seen you so wild-eyed and charged.”
“Poor Fairbridge,” Judy Brindlesby needled him.
“Never mind, Fairbridge, I'll get you a girl. I'll get you
one within a standard month. I promise you.”
“Impossible, sweet Judy, unless you slay your own
mate. We're to be here for a long year, or until we solve
the problem, and nobody else will touch down. Where
would you get me a girl?”
“That I don't know. But the very rocks are singing to
me, 'You'll get a girl, Judy, you'll get a girl for old
Fairbridge within a month.'”
“Gorgos is not merely a magic animal-and-plant
hormone,” Rushmore Planda was speaking with a sud-
denly improved, new and magnificent voice. “It's a way
a
132 Strange Doings
of life, I see that now. It will impose its own shape on
my wife, however much she stuffs herself. It will impose
its shape on everything. It is a new pace and a new sort
of life.”
“It may be that its
"
be that its pace is too fast,” Fairbridge
warned.
"Makes no difference. There can't be
any
other
pace
here. Get the song of those romping birds there! It's the
same beat that Gaea lunatics, treated with Gorgos, begin
to sing with as soon as their sure cure begins. Get the
whole stimulating, pleasant, almost drunken smell of
this planet! Here is not so much the uncanny feel of
things seen before, but of things smelled before. All
great smells (Can one speak of great smells? Yes, one
can.) have a reminiscent element, but with this it is
reminiscent of a future. There is a pleasurable mustiness
here, that's sure, but it isn't of past time: it's of future
time, long waiting, and now beginning to unfold sud-
denly.”
“You men are drunk on only the expectation of
wine,” Lisetta Kerwin said. “But the one thing I remem-
ber from the journal of the great John Chancel was the
recipe for making morning wine in nine minutes on
World Abounding. And I've already started it. Time's
arunning.”
Lisetta was crushing purple fruit into a hugh calathus
or basket made by pulling the inner corolla out of a
giant flower bloom.
“It would be chemically possible to make a potable
fruit alcohol in nine minutes,” Blase Kerwin said, “but
it wouldn't be wine. It wouldn't have the bouquet. It
wouldn't have the-but it has it. I smell that it has
already, and it grows. Here, here, let me swig that—"
“No, no, it isn't ready,” Lisetta protested. “It still
>
>
>
World A bounding 133
>
moves itself, it lends its color to the
сир,
it bites like a
serpent.”
“Look out, serpent and wife, I'll bite back. Have at
you!” And Blase Kerwin took a huge draught from the
green cup. He turned a bit green himself, but cheerfully
so. He lost his voice, and he did a little dance on one
foot while he grasped his throat with both hands, but he
was quite pleased about it all. There are some things too
good to wait for.
A “A little patience,” Lisetta said. “Four minutes yet.”
Blase still hadn't his speech back but he could howl
his high pleasure over the breathtaking encounter. And
soon, quite soon, they were all lushy over the singing,
heady stuff. It was very difficult to be scientific and
adult about World Abounding.
So they probed the world very unscientifically and
kiddishly, except Fairbridge and Rushmore, who still
probed the levels of the Terraces. The three ladies
especially were happy maniacs and they were all over
that abundant land. They caught and rode huge gangling
animals. After all, on the word of Chancel and others,
everything was harmless. They wrestled with big starfish
in the river named Festinatio. They ate the snap-off tails
of huge lizards and sent them away bawling and running
on their two hind legs. Never mind; the big lizards could
regrow their snap-off tails.
“Those five party leaders who wrote 'You'd never
believe it,' do you think they were laughing when they
wrote it?” Judy Brindlesby exploded the question when
she clambered once again back up to the diggings.
“One of them, I believe, wrote in laughter, Judy,”
Fairbridge said. “And one of them, I know for certain,
wrote in absolute horror. I don't know about the other
three.”
134 Strange Doing s
“Fairbridge, I suggest that we clear out a square
about five meters on a side and excavate the whole top
level of it,” Rushmore Planda said. “I believe that there
is more mystery buried here than we have met in all our
lives.”
“All right, we will do that,” Fairbridge agreed. “The
least we can do is see what is right under our feet.”
“But not there!” Judy trumpeted at them. “Dig here
where the people are.”
“What people, Judy?” Fairbridge asked her patiently.
“All the people who have ever been on this world have
been accounted for.”
“Not till we account for them they haven't been.
How do I know what people they are till you dig them
up? Dig carefully, though. They are real people here.
You call yourselves diggers and you don't even know
where the people are buried.”
"We dig where you say, Judy. You are a people-
witcher in
your
several ways.”
“But don't dig all the time. You're missing it. Life is
being lived today and tonight.” And she was off again,
leaping down the three-meter steps of the Terraces.
“I don't know what she means," Fairbridge said as he
set the excavators to work and then adjusted them to
'Slow and Careful.” “I hardly ever know what she
'' “
>
means.
“I believe that I know what she means, Fairbridge,”
Rushmore said in an eerie voice with a scarce human
chuckle in it.
So the excavators excavated, moving the light vol-
canic ash that was below the vegetation. There was real
mystery in the ash that was turned up. That stuff was
not completely dead.
“One thing I like about it here is the size of the
World Abounding 135
party,” Fairbridge mumbled as he sensed something
near and put the excavators on ‘Very Slow.' “Seven.
That's right, that's just right. That's just how many
persons should be on a world. More than that is a
crowd. But a man cannot live pleasantly alone. What do
you think about that, Rushmore? Isn't seven about
right? Rushmore?
“He's gone. The party isn't seven now. It's one, me.
I'm alone. I suspect that they have chosen the better
part, though. Yes, I know what Judy meant, and it does
come in very strongly here. But it isn't just with them;
it's coming up from the very ground here. I'll dig on.”
Fairbridge dug down till he came to the people.
It was night. Ancilla, the smaller moon, was overhead;
Matrona, the larger moon, had just arisen. Fairbridge
went to find the three couples of the party.
“They all have the new exuberance on them and they
make luscious life together all day and all night. But I
have to tell them what I have found.”
It would be easiest to find Judy Brindlesby, the
liveliest of them all. Wherever she was, any man would
know it by special sensing. Fairbridge's special sensing
led him to a river meadow and into a high brake of reeds
that still squeaked from sudden new growth. Judy lay
there with her clay-headed hero and husband Hilary.
It was magnificent Judy stretched on her back in
giggling slumber. Hilary, chuckling with pleasure, lay
atop her and was cutting her hair with great shears:
cutting her incredible hair, cutting her superabundant
hair, cutting the mountains of her hair. He had sheared
off great heaps of it, possibly twenty kilograms of it,
and she still had more than she'd had that afternoon.
“You are almost completely hidden in the ſeeds,
136
Strange Doings
>
Hilary,” Fairbridge said then. “I'd never have found
you, except that any man can sense Judy's presence.”
,
“Hullo, Fairbridge,” Hillary grunted pleasantly. “The
reeds weren't here when we lay down. They've grown up
since. Everything that touches her grows, and she is
enlivened wherever she touches this ground. Look at her
hair, Fairbridge. She's in accord with it here. Gorgos or
whatever the growth element is, she's with it. So am I.”
“'I dug down to people in the Terraces, Hilary.”
“Yes. Judy said there would be people there.”
Fairbridge and Hilary went and took Rushmore from
the sleeping arms of Erma in the blue-stem hills. And
they met Lisetta and Blase Kerwin coming out of the
orchards.
“Lisetta says that you have dug down to people,”
Blase cried vividly. “Oh, for the love of abundant
Aphthonia, let's go see what this is about!”
“I've dug down to people, yes,” Fairbridge said, “but
how could Lisetta know it?”
They climbed up the tall Terraces and came to the
open
shaft.
“We will remove the rest of the volcanic dust and
crust from about them,” Fairbridge said. “And when
old Beta Sun comes up, we can get a good look at
them.'
“Oh, this is fine enough light for it,” Lisetta said.
“Aren't they nice people, though. So friendly. We will
get acquainted with them before the brighter light is on
them. It's best to become acquainted with good people
in dim light first, especially when they've been through
an odd experience. Then they'll brighten up with the
light.”
There were twelve of the people there, twelve adults.
>
World Abounding 137
they were seated, apparently, on stone benches around a
stone table. The details would be known when the rest
of the volcanic dust had been cleared away and when
Beta sun was risen. The twelve were got up in a gala and
festive
way. They had sat eating and drinking when it
came over them, but they had not been taken by sur-
prise. It was a selective volcanic thrust that had covered
them. It came only onto the Terraces that had become a
shoulder of the volcano. the people needn't have been
there; and they needn't have sat and waited while it
covered them. The surrounding plains hadn't been
covered by the volcanic thrust.
“Why, they're pleasantly dead, and not at all de-
cayed,” Lisetta cried. “They are really such nice people.
Don't they seem so to the rest of you? There is some-
thing almost familiar about a few of them-as if I had
met them before.”
“How long?” Fairbridge asked Hilary Brindlesby.
“Two years, maybe. They haven't been dead longer
than that.
"You're crazy, Hilary. You are the tissue man of this
party. Take tissue samples.”
“I will, of course. But they've been dead for about
two years.
“Then they were alive here when the Whiteoak party
was here.”
“Likely.”
“Then why didn't Commander Harry Whiteoak men-
tion them?"
“Whiteoak was one of those, Fairbridge, who used
the phrase 'You'd never believe it,'” Rushmore Planda
cut in. “Maybe he figured that covered it all.”
“But who are they?” Fairbridge persisted. “Every
person of every expedition has been accounted for.
>
138 Strange Doings
a
These are our own sort of people, but they aren't people
of the Whiteoak party. I've met all the Whiteoaks, and
all came back."
“Aren't they of the Whiteoak party, Fairbridge?”
Blase asked with an air of discovery. “You'd better pray
that the light doesn't get any better, man. You're near
spooked now. There's a couple of ghosts there: an ear, a
brow, a jaw slope. And that lady there, isn't she a little
like another lady we met, enough like her to be a sister
or daughter? I tell you that there are strong resem-
blances to several of the Whiteoak people here."
“You're crazy. The Whiteoaks were here for only six
“
standard months. If they met these mysterious people,
why didn't they give an account of it?”
They didn't do much more with it till daylight. They
moved some of the volcanic filler and uncovered to a
little more depth.
“Can you prop under this level and leave these people
here, and then excavate the layer under them?” Lisetta
Kerwin asked.
“We can, but why?” Fairbridge inquired. Fairbridge
was jumpy. He didn't seem to appreciate how nice it
was to come onto such a nice group of people.
“Oh, I think that these people picked a spot that had
been picked time and time again before them.”
a
a
Along about daylight, Judy Brindlesby and Erma
Planda, with a variety of noises, came up to the other on
the Terraces.
“Folks, are we ever sick!" Judy sounded out. “I'm
sicker than Erma, though. I go further into things than
she does. Don't you wish you were sick the way we are,
Lisetta?”
“But I am, I am,” Lisetta said, “and it didn't take me
.
>
>
World Abounding 139
all night to find it out. It's fun, isn't it?”
“Sure it is. I never had so much fun being sick in my
life.” And Judy retched funfully.
It was a little unusual that all three ladies should
show the first signs of pregnancy at the same time. It
was odd that they should all have morning sickness.
Oddest of all was their being so delighted with their
sickness. There was something about World Abounding
that seemed to make all experience, even nausea, a
happy experience.
And the dead people in the Terraces
“They are the happiest-looking dead people I ever did
see,” Erma Planda declared. “I will have to know what
they are so happy about. They would tell me if I had
the proper ears to listen. It's hard to hear when it comes
to you that way. What, dear? What are you saying?”
“I wasn't saying anything, Erma,” Rushmore told
her.
“Wasn't talking to you, Rushmore,” Erma said with a
flick of her golden body. “What, dear? I can't quite
make it out.” And Erma Planda thumped her body as if
to get better reception.
“Your ears aren't in your belly, Erma,” Rushmore
reminded her.
“Oh well, maybe some of them are. No, I just get it a
little at a time what they are so happy about.”
The happy dead people had been preserved by the
volcanic fill, and perhaps by the essence Gorgos or some
other substance of World Abounding. They didn't feel
dead. They were rather waxy to the touch; they were
about as warm as the air, and they hadn't any clammi-
ness; there was even a slight resiliency to them which is
140 Strange Doings
a
usually a property of live flesh and not of dead flesh.
They were clad in the light native garments of World
Abounding. They were, in some manner hard to recon-
cile, kindred to the members of the Whiteoak expedi-
tion. They were beautiful and mysterious people, but
they didn't mean to be mysterious. They'd have told
you anything you wanted to know if only proper accord
might be established between dead tongue and live ear.
But was there not something a little bit too glib about
the impressions that all these new explorers received
from the dead folks? Yes, a little too glib here and
there, but how could anyone be blamed for that?
"Just a minute, nevertheless,” Lisetta Kerwin was
saying both to the dead people and to the live. “We all
say, or we all think, that you, our good friends here, are
clad in the light native garments of World Abounding.
Our good commander, Fairbridge, in fact, has just
scribbled those very words in his notebook. But how did
we know what the light native garments of World
Abounding should look like since we never saw any of
them before? And since there has never been, for the
record, any human native on World Abounding, never
been any human being born here, hasn't this all a fishy
smell? Or has it? For I recall now that the fish of World
Abounding have a pleasant fruity smell. Well, take your
time, folks. Being dead, you are in no hurry, and I am
not; but tell us about it when you get to it.”
They sank a second shaft beside the first. They ran
reinforcing timbers under the place of the pleasant dead
people so that they would not be disturbed or collapsed.
They they dug the second shaft down through the
volcanic fill to the next level of vegetation. There was an
unexpected thing: it had been dug before. They were
excavating an old excavation.
World Abounding 141
а
>
They cleared the space below the dead people (and it
showed every sign of having been cleared before); they
came, as they had weirdly known that they must come
to such, to another clutch of dead people. They had
been expecting just that, but they were stunned by it
even more than by the first discovery or first report.
“How many times, do you think?” Fairbridge asked
them all in real wonder.
“I guess twenty-two times,” Hilary squinted. “There
are, in all, twenty-two levels to the Terraces.”
“Would a colossal joker, a demonical joker, a supernal
joker, a godly joker, even an ungodly joker pull the
same joke twenty-two times in a row? Wouldn't it begin
to pall even on him after twenty-two times of it?”
“Not a bit of it,” Erma said. “Whoever he is, he still
thinks thunder is funny, and he's pulled the thunder
joke billions and billions of times. And he laughs every
time. Listen for the giggle sometimes; it comes around
the edge of
every thunder.”
Slight differences only this time. The dead people of
the second level numbered eleven adults. They had been
dead a little longer than the first, but they hadn't been
dead for more than four or five years. They were as
well-preserved and as happy-seeming as the upper
gentry. They added a bit to the mystery.
Fairbridge and his folks and his excavators continued
to excavate, about one level a day. All the shafts that
they dug now had already been dug out several times
before. At the fifth level down they came to the tip of
the spire or steeple that John Chancel had built as
monument on the plain between the volcano and the
river. They knew that it was older than the Terraces,
that it went all the way down to the flat land; they also
knew that it was only fifty years old.
a
142 Strange Doings
There were sixteen of the gracious and pleasantly
dead people on this level. They had made a circular
stone table around the tip of the spire where it came
through the lower Terrace. They had wined and dined
themselves there while they waited for the volcano
named Merciful to cover them up. But who were these
people, so beautiful and so pleasant and so dead, ar-
ranged on levels several years apart?
“The mystery gets deeper all the time,” Fairbridge
said weightily.
“Yes, it gets about three meters deeper every day,”
Hilary grinned. “Anybody got any strange stories to add
to this?”
“Yes, I've a strange one," Judy told them. “I know
that it seems pretty short notice, and I had no idea that
it could be so far along, and I'm sure that it's com-
pletely impossible, but my time is upon me right now.'
They all gaped at her.
“I said Right Now, Hilary,” Judy told her husband in
an almost tight voice, “and I mean right now.”
Well, Judy was large (though shapely and graceful as a
hover-craft), and the issue would apparently be quite
small. But all of them had scientific eyes, trained to
notice things large and small, and none of them had
noticed that it would be so soon with Judy.
There was no trouble, of course. Hilary himself was a
doctor. So was Blase. So, come to think of it, was
Lisetta Kerwin. But Lisetta herself was feeling a bit
imminent.
No trouble, though. On World Abounding everything
happens easily and pleasantly and naturally. Judy
Brindlesby, easily and pleasantly, gave birth to a very
small girl.
World Abounding 143
a
>
Well, it was less ugly then most babies, less a red lump
and more of a formed thing. And quite small. There was
a spate of words from all of them, but no words could
convey the unusual formliness of the very little girl.
“She is really pretty, and I never thought I'd say
that
about a baby, even my own,” Hilary bleated proudly.
“She is so small and so perfect. She is the least lass I
ever saw.”
“She is wonderful, she is beautiful, there has never
been anyone like her,” Judy was chanting in ecstasy,
“She is perfect, she shines like a star, she sparkles like an
ocean, she is the most enchanting ever, she is—"
“Oh, cool it, mother, cool it,” the Least Lass said.
a
2
.
Fairbridge Exendine reacted in absolute horror to
this, and he remained in a state of horrified rejection.
The others, however, accepted it pretty gracefully.
Explanations were called for, of course. Well then, let us
seek the explanations.
“There has to be an answer to the Case of the
Precocious Little Girl,” Rushmore said. “Does anyone
have an answer?”
“She's yours, Judy,” Erma said. “You tell us if we
heard what we thought we heard.”
“Oh, I thought she talked quite plain enough, and I'm
sure you heard what she said. But why should you ask
me about it when she is right here? How did you
learn to
talk, dear?” Judy asked her little daughter, the Least
Lass.
“Five days in the belly of a chatterbox and I
shouldn't have learned talk?" the Least Lass asked with
fine irony for one so young. So the explanation was
144 Strange Doings
simple enough: the little girl had learned to talk from
her mother.
But Fairbridge Exendine was still gray-faced with
horror. And she didn't belong to that singling at all.
Why should he be so affected by this?
“Do you know that you are the first human child
ever born on World Abounding?” Judy asked her child a
little later.
“Oh, mother, I'm sure you're mistaken,” Least Lass
said. “I was under the impression that I was the two
hundred and first.'
>>
“Can you walk?" Blase Kerwin asked the little girl a
little later yet.
“Oh, I doubt it very much,” she said. “It will be a
standard hour before I even attempt it. It may be a
standard day before I do it perfectly.”
But Fairbridge Exendine had gone back to his digging
now. He was in new horror of the mystery of the
excavations, but he was still more in horror of the little
girl.
Yet she was the prettiest child that anyone had ever
seen-so far.
“Anything that we do is always anticlimactic to what-
ever Judy does,” Erma Planda said with mock com-
plaint. Erma, with her golden body and her greater
beauty, wasn't really jealous of Judy Brindlesby.
Neither was Lisetta Kerwin, with her finer features and
her quicker intelligence. Both knew that Judy would
always anticipate them in everything. She had certainly
done it in this, though by no more than a couple of
hours.
"Well, it's surely a puzzle,” Rushmore Planda was
World Abounding
145
talking pleasantly that day or the next. “We are all
human persons. And the gestation period for humans is
more than five days.”
“Don't-don't talk about it,” Fairbridge stuttered.
“Dig-dig, man.
“Of course it's possible that the three conceptions
took place nine months ago. That's the logical thing to
believe, but a little illogic bug keeps croaking to me
“You know better than that.' And all three of the
children say that they were in the bellies for only five
days. There was certainly an extraordinary enlivening in
all of us that first night here, except in you, Fairbridge.”
“Don't-damn-talk about it. Dig-damn-dig."
“This is a miracle world, of course, and it is full of
miracle substances. Nevertheless, I believe that the
Miracle Master is a little grotesque in this trick. I love
my own small son beyond telling, yet I feel that there is
something in him that is not of myself and is not of
Erma. Part of his parentage is World Abounding."
“Don't-don't talk crazy. None-none of this has
-
happened. Dig-dig, man.'
There was never a more frightened, more nervous
man than Fairbridge. He buried himself in the digging
work to get away from it; he'd buried himself nearly
forty-five meters deep in the excavating work by this
time. Oh, that man was edgy!
“I imagine that the same thing happens on Gaea,”
Rushmore was rambling on. “We were, for most of the
centuries, so close to it that we couldn't see that the
planet was the third parent in every conception. We saw
it only a little when we came to Camiroi and Dahae and
Analos: a twenty-day shorter gestation period in the one
case, a twelve-day longer one in another. We were a long
time guessing that there is no such thing as biology
146 Strange Doings
>
without environment. But who could have guessed that
World Abounding would be so extreme?”
“Don't-don't talk about it,” Fairbridge begged.
“Thirty days, dam-dammit, and four-fourteen of them
gone already. Dig, dig."
“What thirty days, Fairbridge? Is there a thirty-day
period mentioned of our expedition? I don't know of it.
Fairbridge, man, you only dig because you're afraid to
wonder. Whoever saw children grow so much in nine
days? But then there are trees here that grow twenty
meters high in one day. And look at the way the hair
grows on Judy Brindlesby, and she a human! Not that
the children aren't human, not that they aren't even
two-thirds earth-human.
“Fairbridge, those are the three smartest children that
anybody ever saw. When I was their age (oh, damn, I
don't mean nine days old, I mean their apparent age
of
nine or ten years old), when I was their age I wasn't
I
anything like as sharp as they are, and I was rated smart.
And who ever saw such handsome people anywhere?
They're on a par with the dead people here in the
Terraces. Do you believe that they're of the same gene-
sis?”
“D-dig, man, or drop dead, but don't-don't talk
about it. It isn't there. It hasn't happened.”
“ “Erma thinks that the children have rapport with the
dead people here in the Terraces. After all, they are
one-third blood kindred. They all have one common
parent, World Abounding. Erma also thinks that all
three children are coming to their puberty period now.
She believes that the pubescent manifestations here will
be much stronger, much more purposive, much more
communal than anything on Gaea or Camiroi or Dahae.
The useless and vestigial poltergeistic manifestations of
World Abounding 147
even
>
Gaea-Earth will not compare with them at all, she be-
lieves. Was there ever such frustrating failure in com-
municating as the whole poltergeist business?
“Erma believes that the manifestations here will go
beyond the three-angel paradoxes of the pu-
bescents on Kentauron-Mikron. And why should these
things not go beyond? We had premonitions of such
wonderful weirdnesses even on our own world. My mate
Erma believes that these puberty insights (the volcano is
a part and person of these insights) will begin very soon.
Two more days; three at the most.
“D-dig, man. Don't–don't think.'
Coming of age on World Abounding is a closed sub-
ject. It is not closed in the sense of being all secret or
restricted, but in being a thing closed upon itself. From
.
its very beginning it is conscious of its resolution.
Least Lass Brindlesby, Heros Planda, and Kora
Kerwin were paradoxical children. It seems foolish to
speak of relaxed intensity, of foolish sagacity, of placid
hysteria, of happy morbidity, of lively death-desire. The
children had all these qualities and others just as con-
tradictory. They were at all times in close wordless
communication with their parents and with all other
persons present, and they were at the same time total
aliens. The children were puzzling, but they themselves
certainly weren't puzzled: they were always quite clear
as to their own aims and activities. They had no more
doubt of their direction than the arc of a circle has.
Lisetta Kerwin worried a little that she might have a
retarded daughter. It was not that the girl was slow
about things, just that she was different about things.
Should a nineteen-day-old girl be called retarded be-
cause she dislikes reading? Kora could read, most of the
time. Whenever her intuitions cocked their ears with a
148
Strange Doings
any text.
little interest she could go right to the heart of
But mostly all three of the children disliked the reading
business.
Hilary Brindlesby scolded the children because they
showed no sign of the scientific approach or method.
But the scientific approach with its systematic study
would not have brought them along nearly as fast as
they did go. They all had the intuitive approach and it
brought them rapidly to a great body of knowledge.
The children were well acquainted with the dead
people in the Terraces (Fairbridge, in his horror-filled
distracting work, had excavated almost all the Terrace
levels now). The children named the names of all the
dead people and told of their intricate relationships.
Lisetta Kerwin recorded all this from the children. It
tied in remarkably with the surnames of the people of
the various expeditions.
“You can't really communicate with the dead people
of the Terraces,” Blase Kerwin told his daughter Kora.
“It is just a bit of flamboyant imagination that you all
seem to have."
“Oh, they say pretty much the same thing about you
and us, father,” Kora said. “They tell us that we can't
really communicate with such stuffy folks as you who
weren't even born on World Abounding. We do com-
municate with you, though; a little bit, sometimes.”
>
And then one evening, Heros Planda and Kora Kerwin
said that they were married.
“Isn't twenty-two days old a little young to marry?”
Rushmore Planda asked his son.
“No, I don't believe so, father,” Heros said. “It is the
regular age on World Abounding."
“Who married you?” Lisetta Kerwin asked. After all,
>
World Abounding 149
it had to be somebody who had done it, and there were
no human persons on the world except those of the
party.
"We don't know his name," Kora said. “We call him
Marrying Sam in fun, but lots of the Terrace people
have called him that too. We might suppose that that is
his name now.
“He isn't a human person? Then what species does he
belong to?”
“He doesn't belong to any species, mother, since he is
the nly one of his kind. The Volcano says that Marry-
ing Sam is his, the Volcano's-dog. He doesn't look like
a dog, as I intuit dogs, though. He can't very well look
like anything else, since he is the only one of his kind.”
“I see,” Lisetta Kerwin said, but she saw it a little
cockeyed. She was vaguely disappointed. She had al-
ways wanted a grand wedding for her daughter, if she
had ever had a daughter. And now the daughter and the
wedding had come so close together that something
seemed lacking. She didn't know that it had been a very
grand wedding, with elementals such as a Volcano and
an Ocean participating; she didn't even know that she
had participated, along with everything else on World
Abounding
“I thought you would be pleased, mother, that we
had married and regularized our relationship,” Kora
suggested hopefully.
“Of course I'm pleased. It's just that you seem so
young.”
Actually, the wedding celebration was not yet com-
pleted. Part of it was tangled with an event that involved
almost all of them that night. It was similar to the
mysterious carnal happenings of the first night of the
party on World Abounding.
150 Strange Doings
It was another of those extraordinary enlivening
events. It got them. It got Erma Planda of the golden
body, and Judy Brindlesby of the sometime incredible
hair. It got Lisetta Kerwin of the now shattered seren-
ity; it got Rushmore and Hilary and Blase.
Perhaps it had been thought that connubial passion
happened without regard to place or planet. Such is not
the case. And the case on World Abounding was very
different from the case on Gaea or Camiroi or Dahae.
There was a pleasantness at all times on World Abound-
ing, there was a constant passion of a sort, an almost
pantheistic communion of all things together. But there
was something else that came on much stronger at
special times, that was triggered by special events with-
out an exact time arriving, that was wild and rampant
and blood- and seed-pungent.
It was the rutting reason.
Ah, we deck it out better than that. It was a night, or
a day and a night, of powerful interior poetry and
music, of personal affirmation, of physical and moral
and psychic overflowing, of aesthetic burgeoning. It was
clear crystal passion.
But let us not deck it out so nice that we won't know
it. It was the horniest business ever, and it went on all
night and all day and all night.
Hilary and Judy Brindlesby: he had the length and
the strength; she had the fullness and the abundance.
They made such laughing love that it sounded like
chuckling thunder in the reed-brakes. Even the birds and
the coneys took up the cadence of it.
Rushmore and Erma Planda: he of the buffalo bulk
and the impression of swooping Moses-horns on his
head; she of the golden body and the emerald eyes.
“They should take the two of us for models,” Erma had
said on that memorable time twenty-seven nights be-
World Abounding 151
fore. “Nobody has ever done it as we have. We should
give lessons.”
And then Blase and Lisetta Kerwin-no one will ever
know just how it was with them. They had a thing that
was too good to share (except in the planet-sharing
aspect of it), that was too good to tell about, that was
too good even to hint at. But, after such pleasures, they
seemed the most pleasured of all the couples.
But Kora and Heros were at home in this. World
Abounding was really a third flesh of their union in a
way that it couldn't be for the others. They held their
own pleasures atop the volcanic Terraces, not in the
reeds or the blue-stem hills or the orchards as the
World-Gaea couples did.
World Abounding is the most passionate of worlds,
with the possible exception of Kleptis of the Trader
Planets where the rapacity in all things is so towering.
The Miracle-Maker of legend and fact on World Abound-
ing was always shocked and bewildered by such coming
together as that of Heros and Kora, even though it was a
licit relationship and done in the licit manner. It was the
depth and violence of it that was beyond law, that
almost made the Miracle-Maker doubt that he had made
such an indomitable thing as this.
Really, it was the Abounding Time, the name-thing of
the world.
The only discordant (ill-fitting, but not completely
unpleasant) elements in the thunderous season-time of
World Abounding were Fairbridge Exendine and Least
Lass Brindlesby.
“Now I am an old maid out of joint with the time,”
Least Lass said as she wandered on the hills of her
By second morning, the partaking couples were in a state of dazzling exhaustion. But they knew that they were well fruited, fruited forever. Then there came the several days of golden desuetude. Even the letdowns on World Abounding were wonderful. All the folks sympathized, of course, with the pas­ §ion-impounded Fairbridge and with the lost-in-a-maze Least Lass. The case of Fairbridge and Least Lass was comical with the sort of cloud-high comedy that is
home. Both the smaller moon Ancilla and the larger moon Matrona were a-shine. "My proper mate is un­ ready and unbelieving. My third parent, World Abound­ ing, who is also the third lover of our love, is not sufficiently penetrating. Father of Planets, help us! You gave us here the special instruction 'What you do, do quickly,' yet it isn't with us as with other places. Answer me, answer me right now!" Least Lass threw angry rocks at the sky when she was not answered right now. But there is no time for slow answers on World Abounding. And Fairbridge (still in the horro-r that would never leave him, but now touched by something both brighter and deeper) could only barK harshly to himself, "I am a human man. These things cannot be, have not been, must not be allowed to be. They are all hallucination, and this is an hallucinatory world. The monster-child remains monstrous, breathtakingly monstrous. It would be the only love I had ever had, if it could have been, if the cause of it were real. How could a human man mate with an imagination, how with a monster, be she a demon or an angel?" It did not come to these two incongruities, in proper season, as it came to the other persons there.
1 5 2 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
found on World Abounding. There was everything ludi­ crous about it. There was a poignancy and a real agony about it also, but the betting was that these qualities would give way. You drive the sharp poignancy staff into the ground of World Abounding and it will grow green leaves on it before you can blink; yes, and gro­ tesque blooms like monkey faces. But it won't lose any of its sharpness when it blooms. Fairbridge Exendine was a rough-featured man , in no way handsome. He missed being clumsy only by the overriding power of his movements. He had always bee.n a singling. He could hardly be called a woman­ hater, since he was infinitely courteous and respecting to women, but he must be set down as a woman­ avoider. Either he had been burned badly once, or the singling nature was in his roots and bones. He was an abrupt man with a harsh sound to him. There was seldom in itself anything harsh about his acts or his words; the harshness was in the shell of him, in the rind that wrapped him up. And Least Lass Brindlesby:-Fairbridge believed that she wasn't real; and she was. She had been the most beautiful child that anyone had ever seen for no more than an hour or two; until the birth of the children Kora and Heros those twenty-four days ago. She was still of almost perfect beauty; she could only be faulted for a certain heartiness bursting out, too big to be contained in the beauty. She wasn't really the Least Lass anymore; she was as large as her mother; she was bigger than either Kora or Heros. She had a shapeliness and grace superior even to that of her mother, for she was born on World Abounding. But she looked like Fairbridge Exendine, for all her elegant beauty and for all his craggy ugliness. She
W o r l d A b o u n d i n g 1 53
154
Strange Doings
looked like him as a daughter will look like a father, as a
wife may sometimes come to look like a husband. She
had 'grown towards him in the World Abounding
phrase, and all such growths here had to be very swift.
.
She had a great deal of humor, this girl Least Lass,
and she needed it. She was not of flimsy growth: none
of the children (children no longer) were. On some
worlds and quasi-worlds of rapid growth, there is a
defect of quality. The quick-grown tree-sized things will
really be no more than giant weeds; the quick-grown
creatures will not have much to them. On World
Abounding that wasn't so. The quick-grown plants and
creatures here were fine-grained and intricate and com-
plete. The persons were so, and especially Least Lass.
She was no weed. Weeds have no humor (except the
Aphthonia Sneezeweed, of course). But Least Lass
sometimes pursued Fairbridge with humor that would
make one shiver.
“My good man holds me in horror,” she'd say. “He
likes me really, but he believes that I am unnatural, and
he has a real horror for the unnatural. Oh, I will turn
him ash-gray and I will turn him fruit-purple! I will turn
him swollen blood-black. I'll give him all the seven
horrors, and I love him. Fairbridge, Fairbridge, even the
rocks are laughing at your horror and your plight, and
mine is the rockiest laugh of them all.'
Ah, the rocks laughed like clattering hyenas at the
poor distraught man.
Sometimes, Least Lass cried a little, though. There is
a quick gushiness about tears on World Abounding, a
voluminousness that would drown the world if con-
tinued more than a short instant. She cried a cupful
there one day, actually filled a big blue crystal cup with
her tears. Then, in a swift change of mood, she set it at
>
World Abounding 155
Fairbridge's place at the dinner. And when he, puzzled,
tasted it and sputtered, the composite laughter of all
assembled nearby shattered his spirit. (Tears on World
Abundant are quite pungent, more than just salty.)
Fairbridge Exendine then did a strange thing. He
covered the cup with a nap, then wrapped it in a towel
and carried it away to his singling quarters to preserve it
just as it was.
Then Least Lass cried at least another cupful on the
ground. But that was only a matter of seconds. She was
always the sunniest girl ever, immediately after tears.
a
Things wound themselves up in the thirty-first day of
the expedition on World Abounding. It was a clear and
exuberant day. Both the Grian sun and the Alpha sun
could be seen like bright stars in the daylight sky. This is
always a good sign. And the Beta sun itself was pleas-
antly scorching. A good strong day.
We cannot know just how it happened. The fields
themselves announced that there was a special and
privileged rutting time, not for all, only for a select two.
The sand squeaked oestrius sounds. Kora had talked to
the Volcano and to the one-of-a-kind subcreature called
Marrying Sam, and had learned that the ceremony itself
had been a rather stilted one. There was something of
very deep emotion cloaked over with layers of rock hard
reserve, world deep passion covered with a careful crust.
The volcano was familiar with such things in his own
person, and explained that such surface covering is often
necessary to very deep people.
Then, somewhere on World Abounding, Fairbridge
and Least Lass and the Planet itself had their private
experience (an orgy, actually, but their privacy extends
even to the selection of the word); they had their time
156 Strange Doings
a
of it, and it may have been a high old time. The others
could admire from a distance, and from secondary evi-
dence; but they had no direct evidence, only the plane-
tary resonances and the ghostly reports.
When it was over with, the day and the night of it,
when the whole double Nation of those folks was to-
gether again, Fairbridge still had that look of horror (it
would never leave him). But now it was only one ele-
ment of many. It was one part of a look or a play more
properly named The Comedy of Horror; and this was
but a portion of a whole assembly of deep comedies:
The Comedy of Soul Agony, the Comedy of Quick
Growth (one new furrow in the Fairbridge face repre-
sented the almost pun that ‘quick' here means ‘alive,'
means it specially on World Abounding), the Comedies
of World Ending, of Love Transcending, or Death and
Deep Burial.
Fairbridge hadn't been loosed of any of his own
agonies, but at least he had learned that they were
funny.
And Least Lass had a look of almost total happiness;
it being understood that almost-total happiness is often
a shaggy clown-looking thing, with at least a slight touch
of insanity, and a more than slight touch of death's-
head. Quite a gay girl she was and would always be: she
had been born knowing that death is open at both ends.
>
The end of the world, the end of a discrete culture
comes quickly. Lisetta Kerwin worried about a certain
impossibility here.
(Four children had been born on the same day; then,
two days later, a fifth. That made eight persons of the
half nation, the World Abounding Nation; and, of
course, there were still the seven persons of the World-
Gaea Nation.)
World Abounding 157
>
“We have been here for just thirty-six days,” Lisetta
worried, “and we have more than doubled our popula-
tion. What if there should be (What is the phrase they
used back in the Era of Wonderful Nonsense?) a People
Explosion?”
“You know that is impossible, mother,” Kora said.
“World Abounding sets its own lines, as is the habit of
worlds.'
“Yes, it is quite impossible, grandmother,” Chara
Kerwin, the newborn daughter of Kora, said. “This is all
there will be for this particular world. I myself, and
those of my generation, will not experience it all di-
rectly. We will experience part of it by sharing. Our
present numbers are our final numbers. It is less than
some worlds have, I know, so we must make
up
for it by
being as vital as we can be.”
“But, in another twenty days or so," Lisetta pro-
tested, “there will be another passion period, and
then-
“No, there will not be,” Kora tried to explain. “To
do a thing more than once, to do a thing more than
twice (twice is sometimes necessary when there is an
intersection of two worlds), that is to become repeti-
tious, and to be repetitious is the unforgivable sin.
Touch stone, mother, kick sand, knock wood (as you
report is said on Gaea), and pray that it may never
happen to any of us.”
“But of course it will happen, children, and it will
become an increasingly compounded happening. Con-
sider how many there will be in even one year
“A year!” Chara shrilled from the arms of Kora her
mother. “Has anyone ever lived for a year?”
“I don't know,” Kora puzzled. “Has anyone? Have
>
>
you, mother?”
“Yes, I'm afraid that I have,” Lisetta admitted. But
158 Strange Doings
why should she be apologetic at having lived more than
one year?
“I had no idea, mother,” Kora mumbled in half-
embarrassment. “I
guess
this is the reason for the
gaps
in
our communication, however hard we try to close
them.”
Then, for a long while (by local standards), it was all
an easygoing time on World Abounding. It was a period
of action packed leisure (though not all will be able to
understand this); it was crammed full of events, the
outcomings and incomings of a new maturing fruitful
culture. There was not room in the concentrated
leisured hours of any of them to experience it all di-
rectly; each one must simultaneously live in the mind
and body of everyone to be able to contain it all. There
was the unhurried rapidity of thought and act and
enjoyment. There was little difference in the day and
night hours: sleep and wakefulness were merged; dream-
ing and experience were intermingled. The fulfilled per-
sons would sometimes sleep while walking or even run-
ning, especially those of the full World Abounding
generations.
“Are we awake or sleeping?” Least Lass asked her
lover one day, or night.
“That I do not know,” Fairbridge said, or thought, in
whatever state he was in. “But we are together. May the
Planet Plucker grant that we be always together.”
“We are together,” Least Lass agreed, “and yet I am
climbing and leaping on the north ridges of the Volcano
Misericors, and I am sound asleep. And you are swim-
ming in the estuary of the River Festinatio, very deep
below the surface where it is ocean water below the
running water, and you also are asleep. Give me your
>
>
World Abounding 159
that my
hand. There! On a false level of reality it might seem
hand was closed on the meaty bloom of a rock
crocus, but that rock crocus is a part of yourself. It
might seem, to an observer of no understanding, that
your own hand has closed on an Aphthonia Blue-Fish
(the Blue-Fish himself is such an observer and he be-
lieves this), but that Blue-Fish is really myself with the
scales still on his eyes and on his whole fishness. But the
scales have fallen from our own eyes a little bit so that
we may see reality. Grip my hand very hard."
They gripped hands very hard. They were together.
Ceramic flutes! The flutes were one signature of the
present World Abounding culture. They have a tone of
their own that cannot be touched by either wooden or
brass horns. This light, hard, airy ceramic is made from
the deposits of windblown loess from the ocher hills,
from the limey mud of the plashes of the River Festi-
natio, from the ash and the pumice of the Volcano
Misericors. This makes a ceramic like no other; there
will always be old tunes nesting in every horn and pipe
of it.
There were also green-wood clarinets with tendrils
still growing on them; aeolian stringed boxes that played
themselves in harmonic to whistling; snakeskin drums;
hammered electrum trumpets (what a rich sound they
had!); and honey-wood violins.
Such orchestration as was employed was of a natural
sort. Usually it was the whistling coneys (who are very
early risers) who would set the aeolian strings to going:
then the several nations of birds would begin to intone;
the people, whether waking or sleeping, would soon
come in with their composite solos. Or sometimes it was
one of the persons who began a music.
160 Strange Doings
>
“Think a tune, father,” Heros Planda might call. And
his father Rushmore, afternoon dreaming somewhere in
the blue-stem hills, would think of one. Heros would
begin to blow a few notes of it, though he might be
several kilometers distant from his father. It might be
taken up then by boom-birds or by surfacing riverfish
with their quick sounding that was between a whistle
and a bark. There was a lot of music in this World
Abounding culture, but it was never formal and never
forced.
There was a sculpture culture, though Fairbridge
warned that it was a dangerous thing. World Abounding
was so plastic a place, he said, that one might create
more than he had intended by the most simple shaping
or free-cutting. “Half the things alive here have no
business being alive,” he said. “One is not to trust the
stones, especially not trust any stones of the Volcano.'
Nevertheless, the sculpture culture, done in high and
low relief, or in the free or the round, was mostly on the
south face of that trustless volcano. Whenever the Vol-
cano exuded a new flow-wall during the night, all the
people would be at the bright and soft surface in the
morning, before it had cooled. These flow-walls were of
mingled colors, of bright jagged colors sometimes, or
soft colors at other times, then again of shouting colors:
it was a very varied and chemical Volcano and it bled
like rock rainbows.
Usually the Volcano himself set the motif for a sculp-
ture-mass. He could do good and powerful work in the
rough. He could form out large intimations of creatures
and people and events. But he was like a geniused artist
who had only stubs, no hands. It was the human persons
who had to do all the fine and finishing work of the
almost living murals.
World Abounding 161
The performed dramas of this culture fell into a
half-dozen cycles. They were mostly variations or con-
tinuations of things done by groups of the dead Terrace
peoples, or by primordials before them. They were
always part of an endless continuity. Here they might be
in scene five of act four hundred of one of the Volcano
cycles. Earlier acts had been performed by earlier
peoples, by the primordials, by Aphthonian bears, by
characters or manifestations which had, had no life of
their own outside of the dramas.
Poetry wasn't a separate act here. The people of
World Abundant were poetry, they lived poetry, they
ate poetry, they drank it out of cups. All the persons
were in rime with each other, so they had no need of
the sound of it.
Eating was an art. No two meals on World Abounding
had ever been the same. Every one of them was a
banquet, beyond duplication, beyond imitation.
So it went on for a long while (by local standards); it
went along for near three standard months. All the
persons' of the native World Abounding generations now
appeared to be about the same age, this in spite of the
fact that some of them were parents of others of them.
3
“We have done absolutely everything," Chara Kerwin
said one day. “Some of us, or other of us, or all of us
have done everything. Now we will wind it up wonder-
fully. Is it not a stunning thing to have done every-
thing?”
“But you haven't done everything, you bumptious
child,” Lisetta told her. “You haven't borne children, as
your mother has, as myself your grandmother has.”
»
>
1 62 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
"But I have. I have borne myself, I have borne my mother Kora, I have borne you, my grandmother Lisetta, I have borne every person ever birthed on World Abounding or elsewhere. What we do not do as indi­ viduals, we do in common. All of our nation has now done everything, as I have. So we will wind it up." All eight of the gilded youths of the World Abound­ ing nation came at the same time to the realization that they had done everything. They called it back and forth, they echoed the information from the blue-stem hills to the orchards to the mountains. They all came together full of the information. They assembled on the top of the Terraces. They sat down at table there, and de­ manded that the elder World-Gaea nation should serve them. "Out-do yourselves! " Least Lass Exendine called to all those elders. "Give us a banquet better than any you ever invented before. But you may not share it with us. It is for ourselves only. Serve us. And eat ashes your­ selves." So the oldsters, those who had not been born on World Abounding, served the assembled younglings, and did it with delight. There seemed to be a wonderful windup fermenting for all of them. The Comedy of Horror, perhaps, showed a little stronger than it had recently on the face and form of Fairbridge, but it was still only one of that complex of deep comedies. Fairbridge had a very stark and terrible intuition now. He had a horrifying premonition of the real substance of those twin Comedies of World Ending and of Love Transcending. But even horror is a subject of comedy of World Abounding, and it is supposed to have that jagged edge to it. "Bring all our things, bring all our artifacts," Chara
"It may be that you have not really done every­ thing," Fairbridge said once in white agony while all the things were being piled up. "Let us think if there is not something left that you haven't done." "No, no, good father, good husband, good lover, good ancestor, good descendant, good Fairbridge mine," Least Lass was saying, "we have done everything. We have done everything that could be in your mind, for plumbing the Fairbridge mind to its total depth is one of the many things we have done. And if there is some thing that we really have not done, then we will do it after we are dead. We do all sorts of communicating things in our sleep. Well, we will also do them in our deaths, as do the other dead people living in the Ter­ races. Fairbridge, my passion, my patsy, my toy, my love, go tell the Volcano that it is time." "How should I talk to a Volcano?" Fairbridge asked. "Why, you will speak to it directly, Fairbridge. Is it not a Gaea proverb that a man may talk to a volcano just as a beggar may talk to a horse or a cat to a king?" "And I should say what to the Volcano?" "Simply tell him that it is time."
ordered when they were still deep in the wining and dining. "Bring all our instruments and robes and plaques and free sculptures. Pile up enough food for a dozen banquets. Bring our green shroud-robes."
Fairbridge Exendine climbed up from the Terraces onto the steep eastern slope of the Volcano Miser�cors. He climbed clear to the cone. The cone was a ragged laughing mouth; the whole face was a distorted laugh. One eye of that face was far down the north slope, and the other eye was over in the blue-stem hills. The ears
W o r 1 d A b o u n d i n g 1 63
were sundered off somewhere; the brow was exploded; the jaw was shattered all over the scree slopes. It was a fine merry face that the Volcano had, even though it was a little disjointed and disparate. Something overly glandular about this Volcano, though. Ah, it was great-glanded. The Gorgos gland that supplied all of World Abounding was a part of this Volcano. "Are you sure that it is as funny as all that?" Fair­ bridge gruffed at this open-mawed mountain. "It strains my idea of the comic a little. It could stand some revision." They both were silent for a little while. "Ah, the young persons told me to tell you that it is time," Fairbridge said glumly. The Volcano belched a bit of fire. There was something of cruel laugh in that sound: a snort, really. Fairbridge suspected that the Volcano was more animal than man. Then the Volcano ·became somewhat raucous, foul­ mouthed ("that quip is my own, my last," Fairbridge said in his throat), rumbling and roaring, smoky and sulphurous, scorching, sooty. Fairbridge left it in his own passion. . He came down towards the shouldering Terraces again. All the World-Gaea people were calling him to come to the plain below where the hover-craft was at the ready. He ignored them. He continued to the high Terraces and to the native generations of World Abounding. It was like hot snakes hissing at his heels as he went, pouring streams of lava. The air had become like a furnace, like a forge with bellows puffing. The river Festinatio had become quite excited. It palpitated in running shivers of waves. It was a-leap with all its fishy fauna, with all its bold turtles and squids.
1 64 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
The Volcano always invaded the river at the climax of its eruptions: each successive Terrace ran further into the River. Nobody should have been surprised at the excitement of the River, nobody who had watched or taken part in the dramas of the Volcano cycles. Fairbridge came down to the death-edge young people on the Terraces. "You must not be here with us," Heros told him. "There is no way that you can earn that right. We are completed, but you are not." Fairbridge threw himself down on the Terraces, how­ ever, and the ground of the Terraces had already begun to smoke. "You cannot stay here, my other love, my other life," Least Lass told him. But he lay at her feet. He embraced her ankles. "Shall we allow them to stay on the Terraces and be burned to death and buried with ashes?" Judy Brindles­ by asked uneasily on the land below. "Yes. We must allow it," Hilary said. "But there is a whole world that will not be covered. Only the Terraces will be covered and burned." "Yes." "They sit there eating and drinking, and already we can smell the scorched flesh of their feet. They are all so young, and they could live so long and so happy any­ where else on this world." "We don't know that they could live any longer. We don't understand it." "But they are our children." "Yes." "Shall I feed you scraps from the table as though you were a dog at my feet?" Least Lass asked Fairbridge. "Go at once now. You have no business dying here. Go
W o r I d A b o u n d i n g 1 65
1 66 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
with them. They come in great danger and pain to themselves to get you." Rushmore Planda and Blase Kerwin came and dragged Fairbridge off the top of the smoking Terraces and down the slopes where lava and ash flow ran like liz­ ards. All were burned, and Fairbridge was dangerously burned. They went into the hover-craft, the seven persons who had not been born on World Abounding. They rose into the smoky volcanic air, and they hovered. The young people, the World Abounding people, still sat and wined and dined themselves on the scorched Terraces. The hot ash and the fiery liquid shoved in upon them and rose to engulf them. They were encap­ suled and preserved in the caking hot ash. Least Lass, at the rivermost edge of the Terraces, was the last of them to be completely covered. She made a happy signal to them in the hover-craft, and her mother Judy signaled back. Hot ash filled the banquet plate of Least Lass by then, and hot lava filled her cup. Smiling and easy, she ate and drank the living coals to her pleasant death. Then she had disappeared completely under the flow of it, as the rest of them had done. The Volcano covered them with another two meters of fill. Then he pushed on to have his will with the river.
"It did not happen, it could not have happened, it must not be allowed to have happened," Fairbridge Exendine was mumbling inanely, but Fairbridge was mind out of body now. His mind was at the feet of Least Lass in the merciful ashes of the new topmost Terrace.
"The report will be a difficult one," Hilary hazarded. "Just how are we to explain that a normal human settlement is impossible here? How explain that it will always end in such swift short generations? How explain that every World Abounding culture is, by its nature, a terminal culture?" "Why bother?" asked Erma Planda of the still golden body and emerald eyes. "We wll make the entry that several of the other expeditions have made. Yes, and we will be classed as such disgraceful failures as they have been. What else to do?" She wrote the damning entry quickly. "We were warned that there would be some necks wrung if that phrase was used in our report," Rushmore said sourly. "Wring my neck who can," Erma challenged. "There. It's done. And they really wouldn't have believed it, you know."
W o r I d A b o u n d i n g 1 67
He was a morning type, so it was unusual that he should feel depressed in the morning. He tried to account for it, and could not. He was a healthy man, so he ate a healthy breakfast. He was not too depressed for that. And he listened unconsciously to the dark girl with the musical voice. Often she ate at Cahill's in the mornings with her girl friend. Grape juice, pineapple juice, orange juice, apple juice . . . why did people look at him suspiciously just be­ cause he took four or five sorts of juice for breakfast?
"Agnes, it was ghastly. I was built like a sack. A sackful of skunk cabbage, I swear. And I was a green­ brown color and had hair like a latrine mop. Agnes, I was sick with misery. It just isn't possible for anybody to feel so low. I can't shake it at all. And the whole world was like the underside of a log. It wasn't that, though. It wasn't just one bunch of things. It was everything. It was a world where things just weren't worth living. I can't come out of it . . . . "
1 68
DREAM
"Agnes, we all of us had eyes that bugged out. And we stank! We were bloated, and all the time it rained a dirty green rain that smelled like a four-letter word. Good grief, girl! We had hair all over us where we weren't warts. And we talked like cracked crows. We had crawlers. I itch just from thinking about it. And the dirty parts of the dream I won't even tell you. I've never felt so blue in my life. I just don't know how I'll make the day through." "Teresa, doll, how could a dream upset you so much?"
There isn't a thing wrong with ordering three eggs sunny-side up, and three over easy, and three poached ever so soft, and six of them scrambled. What law says a man should have all of his eggs fixed alike? Nor is there
Sausage, only four little links for an order. Did people think he was a glutton because he had four orders of sausage? It didn't seem like very much. "My mother was a monster. She was a wart-hoggish animal. And yet she was still recognizable. How could my mother look like a wart hog and still look like my mother? Mama's pretty! " "Teresa, it was only a dream. Forget it."
The stares a man must suffer just to get a dozen pancakes on his plate! What was the matter with people who called four pancakes a tall stack? And what was odd about ordering a quarter of a pound of butter? It was better than having twenty of those little pats each on its coaster.
"Teresa, it was only a dream."
D r e a m 1 69
17 0 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
anything wrong with ordering five cups of coffee. That way the girl doesn't have to keep running over with refills. Bascomb Swicegood liked to have bacon and waffles after the egg interlude and the earlier courses. But he was nearly at the end of his breakfast when he jumped up. "What did she say?" He was suprised at the violence of his own voice. "What did who say, Mr. Swicegood?" "The girl that was just here, that just left with the other girl." "That was Teresa, and the other girl was Agnes. Or else that was Agnes and the other girl was Teresa. It depends on which girl you mean. I don't know what either of them said." Bascomb ran out into the street. "Girl, the girl who said it rained dirty green all the time, what's your name?" "My name is Teresa. You've met me four times. Every morning you look like you never saw me before." "I'm Agnes," said Agnes. "What did you mean it rained dirty green all the time? Tell me all about it." "I will not, Mr. Swicegood. I was just telling a dream I had to Agnes. It isn't any of your business." "Well, I have to hear all of it. Tell me everything you dreamed." "I will not. It was a dirty dream. It isn't any of your business. If you weren't a friend of my Uncle Ed Kelly, I'd call a policeman for your bothering me." "Did you have things like live rats in your stomach to digest for you? Did they-" "Oh ! How did you know? Get away from me. I wz"ll
Dream
171
call a policeman. Mr. McCarty, this man is annoying
me.'
“The devil he is, Miss Ananias. Old Bascomb just
doesn't have it in him any more. There's no more harm
in him than a lamppost.”
“Did the lampposts have hair on them, Miss Teresa?
Did they pant and swell and smell green
“Oh! You couldn't know! You awful man!”
“I'm Agnes,” said Agnes; but Teresa dragged Agnes
away with her.
“What is the lamppost jag, Bascomb?” asked Officer
Mossback McCarty.
“Ah-I know what it is like to be in hell, Mossback. I
dreamed of it last night.”
“And well you should, a man who neglects his Easter
duty year after year. But the lamppost jag? If it con-
cerns anything on my beat, I have to know about it."
“It seems that I had the same depressing dream as the
young lady, identical in
every detail.”
Not knowing what dreams are (and we do not know),
we should not find it strange that two people might
have the same dream. There may not be enough of them
to go around, and most dreams are forgotten in the
morning.
Bascomb Swicegood had forgotten his dismal dream.
He could not account for his state of depression until he
heard Teresa Ananias telling pieces of her own dream to
Agnes Schoenapfel. Even then it came back to him
slowly at first, but afterwards with a rush.
The oddity wasn't that two people should have the
same dream, but that they should discover the coinci-
dence, what with the thousands of people running
around and most of the dreams forgotten.
a
172
Strange Doings
Yet, if it were a coincidence, it was a multiplex one.
On the night when it was first made manifest it must
have been dreamed by quite a number of people in one
medium-large city. There was a small piece in an after-
noon paper. One doctor had five different worried
patients who had had dreams of rats in their stomachs,
and hair growing on the insides of their mouths. This
was the first publication of the shared-dream phenome-
non.
The squib did not mention the foul-green-rain back-
ground, but later investigation uncovered that this and
other details were common to the dreams.
But it was a reporter named Willy Wagoner who really
put.the town on the map. Until he did the job, the
incidents and notices had been isolated. Doctor Herome
Judas had been putting together some notes on the
Green-rain Syndrome. Doctor Florenz Appian had been
working up his evidence on the Surex Ventriculus
Trauma, and Professor Gideon Greathouse had come to
some learned conclusions on the inner meaning of warts.
But it was Willy Wagoner who went to the people for it,
and then gave his conclusions back to the people.
Willy said that he had interviewed a thousand people
at random. (He hadn't really; he had talked to about
twenty. It takes longer than you might think to inter-
view a thousand people.) He reported that slightly more
than sixty-seven percent had had a dream of the same
repulsive world. He reported that more than forty-four
percent had had the dream more than once, thirty two
percent more than twice, twenty-seven percent more
than three times. Many had had it every damned night.
And many refused frostily to answer questions on the
subject at all.
This was ten days after Bascomb Swicegood had
Dream
173
heard Teresa Ananias tell her dream to Agnes.
Willy published the opinions of the three learned
gentlemen above, and the theories and comments of
many more. He also appended a hatful of answers he
had received that were sheer levity.
But the phenomenon was not local. Wagoner's article
was the first comprehensive (or at least wordy) treat-
ment of it, but only by hours. Similar things were in
other
papers
that very afternoon, and the next day.
It was more than a fad. Those who called it a fad fell
silent after they themselves experienced the dream. The
suicide index rose around the country and the world.
The thing was now international. The cacophonous ditty
Green Rain was on all the jukes, as was The Wart Hog
Song. People began to loath themselves and each other.
Women feared that they would give birth to monsters.
There were new perversions committed in the name of
the thing, and several orgiastic societies were formed
with the stomach rat as a symbol. All entertainment was
forgotten, and this was the only topic.
Nervous disorders took a fearful rise as people tried
to stay awake to avoid the abomination, and as they
slept in spite of themselves and suffered the degrada-
tion.
It is no joke to experience the same loathsome dream
all night every night. It had actually come to that. All
the people were dreaming it all night every night. It had
passed from being a joke to being a universal menace.
Even the sudden new millionaires who rushed their
cures to the market were not happy. They also suffered
whenever they slept, and they knew that their cures
were not cures.
There were large amounts posted for anyone who
174 Strange Doings
a
could cure the populace of the wart-hog-people dreams.
There was presidential edict and dictator decree, and
military teams attacked the thing as a military problem,
but they were not able to subdue it.
Then one night a nervous lady heard a voice in her
noisome dream. It was one of the repulsive cracked
wart-hog voices. “You are not dreaming,” said the voice.
“This is the real world. But when
you
wake
you
will be
dreaming. That barefaced world is not a world at all. It
is only a dream. This is the real world.” The lady awoke
howling. And she had not howled before, for she was a
demure lady.
Nor was she the only one who awoke howling. There
were hundreds, then thousands, then millions. The voice
spoke to all and engendered a doubt. Which was the real
world? Almost equal time was now spent in each, for
the people had come to need more sleep and most of
them had arrived at spending a full twelve hours or more
in the nightmarish world.
“It Could Be” was the title of a headlined article on
the subject by the same Professor Greathouse men-
tioned above. It could be, he said, that the world on
which the green rain fell incessantly was the real world.
It could be that the wart-hogs were real and the people a
dream. It could be that rats in the stomach were normal,
and other methods of digestion were chimerical.
And then a very great man went on the air in world-
wide broadcast with a speech that was a ringing call for
collective sanity. It was the hour of decision, he said.
The decision would be made. Things were at an exact
balance, and the balance would be tipped.
“But we can decide. One way or the other, we will
decide. I implore you all in the name of sanity that you
decide right. One world or the other will be the world of
Dream 175
tomorrow. One of them is real and one of them is a
dream. Both are with us now, and the favor can go to
either. But listen to me here: whichever one wins, the
other will have always been a dream, a momentary
madness soon forgotten. I urge you to the sanity which
in a measure I have lost myself. Yet in our darkened
dilemma I feel that we yet have a choice. Choose!"
And perhaps that was the turning point.
The mad dream disappeared as suddenly as it had
appeared. The world came back to normal with an
embarrassed laugh. It was all over. It had lasted from its
inception six weeks.
Bascomb Swicegood, a morning type, felt excellent
this morning. He breakfasted at Cahill's, and he ordered
heavily as always. And he listened with half an ear to
the conversation of two girls at the table next to his.
“But I should know you,” he said.
“Of course. I'm Teresa."
“I'm Agnes,” said Agnes.
“Mr. Swicegood, how could you forget? It was when
the dreams first came, and you overheard me telling
mine to Agnes. Then you ran after us in the street
because you had had the same dream, and I wanted to
have you arrested. Weren't they horrible dreams? And
have they ever found out what caused them?”
“They were horrible, and they have not found out.
They ascribe it to group mania, which is meaningless.
And now there are those who say that the dreams never
came at all, and soon they will be nearly forgotten. But
the horror of them! The loneliness!”
“Yes, we hadn't even pediculi to curry our body hair.
We almost hadn't any body hair.'
Teresa was an attractive girl. She had a cute trick of
>
176 Strange Doings
>)
a
popping the smallest rat out of her mouth so it could
see what was coming into her stomach. She was bulbous
and beautiful. “Like a sackful of skunk cabbage,”
Bascomb murmured admiringly in his head, and then
flushed green at his forwardness of phrase.
Teresa had protuberances upon protuberances and
warts on warts, and hair all over her where she wasn't
warts and bumps. “Like a latrine mop!” sighed Bascomb
with true admiration. The cracked clang of Teresa's
voice was music in the early morning.
All was right with the earth again. Gone the hideous
nightmare world when people had stood barefaced and
lonely, without bodily friends or dependents. Gone that
ghastly world of the sick blue sky and the near absence
of entrancing odor.
Bascomb attacked manfully his plate of prime car-
rion. And outside the pungent green rain fell inces-
santly.
Ride a Tin Can
These are my notes on the very sticky business. They
are not in the form of a protest, which would be useless.
Holly is gone, and the Shelni will all be gone in the next
day or two, if indeed there are any of them left now.
This is for the record only.
Holly Harkel and myself, Vincent Vanhoosier,
received funds and permission to record the lore of the
Shelni through the intercession of that old correlator
John Holmberg. This was unexpected. All lorists have
counted John as their worst enemy.
“After all, we have been at great expense to record
the minutiae of pig grunts and the sound of earth-
worms,” Holmberg told me, “and we have records of
squeakings of hundreds of species of orbital rodents. We
have veritable libraries of the song and cackle of all birds
and pseudo-ornins. Well, let us add the Shelni to our list.
I do not believe that their thumping on tree roots or
blowing into jug gourds is music. I do not believe that
their sing song is speech any more than the squeaking of
doors is speech. We have recorded, by the way, the
sound of more than thirty thousand squeaking doors.
And we have had worse. Let us have the Shelni, then, if
C
177
178 Strange
Strange Doings
your hearts are set on it. You'll have to hurry. They're
about gone.
“And let me say in all compassion that anyone who
looks like Miss Holly Harkel deserves her heart's desire.
That is no more than simple justice. Besides, the bill will
be footed by the Singing Pig Breakfast Food Company.
These companies are bitten by the small flea of remorse
every now and then and they want to pitch a few coins
into some fund for luck. It's never many coins that they
want to pitch; the remorse bug that bites them is never a
very large one. You may be able to stretch it to cover
your project though, Vanhoosier."
So we had our appropriation and our travel, Miss
Holly and myself.
Holly Harkel had often been in disrepute for her
claims to understand the languages of various creatures.
There was special outrage to her claim that she would be
able to understand the Shelni. Now that was odd. No
disrepute attached to Captain Charbonnett for his claim
to understand the planetary simians, and if there was
ever a phony claim it was this. No disrepute attached to
Meyrowitz for his claim of finding esoteric meanings in
the patterns of vole droppings. But there seemed some-
thing incredible in the claim of the goblin faced Holly
Harkel that not only would she be able to understand
the Shelni instantly and completely but that they were
not low scavenger beasts at all, that they were genuine
goblin people who played goblin music and sang goblin
songs.
Holly Harkel had a heart and soul too big for her
dwarfish body, and a brain too big for her curious little
head. That, I suppose, is what made her so lumpy
everywhere. She was entirely compounded of love and
Ride a Tin Can
a
179
a
concern and laughter, and much of it bulged out from
her narrow form. Her ugliness was one of the unusual
things and I believe that she enjoyed giving it to the
worlds. She had loved snakes and toads, she had loved
monkeys and misbegottens. She had come to look
weirdly like them when we studied them. She was a
snake when we studied them, she was a toad when they
were our subject. She studied every creature from the
inside of it. And here there was an uncommon similar-
ity, even for her.
Holly loved the Shelni instantly. She became a Shelni,
and she hadn't far to go. She moved and scooted and
climbed like a Shelni. She came down trees headfirst
like a Shelni or a squirrel. She had always seemed to me
to be a little other than human. And now she was avid
to record the Shelni things “— before they be gone.”
'
As for the Shelni themselves, some scientists have
called them humanoid, and then braced themselves for
the blow and howl. If they were humanoid they were
certainly the lowest and oddest humanoids ever. But we
folklorists knew intuitively what they were. They were
goblins pure and simple—I do not use the adjectives here
as cliché The tallest of them were less than three feet
tall; the oldest of them were less than seven years old.
They were, perhaps, the ugliest creatures in the universe,
and yet of a pleasant ugliness. There was no evil in them
at all. Scientists who have tested them have insisted that
there was no intelligence in them at all. They were
friendly and open. Too friendly, too open, as it hap-
pened, for they were fascinated by all human things, to
their harm. But they were no more human than a fairy
or an ogre is human. Less, less, less than a monkey.
“Here is a den of them,” Holly divined that first day
a
180 Strange Doings
(it was the day before yesterday). “There will be a
whole coven of them down under here and the door is
down through the roots of this tree. When I got my
doctorate in primitive music I never imagined that I
would be visiting Brownies down under tree roots. I
should say that I never so much as hoped that I would
be. There was so much that they didn't teach us. There
was even one period in my life when I ceased to believe
in goblins.”
The latter I do not believe.
Suddenly Holly was into a hole in the ground head-
first, like a gopher, like a ground squirrel, like a Shelni. I
followed her, letting myself down carefully, and not
headfirst. I myself would have to study the Shelni from
the outside. I myself would never be able to crawl inside
their green goblin skins, never be able to croak or carol
with their frog tongues, never feel what made their
popeyes pop. I myself would not even have been able to
sense out their dens.
And at the bottom of the hole, at the entrance to the
den itself, was an encounter which I disbelieved at the
time I was seeing and hearing it. There occurred a
conversation which I heard with my own ears, they
having become transcendent for the moment. It was in
the frog-croak Shelni talk between Holly Harkel and the
five-year-old Ancient who guarded the coven, and yet it
was in a sort of English and I understood it:
“Knockle, knockle.” (This from Holly).
“Crows in cockle.” (This from the guard).
“Wogs and wollie.”
“Who you?” “Holly."
“What's a dinning?”
“Coming inning.”
So they let us in. But if you think you can enter a
Shelni coven without first riming with the five-year-old
.
Ride a Tin Can 181
Ancient who guards it, then it's plain that you've never
been in one of the places. And though the philologists
say that the “speech” of the Shelni is meaningless croak-
ing, yet it was never meaningless to Holly, and in flashes
it was not meaningless to me. The secret guess of Holly
was so.
Holly had insisted that the Shelni spoke English
within the limits of their vocal apparatus. And they told
her at this very first session that they never had had any
language of their own “because no one had ever made
one for us”; so they used English as soon as they came
to hear it. “We would pay you for the use of it if we had
anything to pay you with,” they said. It is frog-croak
English, but only the pure of ear can understand it.
I started the recorder and Holly started the Shelni.
Quite soon she had them playing on those jug shaped
flutes of theirs. Frog music. Ineffably sad sionnach
skirries. Rook, crow, and daw squabbling melody. They
were pleasant, weird little pieces of music that sounded
as though they were played underwater. It would be
hard to imagine them not played under the ground at
least.
The tunes were short just as all tunes of children are
short. There was no real orchestration, though that
should have been possible with the seven flutes differ-
ently jugged and tuned. Yet there was true melody in
these: short, complete, closed melody, dwarfed perfec-
tion. They were underground fugues full of worms'
.
blood and cool as root cider. They were locust and
chaffer and cricket din.
Then Holly got one of the most ancient of the Shelni
to tell stories while the jug flutes chortled. Here are the
two of them that we recorded that first day. Others who
listen to them today say that there is nothing to them
but croaking. But I heard them with Holly Harkel, she
182 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
The Shelni Who Lost His Burial Tooth It is told this way. There was a Shelni who lost his burial tooth before he died. Every Shelni begins life with six teeth, and he loses one every year. Then, when he is very old and has only one tooth left, he dies. He must give the last tooth to the Skokie burial-person to pay for his burial. But this Shelni had either lost two teeth in one year or else he had lived to too great an age. He died. And he had no tooth left to pay with. 'I will not bury you if you have no tooth left to pay me with,' said the Skokie burial-person. 'Should I work for nothing?' 'Then I will bury myself,' said the dead Shelni. 'You don't know how,' said the Skokie burial­ person. 'You don't know the places that are left. You will find that all the places are full. I have agreement that everybody should tell everybody that all the places are full, so only the burial-person may bury. That is my job.' Nevertheless, the dead Shelni went to find a place to bury himself. He dug a little hole in the meadow, but wherever he dug he found that it was already full of dead Shelnis or Skokies or Frogs. And they always made him put all the dirt back that he had dug. He dug holes in the valley and it was the same thing. He dug holes on the hill, and they told him that the hill was full too. So he went away crying for he could find no place to lie down.
helped interpret them to me, so I can hear and under­ stand them perfectly in frog-croak English. Take them, Grisly Posterity ! I am not sure that you deserve even this much of the Shelni.
He asked the Eanlaith whether he could stay in their tree. And they said, no he could not. They would not let any dead folks live in their tree. He asked the Eise if he could stay in their pond. And they said, no he could not. They would not allow any dead folks in their pond. He asked the Sionnach if he could sleep in their den. And they said, no he could not. They liked him when he was alive, but a dead person has hardly any friends at all. So the poor dead Shelni wanders yet and can find no place to rest his head. He will wander forever unless he can find another burial tooth to pay with. They used to tell it so.
One comment on this burial story: The Shelni do have careful burial. But the burial crypts are plainly dug, not by the six-fingered Shelni, but by the seven-clawed Skokie. There must be substance to the Skokie burial­ person. Moreover, the Skokie, though higher on the very low scale than the Shelni, do not bury their own. Furthermore, there are no Shelni remains going back more than about thirty equivalent years. There are no random lying or fossil She1ni at all, though such remains are common for every other species here.
The Shelni Who Turned into a Tree This is how they tell it. There was a woman who was neither Shelni nor Skokie nor Frog. She was Sky Woman. One day she came with her child and sat down under the Shelni tree.
The second story (of the first day).
R i d e a T i n C a n 1 83
184 Strange Doings
When she got up to go she left her own child who was
asleep and picked up a Shelni child by mistaķe. Then
the Shelni woman came to get her own child and she
looked at it. She did not know what was wrong but it
was a Sky People child.
‘Oh, it has pink skin and flat eyes! How can that be?'
the Shelni woman asked. But she took it home with her
and it still lives with the Shelni and everyone has for-
gotten the difference.
Nobody knows what the Sky Woman thought when
she got the Shelni child home and looked at it. Never-
theless she kept it, and it grew and was more handsome
than
any
of them.
But when the second year came and the young
Shelni
was grown, it walked in the woods and said 'I do not
feel like a Sky People. But if I am not a Sky People,
then what am I? I am not a Duck. I am not a Frog. And
if I am a Bird, what kind of Bird am I? There is nothing
left. It must be that I am a Tree.' There was reason for
this. We Shelni do look a little bit like trees and we feel
a little bit like trees.
So the Shelni put down roots and grew bark and
worked hard at being a tree. He underwent all the
hardships that are the life of a tree. He was gnawed by
goats and gobniu; he was rough-tongued by cattle and
crom; he was infested by slugs and befouled by the
nameless animal. Moreover, parts of him were cut away
for firewood.
But he kept feeling the jug music creeping up all the
way
from his undertoes to his hair and he knew that
this music was what he had always been looking for. It
was the same jug and tine music that you hear even now.
Then a bird told the Shelni that he was not really a
tree but that it was too late for him to leave off growing
Ride a Tin Can 185
like a tree. He had brothers and sisters and kindred
living in the hole down under his roots, the bird said,
and they would have no home if he stopped being a
tree.
This is the tree that is the roof of our den where we
are even now. This tree is our brother who was lost and
who forgot that he was a Shelni.
This is the way it has always been told.
On the second day it was remarkable how much
Holly had come to look like a Shelni. Ah well, she has
come to look like every sort of creature we have ever
studied together. Holly insists that the Shelni have intel-
ligence, and I half agree with her. But the paragraph in
the basic manual of this world is against us:
'-a tendency to attribute to the Shelni an intelli-
gence which they do not possess, perhaps due to their
fancied human resemblance. In maze-running they are
definitely inferior to the rodents. In the manipulation of
latches and stops they are less adept than the earth
racoons or the asteroid rojon. In tool handling and true
mimicry they are far from equal to the simians. In
simple foraging and the instinct for survival they are far
below the hog or the harzl. In mneme, the necessary
prelude to intelligence, they are about on par with the
turtles. Their ‘speech' lacks the verisimilitude of the
talking birds, and their ‘music' is below that of the
insects. They make poor watchdogs and inadequate
scarecrows. It appears that the move to ban shelniphagi,
though perhaps sincere, is ill-advised. After all, as an
early spaceman put it, 'What else are they good for?'
6
Well, we have to admit that the Shelni are not as
intelligent as rats or hogs or harzls. Yet I, surely due to
186
Strange Doings
the influence of Holly, feel a stronger affinity to them
than to rats or hogs or coons or crows or whatever. But
no creature is so helpless as the Shelni.
How do they even get together?
The Shelni have many sorts of songs, but they do not
have any romantic songs in our sense. After all, they are
small children till they die of old age. Their sexual
relationship seems distinguished either by total unaware-
ness or by extreme bashfulness.
“I don't see how they bring it off at all, Vincent,”
Holly said the second day (which was yesterday). “They
are here, so they must have been born. But how do
these bashful and scatterbrained three-year-olds ever get
together to bring it off? I can't find anything at all in
their legends or acting patterns, can you?
“In their legends, all their children are foundlings.
They are born or discovered under a blueberry bush (my
translation of spionam). Or alternately, and in other
cycles, they are found under a quicken tree or in a
cucumber patch. In common sense we must assume that
the Shelni are placental and viviparous. But should we
apply common sense to goblin folk?
“They also have a legend that they are fungoid and
spring out of the ground at night like mushrooms. And
that if a Shelni woman wishes a child, she must buy a
fungoid slip from a Skokie and plant it in the ground.
Then she will have her child ready the next morning.
But Holly was depressed yesterday morning. She had
seen some copy by our sponsor The Singing Pig Break-
fast Food Company and it disturbed her:
“Singing Pig! The Children love it! Nourishing Nov-
elty! Nursery Rime Characters in a can for your conven-
ience! Real Meat from Real Goblins! No fat, no bones.
If your can has a lucky number tab, you can receive free
Ride a Tin Can 187
a facsimile Shelni jug flute. Be the first on your block to
serve Singing Pig, the meat from real Goblins. Corn-
starch and natural flavor added.”
Oh well, it was only an advertisement that they used
back on World. We had our recording to do.
“Vincent, I don't know how they got here,” Holly
said, “but I know they won't be here very long. Hurry,
hurry, we have to get it down! I will make them remem-
bered somehow."
Holly got them to play on the tines that second day
(which was yesterday). There had been an impediment
the day before, she said. The tines may not be played
for one until the second day of acquaintance. The
Shelni do not have stringed instruments. Their place is
taken by the tines, the vibrating, singing forks. They
play these many pronged tuned forks like harps, and in
playing them they use the tree roots for sounding
boards so that even the leaves in the air above partake a
little of the music. The tines, the forks are themselves of
wood, of a certain very hard but light wood that is sharp
with chert and lime dust. They are wood, I believe, in an
early stage of petrifaction. The tine fork music usually
follows the jug flute music, and the ballads that are sung
to it have a dreamlike sadness of tone that belies the
childish simplicity of the texts.
Here are two more of those ballad stories that we
recorded on the second day (which was yesterday).
а
The Skokie Who Lost His Wife
This is the way they tell it.
A Skokie heard a Shelni jug flute jugging one night.
‘That is the voice of my wife,' the Skokie said. “I'd
know it anywhere.'
The Skokie came over the moors to find his wife. He
188 Strange Doings
very voice.'
went down into the hole in the ground that his wife's
voice was coming from. But all he found there was a
Shelni playing a jug flute.
'I am looking for my poor lost wife,' the Skokie said.
'I have heard her voice just now coming out of this hole.
Where is she?'
“There is nobody here but myself,' the Shelni said. “I
am sitting here alone playing my flute to the moons
whose light runs down the walls of my hole.'
‘But I heard her here,' said the Skokie, ‘and I want
her back.'
'How did she sound?' asked the Shelni. 'Like this?'
And he jugged some jug music on his flute.
‘Yes, that is my wife,' said the Skokie. “Where have
you hidden her? That is her
'
‘That is nobody's wife,' the Shelni told the Skokie.
‘That is just a little tune that I made up.'
‘You play with my wife's voice, so you must have
swallowed my wife,' the Skokie said. “I will have to take
you apart and see.'
'If I swallowed anybody's wife I'm sorry,' said the
Shelni. “Go ahead then.'
So the Skokie took the Shelni apart and scattered the
pieces all over the hole and some of them on the grass
outside. But he could not find any part of his wife.
'I have made a mistake,' said the Skokie. 'Who would
have thought that one who had not swallowed my
wife
could make her voice on the flute!'
'It is all right,' said the Shelni, ‘so long as you put me
together again. I remember part of the
of the way I go.
If
you
remember the rest of the way, then you can put me
together again.'
But neither of them remembered very well the way
Ride a Tin Can 189
a
.
the Shelni was before he was taken apart. The Skokie
put him together all wrong. There were not enough
pieces for some parts and too many for others.
‘Let me help,' said a Frog who was there. 'I remember
where some of the parts go. Besides, I believe it was my
own wife he swallowed. That was her voice on the flute.
It was not a Skokie voice.'
The frog helped, and they all remembered what they
could, but it did not work. Parts of the Shelni could not
be found again, and some of the parts would not go into
him at all. When they had him finished, the Shelni was
in great pain and could hardly move, and he didn't look
much like a Shelni.
'I've done all I can,' the Skokie said. “That's the way
you'll have to be. Where is Frog?'
'I'm inside,' said Frog.
‘That's where you will have to stay,' the Skokie said.
'I've had enough of both of you. Enough, and these
pieces left over. I will just take them with me. Maybe I
can make someone else out of them.'
That is the way the Shelni still is, put together all
wrong. In his wrong form he walks the country by
night, being ashamed to go by day. Some folks are
startled when they meet him, not knowing this story.
He still plays his jug flute with the lost Skokie Wife's
voice and with Frog's voice. Listen, you can hear it
now! The Shelni goes in sorrow and pain because
nobody knows how to put him together right.
The Skokie never did find his lost wife.
This is how it is told.
And then there was the second story that we
recorded yesterday, the last story, though we did not
know it then, that we would record of the Shelni:
190 Strange
Strange Doings
The Singing Pigs
This is how they say it.
We have the ancient story of the singing pigs who sing
so loud that they fly up into the sky on the tail of their
own singing. Now we ourselves, if we can sing loud
enough, if we can jug the flutes strong enough, if we can
tang the tines deep enough, will get to be the Singing
Pigs of our own story. Many already have gone away as
.
Singing Pigs.
There come certain bell men with music carts. They
play rangle-dangle Sky music. They come for love of us.
And if we can hurry fast enough when they come we
can go with them, we can ride a tin can over the sky.
Bong! bong! that is the bell man with the music cart
now! All the Shelni hurry! This is the day you may get
to go. Come all you Shelni from the valley and the
stream and jump on the cart for the free ride. Come all
the Shelni from the meadows and the woods. Come up
from the tree roots and the holes underground. The
Skokie don't get to go, the Frogs don't get to go, only
the Shelni get to go.
Cry if the cart is too full and you don't get to go
today, but don't cry too long. The bell men say that
they will come back tomorrow and every day till there
are no Shelni left at all.
‘Come all you little Singing-Pig-Shelni, a bell man
shouts. 'Come get your free rides in the tin cans all the
way to Earth! Hey, Ben, what other animal jumps onto
the slaughter wagon when you only ring a bell? Come
along little Shelni-Pigs, room for ten more on this
wagon. That's all, that's all. We'll have lots more wagons
going tomorrow. We'll take all of you, all of you! Hey,
Ben, did you ever see little pigs cry when there's no
more room for them on the slaughter wagon?' These are
the high kind words that a bell man speak for love of us.
Ride a Tin Can
191
Not even have to give a burial tooth or other tooth to
pay for the ride. Frogs can't go, Skokies can't go, only
,
the Shelni get to go!
Here are the wonderful things! From the wagon, the
Shelni get to go to one room where all their bones are
taken out. This does never happen to Shelni before. In
another room the Shelni are boiled down to only half
their size, little as little boy Shelni. Then they all get to
play the game and crawl into the tin cans. And then
they get their free ride in the tin cans all the way to
Earth. Ride a tin can!
Wipe off your sticky tears you who miss the music
cart today. Go to sleep early tonight and rise early
tomorrow. Sing your loudest tomorrow so the bell men
will know where to come. Jug the flutes very strong
tomorrow, tang the tines deep, say whoop! whoop! here
we are, bell men.
All laugh when they go with the bell men in the
music cart. But there is story that someday a Shelni
woman will cry instead of laugh when they take her.
What can be the matter with this woman that she will
cry? She will cry out ‘Damn you, it's murder! They're
almost people! You can't take them! They're as much
people as I am. Double damn you, you can't take me!
I'm human. I know I look as funny as they do but I'm
human. Oh, oh, oh!' This is the funniest thing of the
story, the prophecy thing part.
Oh, oh, oh, the woman will say, Oh, oh, oh, the jug
flutes will echo it. What will be the matter with the
Shelni woman who cries instead of laughs?
This is our last story, wherever it is told. When it is
told for the last time, then there will be no more stories
here, there will be no more Shelni. Who needs stories
and jug flute music who can ride a tin can?
That is how it has been said.
`192 Strange Doings
Then we went out (for the last time, as it happened)
from the Shelni burrow. And, as always, there was the
riming with the five-year-old Ancient who guarded the
place:
“What to crowing?"
“Got to going.”
“Jinx on Jolly,
Golly, Holly!”
“Were it other,
Bug, my brother!”
“Holly crying.
Sing her flying,
Jugging, shouting.”
“Going outing.”
Now this was remarkable. Holly Harkel was crying
when we came out of the burrow for the (as it hap-
pened) last time. She was crying great goblin tears. I
almost expected them to be
green.
Today I keep thinking how amazingly the late Holly
Harkel had finally come to look like the Shelni. She was
a Shelni. “It is all the same with me now,” she said this
morning. “Would it be love if they should go and I
should stay?”
It is a sticky business. I tried to complain, but those
people were still ringing that bell and chanting “All you
little Pig-Shelni-Singers come jump on the cart. Ride a
tin can to Earth! Hey, Ben, look at them jump on the
slaughter wagon!”
“It was inexcusable,” I said. “Surely you could tell a
human from a Shelni."
“Not that one,” said a bell ringer. “I tell you they all
jumped on the wagon willingly, even the funny looking
>
a
Ride a Tin Can
a
193
one who was crying. Sure, you can have her bones, if
you can tell which ones they are.”
I have Holly's bones. That is all. There was never a
creature like her. And now it is over with.
But it is not over!
Singing Pig Breakfast Food Company, beware! There
will be vengeance!
It has been told.
Aloys
He had flared up more brightly than anyone in memory.
And then he was gone. Yet there was ironic laughter
where he had been; and his ghost still walked. That was
the oddest thing: to encounter his ghost.
It was like coming suddenly on Halley's Comet drink-
ing beer at the Plugged Nickle Bar, and having it deny
that it was a celestial phenomenon at all, that it had ever
been beyond the sun.
For he could have been the man of the century, and
now it was not even known if he was alive. And if he
were alive, it would be very odd if he would be hanging
around places like the Plugged Nickel Bar.
This all begins with the award. But before that it
begins with the man.
Professor Aloys Foulcault-Oeg was acutely embar-
rassed and in a state of dread.
“These I have to speak to, all these great men. Is even
glory worth the price when it must be paid in such
coin?"
Aloys did not have the amenities, the polish, the tact.
194
Aloys 195
A child of penury, he had all his life eaten bread that
was part sawdust, and worn shoes that were part card-
board. He had an overcoat that had been his father's,
and before that his grandfather's, willed for generations
to the eldest son.
This coat was no longer handsome, its holes being
stuffed and quilted with ancient rags. It was long past its
years of greatness, and even when Aloys had inherited it
as a young man it was in the afternoon of its life. And
yet it was worth more than anything else he owned in
the world.
Professor Aloys had become great in spite of-or
because of?-his poverty. He had worked out his finest
theory, a series of nineteen interlocked equations of
cosmic shapeliness and simplicity. He had worked it out
on a great piece of butchers' paper soaked with lamb’s
blood, and had so given it to the world.
And once it was given, it was almost as though
nothing else could be added on any subject whatsoever.
Any further detailing would be only footnotes to it and
all the sciences no more than commentaries.
Naturally this made him famous. But the beauty of it
was that it made him famous, not to the commonalty of
mankind (this would have been a burden to his sensi-
tively tuned soul), but to a small and scattered class of
extremely erudite men (about a score of them in the
world). By them his worth was recognized, and their
recognition brought him almost complete satisfaction.
But he was not famous in his own street or his own
quarter. And it was in this stark conglomerate of dark-
souled alleys and roofs that Professor Aloys had lived all
his life till just thirty-seven days ago.
When he received the announcement, award, and invi-
196 Strange Doings
tation, he quickly calculated the time. It was not very
long to allow for traveling halfway around the world.
Being locked out of his rooms, as he often was, he was
unencumbered with baggage or furniture, and he left for
the ceremony at once.
With the announcement, award, and invitation, there
had also been a check; but as he was not overly familiar
with the world of finance or with the English language
in which the check was drawn, he did not recognize it
for what it was. Having used the back of it to write
down a formula that had crept into his mind, he shoved
the check, forgotten, into one of the pockets of his
greatcoat.
For three days he rode the riverboat to the port city
hidden and hungry. There he concealed himself on an
ocean tramp. That he did not starve on this was due to
the caprice of certain lowlifes who discovered him, for
they made him stay hidden in a terrible bunker, and
every day they passed in a bucket to him. And some-
times this contained food. But sometimes offal.
Then, several ports and many days later, he left the
ship like a crippled, dirty animal. And it was in That
City and on That Day. For the award was to be that
evening.
>
“All these I have to speak to, all these wonderful men
who are higher than the grocers, higher even than the
butchers. These men get more respect than a policeman,
than a canal boat captain. They are wiser than a mayor
and more honored than a merchant. They know arts
more intricate than a clock-maker's and are virtuous
beyond the politicians. More perspicacious than editors,
more talented than actors, these are the great men of
Aloys 197
the world. And I am only Aloys, and now I am too
ragged and dirty even to be Aloys anymore. I am no
longer a man with a name.”
For he was very humble as he walked the great town
where even the shop girls dressed like princesses, and all
the restaurants were so fine that only the rich people
would have dared to go into them at all. Had there been
poor people (and there were none) there would have
been no place for them to eat. They would have starved.
“But it is to me that they have given the prize. Not to
Schellendore and not to Ottleman, not to Francks nor
Timiryaseff, not even to Piritim-Kess, the latchet of
whose shoe I am not-but why do I say that?-he is not
after all very bright-all of them are inadequate in some
way-the only one who was ever able to get to the heart
of these great things was Aloys Foulcault-Oeg, who
happens to be myself. It is a strange thing that they
should honor me, and yet I believe they could not have
made a better choice.”
So pride and fear warred in him, but it was always the
pride that lost. For he had only a little bit of pride,
undernourished and on quaking ground, and against it
were a whole legion of fears, apprehensions, shames,
dreads, embarrassments, and nightmarish bashfulnesses.
He begged a little bit when he found a poor part of
town. But even here the people were of the rich poor,
not of the poor as he had known them.
When he had money in his pocket, he had a meal.
Then he went to the Jiffy Quick While You Wait Clean-
ers Open Day and Night to have his clothes cleaned. He
wrapped himself in dignity and a blanket while he
waited, as many years before he had had to forego the
luxury of underclothes. And as the daylight was coming
to an end they brought his clothes back to him.
a
198
Strange Doings
“We have done all we could do," they told him. “If
we had a day or a week or a month we might do a little
more, but not much. We have not done anything at all
to the greatcoat. The workers were afraid of it. They
said it barked at them.”
“Yes, sometimes it will do that.”
Then he went out into the town, cleaner than he had
been in many days, and he walked to the hall of the
Commendation and Award. Here he watched all the
great men arrive in private cars and taxis: Ergodic
Eimer, August Angstrom, Vladimir Vor. He watched
them and thought of what he would say to them, and
then he realized that he had forgotten his English.
“I remember Sir or Madam as the Case May Be. I
remember Dog, that is the first word I ever learned, but
what will I say to them about a dog? I remember house
and horse and apple and fish. Oh, now I remember the
entire language. But what if I forget it again? Would it
not be an odd speech if I could only say apple and fish
and house and dog? I would be shamed.”
He wished he were rich and could dress in fine white
like the streetsweepers, or in black leather like the
newsboy on the corner. He saw Edward Edelsteim and
Christopher Cronin enter and he cowed on the street
and knew that he would never be able to talk to those
great men.
A fine gentleman came out and walked directly to
him.
“
“You are the great Professor Foulcault-Oeg? I would
have known you anywhere. True greatness shines from
you. Our city is honored tonight. Come inside and we
will go to a little room apart, for I see that you will have
Aloys 199
to compose yourself first. I am Graf-Doktor Hercule
Bienville-Stravroguine.”
Why he ever said he was the Graf-Doktor is a mys-
tery, because he was Willy McGilly and the other was
just a name that he made up that minute.
Within they went to a small room behind the cloak
room. But here, in spite of the smooth kindness of the
gracious gentleman, Aloys knew that he would never be
able to compose himself. He was an épouvantail, a
pugalo, a clown, a ragamuffin. He looked at the nine-
teen-point outline of the address he was to give. He
shuddered and quaked, he gobbled like a turkey. He
sniffled and he wiped his nose on his sleeve. He was
terrified that the climax of his life's work should find
him too craven to accept it. And he discovered that he
had forgotten his English again.
“I remember bread and butter, but I don't know
which one goes on top. I know pencil and penknife and
bed, but I have entirely forgotten the word for mater-
nal uncle. I remember plow, but what in the world will I
say to all those great men about a plow? I pray that this
I
cup may pass from me."
Then he disintegrated completely in one abject mass
of terror.
Several minutes went by.
But when he emerged from that room he was a
different man entirely. Erect, alive, intense, queerly
handsome, and now in formal attire, he mounted with
the sure grace of a panther to the speaker's platform.
Once only he glanced at the nineteen-point outline of
his address. As there is no point in keeping it a secret, it
was as follows: 1. Cepheid and Cerium-How long is a
Yardstick? 2. Double Trouble-Is Ours a Binary
200. Strange Doings
Universe? 3. Cerebrum and Cortex-The Mathematics of
Melancholia. 4. Microphysics and Megacyclic Poly-
neums. 5. Ego, No, Hemeis–The Personality of the
Subconscious. 6. Linear Convexity and Lateral In-
transigence. 7. Betelgeuse Betrayed–The Myth of
Magnitude. 8. Mu-Meson, the Secret of the Meta-
morphosis. 9. Theogony and Tremor, The Mathematics
of Seismology. 10. Planck's Constant and Agnesi's
Variable. 11. Diencephalon and Di-Gamma-Uncon-
scionable Thoughts About Consciousness. 12. Inverse
Squares and the Quintesimal Radicals. 13. The Chain of
Error in the Linear-B Translation-Or Where the Cretans
Really Came From. 14. Cybernetics—Or a Brain for
Every Man. 15. Ogive and Volute–Thoughts of Celestial
Curvature. 16. Conic Sections-Small' Pieces of Infinity.
17. Eschatology-Medium Thoughts About the End. 18.
Hypolarity and Cosmic Hysterisis. 19. The Invisible
Quadratic-or This Is All Simpler Than You Think.
You will immediately see the beauty of this skeleton,
and yet to flesh it would not be the work of an ordinary
man.
He glanced over it with a sure smile of complete
confidence. Then he spoke softly to the master of
ceremonies in a queer whisper with a rumble in it that
could be heard throughout the Hall.
“I am here. I will begin. There is no need for any
further introduction. It will be late by the time I fin-
ish.'
For the next three and a half hours he held that
intelligent audience completely spellbound, enchanted.
They followed, or seemed to follow, his lightning
flashes of metaphor illumining the craggy chasms of his
vasty subjects.
Aloys 201
They thrilled to the magnetic power of his voice,
urbane yet untamed, with its polyglot phrasing and its
bare touch of accent so strange as to be baffling; ancient
surely and European, and yet from a land beyond the
pale. And they quivered with interior pleasure at the
glorious unfolding in climax after climax of these before
only half-glimpsed vistas.
Here was the world of mystery revealed in all its
wildness, and it obeyed and stood still, and he named its
name. The nebula and the conch lay down together, and
the ultra-galaxies equated themselves with the zeta
mesons. Like the rich householder, he brought from his
store treasures old and new, and nothing like them had
ever been seen or heard before.
At one point Professor Timiryaseff cried out in baf-
flement and incomprehension, and Doctor Ergodic
Eimer buried his face in his hands, for even these most
erudite men could not glimpse all the shattering profun-
dity revealed by the fantastic speaker.
And when it was over they were delighted that so
much had been made known to them like a great free
gift. They had the crown without the cross, and the odd
little genius had filled them all with a rich glow.
The rest was perfunctory: commendations and testi-
monials from all the great men. The trophy, heavy and
rich but not flashy, worth the lifetime salary of a
professor of mathematics, was accepted almost care-
lessly. And then the cup was passed quietly, which is to
say the tall cool glasses went around as the men lingered
and talked with hushed pleasure.
“Gin,” said the astonishing orator. “It is the drink of
the bums and impoverished scholars, and I am both.
Yes, anything at all with it.”
Then he spoke to Maecenas, who was at his side, the
a
patron who was footing the bill for all this gracious extravagance. "The check I have never cashed, having been much in movement since I have received it. And as to n1e it is a large amount, though perhaps not to others, and as you yourself have signed it, I wonder if you would cash it for me now.'' "At once," said Maecenas, "at once. Ten minutes and we shall have the sum here. Ah, you have endorsed it with a formula! Who but the Professor Aloys Foulcault­ Oeg could be so droll? Look, he has endorsed it with a formula." "Look, look, let us copy. Why, this is marvelous. It takes us even beyond his great speech of tonight. The implications of it!" "Oh, the implications!" they said as they copied it off, and the implications rang in their heads like bells of the future. Now it has suddenly become very late, and the elated little man with the gold and gemmed trophy under one arm and the packet of bank notes in his pocket dis­ appeared as by magic. Maecenas went to his villa in the province, which is to say Long Island. And all the Professors, Doctors, and erudite gentlemen went to their homes and lodgings. But later, and after the excitement had worn off, none of them understood a thing about it at all, not even those who had comprehended part of it before the talk. And this was odd. They'd been spooked.
202 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
Professor Aloys Foulcault-Oeg was not seen again; or, if seen, he was not known, for hardly anyone would have known his face. In fact, when he had painfully
Aloys 203
released the bonds by which he had been tied in the
little room behind the back room, and had removed the
shackles from his ankles, he did not pause at all. Not for
many blocks did he even remove the gag from his
mouth, not realizing in his confusion what it was that
obstructed his speech and breathing. But when he got
it
out it was a pleasant relief.
A kind gentleman took him in hand, the second to do
so that night. He was bundled into a kind of taxi and
driven to a mysterious quarter called Wreckville. And
deep inside a secret building he was given a bath and a
bowl of hot soup. And later he gathered with others at
the festive board.
Here Willy McGilly was king. As he worked his way
into his cups, with the gold trophy in front of him, he
expounded and elucidated.
“I was wonderful. I held them in the palm of my
hand. Was I not wonderful, Oeg?”
"I could not hear all, for I was on the floor of the
little room. But from what I could hear, yes, you were
wonderful.'
It wasn't supposed that Aloys made that speech, was
it? It was stated that when he came out of that room he
was a different man entirely. Nobody but Willy McGilly
would give a talk like that.
“Only once in my life did I give a better speech,” said
Willy. “It was the same speech, but it was newer then.
That was in Little Dogie, New Mexico, and I was selling
a snake-oil derivative whose secret I yet cannot reveal.
But I was good tonight and some of them cried. And
now what will you do, Oeg? Do you know what we
are?”
“Moshennekov."
“Why, so we are!”
>
204 Strange Doings
>
"Schwindlern."
“The very word.”
“Lowlife con men. And the world you live on is not
the one you were born on. I will join you if I may."
“Oeg, you have a talent for going to the core of the
apple.”
”
>
For when a man (however unlikely a man) shows real
talent, then the Wreckville bunch have to recruit him.
They cannot have uncontrolled talent running loose in
the commonalty of mankind.
Entire And Perfect
Chrysolite
Having achieved perfection, we feel a slight unease.
From our height we feel impelled to look down. We
make our own place and there is nothing below us; but
in our imagination there are depths and animals below
us. To look down breeds cultishness.
There are the cults of the further lands and the
further peoples. The Irish and Americans and Africans
are respectable, philosophical and industrial parties, but
the cultishness is something beyond. Any addition to
the world would mar the perfect world which is the
perfect thought of the Maker. Were there an Africa
indeed, were there an Ireland, were there an America or
an Atlantis, were there the Indies, then we would be
other than we are. The tripartite unity that is the
ecumene would be broken: the habitable world-island,
the single eye in the head that is the world-globe would
be voided.
There are those who say that our rational and perfect
world should steep itself in this great unconscious
geography of the under-mind, in the outré fauna and the
incredible continents of the tortured imagination and of
205
206 Strange Doings
black legends. They pretend that this would give us
depth.
We do not want depth. We want height! Let us seal
off the under-things of the under-mind, and exalt our-
selves! And our unease will pass.
Exaltation Philosophy-Audifax O'Hanlon
>
The True Believer was sailing offshore in an easterly
direction in the latitude of fifteen degress north and the
longitude of twenty-four degrees east. To the north of
the coasting ship was the beautiful Cinnamon Coast of
Libya with its wonderful beaches and its remarkable
hotels tawny in the distance. To the east and south and
west were the white-topped waves that went on for ever
and ever. The True Believer sailed along the southern-
most edge of the ecumene, the habitable and inhabited
world.
August Shackleton was drinking Roman Bomb out of
a potbellied bottle and yelping happily as he handled
the wheel of the True Believer:
“It's a kids' thing to do,” he yipped, “but there were
never such beautiful waters to do it in. We try to call in
outer spirits. We try to call up inner spirits and lands.
It's a children's antic. Why do we do it, Boyle, other
than for the fun of it?”
“Should there be another reason, Shackleton? Well,
there is; but we go about it awkwardly and without
knowing what we're doing. The thing about humans
which nobody apparently wishes to notice, is that we're
a species which has never had an adult culture. We feel
that lack more and more as we become truly adult in
other
ways.
tedious to stretch out a childhood
forever. The easy enjoyments, the easy rationality, the
easy governments and sciences, are really childish things.
It grows
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 207
We master them while we are yet children, and we look
beyond. But there isn't anything beyond the childish-
ness, Shackleton. We must find a deeper view somehow.
We are looking for that something deeper here."
“What? By going on a lark that is childish even to
children, Boyle? I was ashamed in front of my sons
when I confessed on what sort of diversion I was going.
First there were the séances that we indulged in. If we
raised any spirits there, they were certainly childish
ones. And now we're on this voyage on the True
Believer. We're looking for the geographical home of
certain collective unconscious images! Why shouldn't
the children hoot at us? Ah well, let us not be too
ashamed. It's colorful and stimulating fun, but it isn't
adult.”
The other four members of the party. Sebastian
Linter and the three wives, Justina Shackleton, Luna
Boyle, and Mintgreen Linter, were swimming in the blue
ocean. The True Believer was coasting very slowly and
the four swimmers were clipped to outrigger towlines.
“There's something wrong with the water!” Justina
Shackleton suddenly called up to her husband. “There's
weeds in it, and there shouldn't be. There's reeds in it,
and swamp grasses. There's mud. And there's green
slime!”
“You're out of your lovely head, lovely,” Shackleton
called back. “It's all clear blue water off a sand coast. I
can see fish twenty meters down. It's clear.”
“I tell you it's full of green slime!” Justina called
back. “It's so thick and heavy that it almost tears me
away from the line. And the insects are so fierce that I
have to stay submerged.”
But they were off the Cinnamon Coast of Libya.
They could smell the warm sand, and the watered gar-
208 Strange Doings
dens ashore. There was no mud, there was no slime,
there were no insects off the Cinnamon Coast ever. It
was all clear and bright as living, moving glass.
Sebastian Linter had been swimming on the seaward
side of the ship. Now he came up ropes to the open
deck of the ship, and he was bleeding.
“It is thick, Shackleton,” he panted. “It's full of
snags and it's dangerous. And that fanged hog could
have killed me. Get the rest of them out of the water!”
“Linter, you can see for yourself that it is clear
everywhere. Clear, and of sufficient depth, and serene.”
“Sure, I see that it is, Shackleton. Only it isn't. What
we are looking for has already begun. The illusion has
already happened to all senses except sight. Stuff it,
Shackleton! Get them out of the water! The snakes and
the crocs will get them. The animals threshing around in
the mud will get them. And if they try to climb up into
the shore, the beasts there will break them up and tear
them to pieces.”
“Linter, we're two thousand meters off shore and
everything is clear. But you are disturbed. Oof, so am I!
The ship just grounded, and it's fifty meters deep here.
All right, everyone! I order everybody except my wife
to come out of the water! I request that she come out. I
am unable to order her to do anything."
The other two women, Luna Boyle and Mintgreen
Linter, came out of the water. And Justina Shackleton
did not.
“In a while, August, in a while I come,” Justina called
up to the ship. “I'm in the middle of a puzzle here and I
want to study it some more. August, can an hallucina-
tion snap you in two? He sure is making the motions."
“I don't know, lovely,” August Shackleton called
back to her doubtfully.
>
a
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 209
Luna Boyle and Mintgreen Linter had come out of
the ocean up the ropes. Luna was covered with green
slime and was bleeding variously. Mintgreen was covered
with weeds and mud, and her hands and feet were torn.
And she hobbled with pain.
“ “Is your foot broken, darling?” Sebastian Linter
asked her with almost concern, “But, of course, it is all
illusion.”
“I have the illusion that my foot is broken,” Mint-
green sniffled, “and I have the illusion that I am in very
great pain. Bleeding blubberfish, I wish it were real! It
couldn't really hurt this much.”
“Oh, elephant hokey!” Boyle stormed. “These
illusions are nonsense. There can't be such an ambient
creeping around us. We're not experiencing anything."
“Yes we are, Boyle,” Shackleton said nervously.
“And your expression is an odd one at this moment.
For the elephant was historical in the India that is, was
fantastic in the further India that is fantastic, and is still
more fanciful in its African contingency. In a moment
we will try to conjure up the African elephant which is
twice the mass of the historical Indian elephant. The
ship is dragging badly now and might even break up if
this continues, but the faro shows no physical contact.
All right, the five of us on deck will put our heads
together for this. You lend us a head too, Justina!”
“Take it, take my head. I'm about to let that jawful
snapper have my body anyhow. August, this stuff is
real! Don't tell me I imagine that smell,” Justina called.
“We will all try to imagine that smell, and other
things,” August Shackleton stated as he uncorked
another bottle of Roman Bomb. In the visible world
there was still the Cinnamon Coast of Libya, and the
blue ocean going on forever. But in another visible
>
210 Strange Doings
world, completely unrelated to the first and occupying
absolutely a different space (but both occupying total
space), were the green swamps of Africa, the sedgy
shores going sometimes back into rain forests and some-
times into savannas, the moon mountains rising behind
them, the air sometimes heavy with mist and sometimes
clear with scalding light, the fifth levels of noises, the
hundred levels of colors.
“The ambient is forming nicely even before we start,"
Shackleton purred. Some of them drank Roman Bomb
and some of them Green Canary as they readied them-
selves for the psychic adventure.
“We begin the conjure,” Shackleton said, “and the
conjure begins with words. Our little group has been
involved in several sorts of investigations, foolish ones
perhaps, to discover whether there are (or more im-
portantly, to be sure that there are not) physical areas
and creatures beyond those of the closed ecumene. We
have gone on knob-knockers, we have held séances. The
séances in particular were grotesque, and I believe we
were all uneasy and guilty about them. Our Faith for-
bids us to evoke spirits. But where does it forbid us to
evoke geographies?”
“Ease up a little on the evoking!” Justina shrilled up
at them. “The snapper just took me off at the left ankle.
I pray he doesn't like
my
taste.”
“It has been a mystery for centuries,” said August
(somewhat disturbed by his wife's vulgar outburst from
the ocean), “that out of the folk unconscious there
should well up ideas of continents that are not in the
world, continents with highly imaginary flora and fauna,
continents with highly imaginary people. It is a further
mystery that these psychic continents and islands
should be given bearings, and that apparently sane per-
>
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 211
>
sons have claimed to visit them. The deepest mystery of
all is Africa. Africa, in Roman days, was a subdivision of
Mauretania, which was a subdivision of Libya, one of
the three parts of the world. And yet the entire coast of
Libya has been mapped correctly for three thousand
years, and there is no Africa beyond, either appended or
separate. We prove the nonsense of it by sailing in clear
ocean through the middle of that pretended continent.”
"We prove the nonsense further by getting our ship
mired in a swamp in the middle of the imaginary con-
tinent and seeing that continent begin to form about
us,” said Boyle. His Green Canary tasted funny to him.
There was a squalling pungency in the air and something
hair-raisingly foreign in the taste of the drink.
“This is all like something out of Carlo Forte,” Linter
laughed unsteadily.
“The continental ambient forms about us, said
Shackleton. "Now we will evoke the creatures. First let
us conjure the great animals: the rhinoceros, the lion,
the leopard, the elephant, which all have Asian counter-
parts; but these of the contingent Africa are to be half
again or twice the size, and incomparably fierce.”
“We conjure them, we conjure them,” they all
chanted, and the conjured creatures appeared mistily.
“We conjure' the hippopotamus, the water behemoth,
with its great comical bulk, its muzzle like a scoop
shovel, and its eyes standing up like big balls—"
“Stop it, August!” Justina Shackleton shrieked from
the water. “I don't know whether the hippo is playful
or not, but he's going to crush me in a minute."
“Come out of the water, Justina!” August ordered
sternly.
“I will not. There isn't any ship left for me to come
to. You're all sitting on a big, slippery, broken tree out
a
over the water, and the snappers and boas are coming very near your legs and necks." "Yes, I suppose so, one way of looking at it," August said. "Now everybody conjure the animals that are compounded out of grisly humor, the giraffe with a neck alone that is longer than a horse, and the zebra which is a horse in a clown suit." "We conjure them, we conjure them," they all chanted. "The zebra isn't as funny as I thought it would be," Boyle complained. "Nothing is as funny as I thought it would be." "Conjure the great snake that is a thousand times heavier than other snakes, that can swallow a wild ass," Shackleton gave them the lead. "We conjure it, we conjure it," they all chanted. "August, it's over your head, reaching down out of the giant mimosa tree," Justina screamed warning from the swamp. "There's ten meters of it reaching down for you." "Conjure the crocodile," Shackleton intoned. "Not the little crocodile of the River of Egypt, but the big crocodile of deeper Africa that can swallow a cow." "We conjure it, we imagine it, we evoke it, and the swamps and estuaries in which it lives," they all chanted. "Easy on that one," Justina shrilled. "He's been tak­ ing me by little pieces. Now he's taking me by big pieces." "Conjure the ostrich," Shackleton intoned, "the bird that is a thousand times as heavy as other birds, that stands a meter taller than man, that kicks like a mule, the bird that is too heavy to fly. I wonder what delirium first invented such a wildlife as Africa's, anyhow?"
21 2 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
"We conjure it, we conjure it," they chanted .. "Conjure the great walking monkey that is three times as heavy as a man," August intoned. "Conjure a somewhat smaller one, two-thirds the size of man, that grins and gibbers and understands speech, that could speak if he wished." "We conjure them, we conjure them." "Conjure the third of the large monkeys that is dog­ faced and purple of arse." "We conjure it, we conjure it, but it belongs in a comic strip." "Conjure the gentle monster, the okapi that is made out of pieces of the antelope and camel and contingent giraffe, and which likewise wears a clo\vn suit." "We conjure it, we conjure it." "Conjure the multitudinous antelopes, koodoo, nyala, hartebeest, oryx, bongo, klipspringer, gemsbok, all so out of keeping with a warm country, all such grotesque takeoffs of the little alpine antelope." "We conjure them, we conjure them." "Conjure the buffalo that is greater than all other buffalo or cattle, that has horns as wide as a shield. Conjure the quagga. I forget its pretended appearance, but it cannot be ordinary." "We conjure it, we conjure it." "We come to the top of it all! Conjure the most anthropomorphic group in the entire unconsciousness: men who are men indeed, but who are as black as midnight in a hazel grove, who are long of ankle and metatarsus and lower limb so they can run and leap uncommonly, who have crumpled hair and are massive of feature. Conjure another variety that are only half as tall as men. Conjure a third sort that are short of stature and prodigious of hips."
E n t i r e a n d P e r f e c t C h r y s o l i t e 2 1 3
214 Strange Doings
“We conjure them, we conjure them,” they all
chanted. “They are the caricatures from the beginning.”
“But can all these animals appear at one time?” Boyle
protested. “Even on a contingent continent dredged out
of the folk unconsciousness there would be varieties of
climates and land-form. All would not be together.”
“This is rhapsody, this is panorama, this is Africa,”
said Luna Boyle.
And they were all totally in the middle of Africa, on
a slippery bole of a broken tree that teetered over a
green swamp. And the animals were around them in the
rain forests and the savannas, on the shore, and in the
green swamp. And a man black as midnight was there,
his face broken with emotion.
Justina Shackleton screamed horribly as the crocodile
sliced her in two. She still screamed from inside the
gulping beast as one might scream under water.
2
The Ecumene, the world island, has the shape of an
egg 110° from East to West and 45° from North to
South. It is scored into three parts, Europa, Asia, and
Libya. It is scored by the incursing seas, Europa from
Asia by the Pontus and the Hyrcanum Seas, Asia from
Libya by the Persian Sea, and Libya from Europa by the
Tyrrhenian and Ionian Seas (the Mediterranean Com-
plex). The most westerly part of the world is Coruna in
Iberia or Spain, the most northerly is Kharkovsk in
Scythia or Russia, the most easterly is Sining in Han or
China, the most southerly is the Cinnamon Coast of
Libya.
The first chart of the world, that of Eratosthenes, was
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 215
thus, and it was perfect. Whether he had it from primi-
tive revelation or from early exploration, it was correct
except in minor detail. Though Britain seems to have
been charted as an Island rather than a Peninsula, this
may be an error of an early copyist. A Britain unjoined
to the Main would shrivel, as a branch hewed from a
tree will shrivel and die. There are no viable islands.
All islands fade and drift and disappear. Sometimes
they reappear briefly, but there is no life in them. The
juice of life flows through the continent only. It is the
One Land, the Living and Holy Land, the Entire and
Perfect Jewel.
Thus, Ireland is seen sometimes, or Hy-Brasil, or the
American rock-lands: but they are not always seen in
the same places, and they do not always have the same
appearances. They have neither life nor reality.
The secret geographies and histories of the American
Society and the Atlantis Society and such are esoteric
lodge-group things, symbolic and murky, forms for the
initiated; they contain analogs and not realities.
The ecumene must grow, of course, but it grows
in wardly in intensity and meaning; its form cannot
change. The form is determined from the beginning, just
as the form of a man is determined before he is born. A
man does not grow by adding more limbs or heads. That
the ecumene should grow appendages would be as
grotesque as a man growing a tail.
World as Perfection-Diogenes Pontifex.
August Shackleton guffawed nervously when his wife
was sliced in two and the half of her swallowed by the
crocodile; and his hand that held the Roman Bomb
trembled. Indeed, there was something unnerving about
the whole thing. That cutoff screaming of Justina
216 Strange Doings
a
Shackleton had something shocking and unpleasant
about it.
Justina had once gone hysterical at a séance when the
ghosts and appearances had been more or less conven-
tional, but August was never sure just how sincere her
hysteria was. Another time she had disappeared for
several days from a séance, from a locked room, and had
come back with a roguish story about being in spirit
land. She was a high-strung clown with a sense of the
outrageous, and this present business of being chopped
in two was typical of her creations.
And suddenly they were all explosively creative, each
one's subjective patterns intermingling with those of the
other to produce howling chaos. What had been the ship
the True Believer, what had been the slippery over-
hanging bole, had now come dangerously down into the
swamp. They all wanted a closer look.
There was screaming and trumpeting, there was color
and
surge and threshing mass. The crocodile bellowed as
a bull might, not at all as Shackleton believed that a
croc should sound. But someone there had the idea that
a crocodile should bellow like that, and that someone
had imposed his ideate on the others. Unhorselike crea-
tures whinnied, and vivid animals sobbed and gurgled.
“Go back up, go back up!” the black man was bleat-
ing. “You will all be killed here."
His face was a true Mummers-Night black-man mask.
One of the party was imagining strongly in that stereo-
typed form. But the incongruous thing about the black
man was that he was gibbering at them in French, in bad
French as though it were his weak second language.
Which one of them was linguist enough to invent such a
black French on the edge of the moment? Luna Boyle,
of course. But why had she put grotesque French into
>
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 217
a
>
>
the mouth of a black man in contingent Africa?
“Go back up, go back up,” the black man cried. He
had an old rifle from the last century and he was
shooting the crocodile with it.
“Hey, he's shooting Justina too,” Mintgreen giggled
too gaily. “Half of her is in the dragon thing. Oh, she
will have some stories to tell about this! She has the best
imagination of all of us.”
“Let's get her out and together again,” Linter sug-
gested. They were all shouting too loudly and too ner-
vously. “She's missing the best part of it.”
“Here, here, black man,” Shackleton called. “Can
you get the half of my wife out of that thing and put
her together again?”
“Oh, white people, white people, this is real and this
is death,” the black man moaned in agony. “This is a
closed wild area. You should not be here at all. However
you have come here, whatever is the real form of that
balk or tree on which you stand so dangerously, be gone
from here if you can do it. You do not know how to
live in this. White people, be gone! It is your
lives!”
“One can command a fantasy,” said August Shackle-
ton. “Black man fantasy, I command that you get the
half of my wife out of that dying creature and put her
together again.”
“Oh, white people on dope, I cannot do this,” the
black man moaned. “She is dead. And you joke and
drink Green Bird and Bomb, and hoot like demented
children in a dream."
“We are in a dream, and you are of the dream,”
Shackleton said easily. “And we may experiment with
our dream creatures. That is our purpose here. Here,
catch a bottle of Roman Bomb!” and he threw it to the
black man, who caught it.
>
>
218 Strange Doings
>
“Drink it,” said Shackleton. “I am interested in see-
ing whether a dream figure can make incursion on
physical substance.”
“Oh, white people on dope,” the black man moaned.
“The watering place is no place for you to be. You
excite the animals, and then they kill. When they are
excited it is danger to me also who usually move among
them easily. I have to kill the crocodile who is my
friend. I do not want to kill others. I do not want more
of you to be killed.”
The black man was booted and jacketed quite in the
manner of a hunting store outfitting, this possibly by
the careful imagining of Boyle who loved hunting rig.
The black Mummers-Night mask was contorted in agony
and apprehension, but the black man did drink the
Roman Bomb nervously the while he begged them to
be
gone
from that place.
“You will notice that the skull form is quite human
and the bearing completely erect,” Linter said. “You
will notice also that he is less hairy than we are and is
thick of lip, while the great ape is more hairy and thin
of lip. I had imagined them to be the same creature
differently interpreted.”
“No, you imagine them to be as they appear,”
Shackleton said. “It is your imagining of these two
creatures that we are watching.”
“But notice the configuration of the tempora and the
mandible shape,” Linter protested, “—not what I ex-
pected.”
“You are the only one of us who knows about
tempora and mandible shape,” said Shackleton. “I tell
you that it is your own imagery. He is structured by
you, given the conventional Mummers-Night black-mask
by all of us, clothed by Boyle, and speeched by Luna
>
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 219
Boyle. His production is our joint effort. Watch it,
everyone! It becomes dangerous now, even explosive!
Man, I'm getting as hysterical as my wife! The dream is
so vivid that it has its hooks in me. Ah, it's a great
investigative experience, but I doubt if I'll want to
return to this particular experience again. Green perdi-
tion! But it does become dangerous! Watch out, every-
one!”
Ah, it had become wild: a hooting and screaming and
bawling wild Africa bedlam, a green and tawny dazzle of
fast-moving color, pungent animal stench of fear and
murder, acrid smell of human fear.
A lion defiled the watering place, striking down a
horned buck in the muddy shallows and going muzzle-
deep into the hot-colored gore. A hippo erupted out of
the water, a behemoth from the depths. Giraffes erected
like crazily articulated derricks and galloped ungainly
through the boscage.
“Enough of this!” cried Mintgreen Linter. Fright-
ened, she took the lead, incanting:
“That the noon-time nightmare pass! The crocodile-
dragon and the behemoth.'
“We abjure them, we abjure them,” they all chanted
in various voices.
“That the black man and the black ape pass, and all
black things of the black-green land.”
“We abjure them, we abjure them,” they chanted.
But the black man was already down under the feet and
horns of a buffalo creature, dead, and his last rifle shot
still echoing. He had tried to prevent the buffalo from
upsetting the teetering bole and dumping all the white
people into the murder swamp. The great ape was also
gone, terrified, back to his high-grass savannas. Many of
the other creatures had disappeared or become faint,
>
220 Strange Doings
and there was again the tang of salt water and of distant
hot-sand beaches.
“That the lion be gone who roars by day,” Luna
Boyle took up the incantation, “and the leopard who is
Pan-Ther, the all-animal of grisly mythology. That the
crushing snakes be gone, and the giant ostrich, and the
horse in the clown suit.”
“We abjure them all, we abjure them all,” everybody
chanted.
“That the True Believer form again beneath our feet
in the structure we can see and know,” August Shackle-
ton incanted.
“We conjure it up, we conjure it up,” they chanted,
and the True Believer rose again barely above the thresh-
old of the senses.
“That the illicit continents fade, and all the baleful
islands of our writhing under-minds!” Boyle blurted in
some trepidation.
“We abjure them, we abjure them,” they all chanted
contritely. And the illicit Africa had now become quite
fragile, while the Cinnamon Coast of South Libya
started to form as if behind green glass.
“Let us finish it! It lingers unhealthily!” Shackleton
spoke loudly with resolve. “Let us drop our reserva-
tions! That we dabble no more in this particular illicit-
ness! That we go no more hungering after strange
geographies that are not of proper world! That we seal
off the unsettling things inside us!”
“We seal them off, we seal them off,” they chanted.
And it was finished.
>
They were on the True Believer, sailing in an easterly
direction off the Cinnamon Coast of Libya. To the
north was that lovely coast with its wonderful beaches
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 221
and remarkable hotels. To the south and east were the
white-topped waves that went on for ever and ever. It
was over with, but the incantation had shook them all
with the sheer psychic power of it.
.
“Justina isn't with us,” Luna Boyle said nervously.
“She isn't on the True Believer anywhere. Do you think
something has happened to her? Will she come back?"
“Of course she'll come back," August Shackleton
purred. “She was truant from a séance for two days
once. Oh, she'll have some good ones to tell when she
does come back, and I'll rather enjoy the vacation from
her. I love her, but a man married to an outré wife needs
a rest from it sometimes.'
“But look, look!” Luna Boyle cried. “Oh, she's
impossible! She always did carry an antic too far. That's
in bad taste.”
The severed lower half of Justina Shackleton floated
in the clear blue water beside the True Believer. It was
bloodied and gruesome and was being attacked by slash-
ing fishes.
“Oh, stop it, Justina!” August Shackleton called
angrily. “What a woman! Ah, I see it now. We turn to
land.”
It was the opening to the Yacht Basin, the channel
through the beach shallows to the fine harbor behind.
They tacked, they turned, they nosed in towards the
Cinnamon Coast of Libya.
The world was intact again, one whole and perfect
jewel, lying wonderful to the north of them. And south
was only great ocean and great equator and empty
places of the under-mind. The True Believer came to
port passage with the perfect bright noon-time on all
things.
"Wear a mask or die," the alarmists had been saying louder and louder; and now they were saying "Wear a mask and die anyhow." And why do we so often hold the alarmists in contempt? It isn't always a false alarm they sound, and this one wasn't. The pollution of air and water and land had nearly brought the world to a death halt, and crisis was at hand as the stifling poison neared critical mass.
"Aw, dog dirt, not another air pollution piece," you say. Oh, come off of it. You know us better than that. This is not such an account as you might suppose. It will 222
INcAsEd iN ANciENT RiNd
The eye is robbed of impetus By Fogs that stand and shout: And swiftness all goes out from us And all the stars go out.
Lost Skies--O'Hanlon
1
Incased in Ancient Rind
223
not be stereotype, though it may be stereopticon.
“The lights are burning very brightly,” said Harry
Baldachin, “this club room is sealed off as tightly as
science can seal it, the air conditioning labors faithfully,
the filters are the latest perfection, this is the clearest
day in a week (likely a clearer day than any that will
ever follow), yet we have great difficulty in seeing each
other's face across the table. And we are in Mountain
Top Club out in the high windy country beyond the
cities. It is quite bad in the towns, they say. Suffocation
victims are still lying unburied in heaps.”
“There's a curious thing about that though,” Clement
Flood said. “The people are making much progress on
the unburied heaps. People aren't dying as fast as they
were even a month ago. Why aren't they?”
“Don't be so truculent about it, Clement,” Harry
said. “The people will die soon enough. All the weaker
ones have already died, I believe, and the strong ones
,
linger awhile; but I don't see how any of us can have
lungs left. There'll be another wave of deaths, and then
another and another. And all of us will go with it.”
“I won't,” said Sally Strumpet. “I will live forever. It
doesn't bother me very much at all: just makes my nose
and eyes itch a little bit. What worries me, though, is
that I don't test fertile yet. Do you suppose that the
pollution has anything to do with my not being fertile?”
“What are you chattering about, little girl?” Charles
Broadman asked. “Well, it is something to think about.
Gathering disasters usually increase fertility, as did the
pollution disaster at first. It has always been as though
some cosmic wisdom was saying 'Fast and heavy fruit
now for the fruitless days ahead.' But now it seems as if
the cosmic wisdom is saying “Forget it, this is too
O
224 Strange Doings
overmuch.' But fertility now is not so much inhibited as
delayed,” Broadman continued almost as if he knew
what he was talking about.
Sally Strumpet was a bright-eyed (presently red-eyed)
seventeen-year-old actress, and that was her stage name
only. Her real name was Joan Struthio, and she was met
for club dinner with Harry Baldachin, Clement Flood,
and Charles Broadman, all outstanding in the mentality
set, because she had a publicity man who arranged such
things. Sally herself belonged to the mentality set by
natural right, but not many suspected this fact: only
Charles Broadman of those present, only one in a hun-
dred of those who were entranced by Sally's rather
lively simpering, hardly any of the mucous-lunged
people.
“This
may be the last of our weekly dinners that I am
able to attend,” Harry Baldachin coughed. “I'd have
taken to my bed long ago except that I can't breathe at
all lying down any more. I'm a dying man now, as are all
of us.”
“I'm not, neither the one nor the other,” Sally said.
“Neither is Harry,” Charles Broadman smiled snak-
ishly, “not the first, surely, and popular doubt has been
cast on the second. You're not dying, Harry. You'll live
till you're sick of it.”
“I'm sick of it now. By my voice you know that I'm
.
dying.”
“By your voice I know that there's a thickening of
the pharynx,” Charles said. “By your swollen hands I
know that there is already a thickening of the meta-
carpals and phalanges, not to mention the carpals them-
selves. Your eyes seem unnaturally deep-set now as
though they had decided to withdraw into some interior
cave. But I believe that it is the thickening of your brow
Incased in Ancient Rind
225
ridges that makes them seem so, and the new bulbosity
of your nose. You've been gaining weight, have you
not?”
“I have, yes, Broadman. Every pound of poison that I
take in adds a pound to my weight. I'm dying, and we're
all dying.”
“Why Harry, you're coming along amazingly well. I
thought I would be the first of us to show the new signs,
and instead it is yourself. No, you will be a very, very
long time dying.”
“The whole face of the earth is dying,” Harry Balda-
chin maintained.
“Not dying. Thickening and changing,” said Charles
Broadman.
“There's a mortal poison on everything,” Clement
Flood moaned. “When last was a lake fish seen not
floating belly upward? The cattle are poisoned and all
the plants, all dying.”
“Not dying. Growing larger and weirder,” said Broad-
man.
“I am like a dish that is broken,” said the Psalmist,
“my strength has failed through affliction, and my
bones are consumed. I am forgotten like the unremem-
bered dead.”
“Your dish is made thicker and grosser, but it is not
broken,” Broadman insisted. “Your bones are not con-
sumed but altered. And you are forgotten only if you
forget.”
“Poor Psalmist,” said Sally. This was startling, for the
Psalmist had always been a private joke of Charles
Broadman, but now Sally was aware of him also. “Why,
your strength hasn't failed at all,” she said. “You come
on pretty strong to me. But my own nose is always
itching, that's the only bad part of it. I feel as though I
>
>
226 Strange Doings
were growing a new nose. When can I come to another
club supper with you gentlemen?”
“There will be no more,” Harry Baldachin hacked
through his thickened pharynx. “We'll all likely be dead
by next week. This is the last of our meetings.'
“Yes, we had better call our dinners off,” Clement
Flood choked. “We surely can't hold them every week
now.'
“Not every week,” said Charles Broadman, “but we
will still hold them. This all happened before, you
know.”
“I want to come however often they are,” Sally
insisted.
“How often will we hold them, dreamer, and we all
near dead?” Harry asked. “You say that this has hap-
pened before, Broadman? Well then, didn't we all die
with it before?”
“No. We lived an immeasurably long time, with it
before,” Charles Broadman stated. “What, can you not
read the signs in the soot yet, Harry?”
“Just how often would you suggest that we meet
then, Charles?” Clement Flood asked with weary sar-
>
casm.
.
“Oh, how about once every hundred years, gentlemen
and Sally. Would that be too often?”
“Fool,” Harry Baldachin wheezed and peered out
from under his thickening orbital ridges.
“Idiot,” Clement Flood growled from his thickening
throat.
“Why, I think a hundred years from today would be
perfect,” Sally cried. “That will be a wednesday, will it
not?”
“That was fast,” Broadman admired. “Yes, it will be
a wednesday, Sally. Do be here, Sally, and we will talk
>
Incased in Ancient Rind
227
>
>
>
>
some more of these matters. Interesting things will have
happened in the meanwhile. And you two gentlemen
will be here?”
“No, don't refuse,” Sally cut in. “You are so unim-
aginative about all this. Mr. Baldachin, say that
you
will
dine with us here one hundred years from today if you
are alive and well.”
“By the emphyseman God that afflicts us, and me
dying and gone, yes, I will be here one hundred
years
from today if I am alive and well,” Harry Baldachin said
angrily. “But I will not be alive this time next week.”
“And you say it also, Mr. Flood,” Sally insisted.
“Oh, stop putting fools' words in peoples' mouths,
little girl. Let me die in my own phlegm.”
“Say it, Mr. Flood,” Sally insisted again, “say that
you will dine with us all here one hundred years from
this evening if you are alive and well.”
“Oh, all right,” Clement Flood mumbled as he bled
from his rheumy eyes. "Under those improbable condi-
tions I will be here."
But only Sally and Charles Broadman had the quick
wisdom to understand that the thing was possible.
Fog, smog, and grog, and the people perished. And
the more stubborn ones took a longer time about perish-
ing than the others. But a lethal mantle wrapped the
whole globe now. It was poison utterly compounded, and
no life could stand against it. There was no possibility
of improvement, there was no hope of anything. It
could only get worse. Something drastic had to happen.
And of course it got worse. And of course something
drastic happened. The carbon pollution on earth
reached trigger mass. But it didn't work out quite as
some had supposed that it might.
228
Strange Doings
2
We shamble thorough our longish terms
Of Levallosian mind
Till we be ponderous Pachyderms
Incased in ancient rind.
Lost Skies--O'Hanlon
twenty miles
Oh, for one thing, no rain, or almost no rain fell on
the earth for that next hundred years. It was not missed.
Moisture was the one thing that was in abounding
plenty.
“But a mist rose from the earth and watered all the
surface of the ground.”
Rainless rain forests
grew
and
grew.
Ten million cubic
miles of seawater rose to the new forming canopy and
hung there in a covering world-cloud no more than
up. Naturally the sun and moon and stars
were seen no more on the earth for that hundred years;
and the light that did come down through the canopy
seemed unnatural. But plants turned into giant plants
and spread over the whole earth, gobbling the carbon
dioxide with an almost audible gnashing.
So there was more land, now, and wetter land. There
was a near equipoise of temperature everywhere under
the canopy. The winds were all gathered up again into
that old leather bag and they blew no more on the
earth. Beneath the canopy it was warm and humid and
stifling from pole to pole and to the utmost reaches of
the earth.
It was a great change and everything felt it. Foot-long
saurians slid out of their rocks that were warm and
moist again: and gobbled and grew, and gobbled and
Incased in Ancient Rind
229
grew, and gobbled and grew. Old buried fossil suns had
been intruded into the earth air for a long time, and
now the effect of their carbon and heat was made
manifest. Six-foot-diameter turtles, having been ready to
die, now postponed that event: and in another hundred
years, in two hundred, they would be ten-foot-diameter
turtles, thirteen-foot-diameter turtles.
The canopy, the new lowering copper-colored sky,
shut out the direct sun and the remembered blue sky,
and it shut out other things that had formerly trickled
down: hard radiation, excessive ultraviolet rays and all
the actinic rays, and triatomic oxygen. These things had
,
been the carriers of the short and happy life, or the
quick and early death; and these things were no longer
carried down.
-
There was a thickening of bone and plate on all
boned creatures everywhere, as growth continued for
added years. There were new inhibitors and new stim-
ulants; new bodies for old-no, no-older bodies for old.
Certain teeth in certain beasts had always grown for all
the beast life. Now the beast life was longer, and the
saber-tooths appeared again.
It was murky under the new canopy, though. It took
a long time to get used to it-and a long time was
provided. It was a world filled with fogs, and foggy
phrases.
'A
very
ancient and fish-like smell.'
“Just to keep her from the foggy foggy dew.'
‘There were giants on the earth in those days.'
'When Enos was ninety years old, he became the
father of Cainan. Enos lived eight hundred and fifteen
years after the birth of Cainan, and had other sons and
daughters.
230
Strange Doings
‘Behold now Behemoth, which I have made with
thee.'
‘And beauty and length of days.'
"There Leviathan stretched like a promotory
sleeps or swims.'
‘I will restore to you the years that the locust has
eaten.'
“A land where the light is as darkness,” said Job.
“Poor Job,” said Sally Strumpet.
“This is my sorrow, that the right hand of the Most
High is changed,” said the Psalmist.
“Poor Psalmist,” said Sally Strumpet.
The world that was under the canopy of the lowering
sky was very like a world that was under water. Every-
thing was incomparably aged and giantized and slow.
Bears grew great. Lizards lengthened. Human people
broadened and grew in their bones, and lengthened in
>
their years.
>
“I suppose that we are luckier than those who come
before or after,” Harry Baldachin said. “We had our
youths, we had much of our proper lives, and then we
had this.”
This was a hundred years to a day (a wednesday, was
it not?) since that last club dinner, and the four of
them, Harry Baldachin, Clement Flood, Charles Broad-
man, and Sally Strumpet were met once more in the
Mountain Top Club. Two of them, it will be remem-
bered, hadn't expected to be there.
“What I miss most in these last nine or ten decades is
colors," Clement Flood mused. “Really, we haven't
colors, not colors as we had when I was young. Too
much of the sun is intercepted now. Such aviators as
>
Incased in Ancient Rind
231
>
still go up (the blue-sky hobbyists and such) say that
there are still true colors above the canopy, that very
ordinary objects may be taken up there and examined,
and that they will be in full color as in ancient times. I
believe that the loss of full color was understood by
earlier psychologists and myth makers. In my youth, in
my pre-canopy youth, I made some studies of very
ancient photography. It was in black and white and
gray
only, just as most dreams were then in black and white
and gray only. It is strange that these two things nearly
anticipated the present world: we are so poor in color
that we nearly fall back to the old predictions. No
person under a hundred years old, unless he has flown
above the canopy, has ever seen real color. But I will
remember it.”
“I remember wind and storm,” said Harry Baldachin,
"and these cannot now be found in their real old form
even by going above the canopy. I remember frost and
snow, and these are very rare everywhere on earth now.
I remember rain, that most inefficient thing ever-but
it's pleasant in memory.”
“I remember lightning,” said Charles Broadman, “and
thunder. Ah, thunder.”
“Well, it's more than made up for in amplitude,”
Clement smiled. “There is so much more of the earth
that is land now, and all the land is gray and growing-I
had almost used the old phrase 'green and growing,' but
the color green can be seen now only by those who
ascend above the canopy. But the world is warm and
moist from pole to pole now, and filled with giant
plants and giant animals and giant food. The canopy
above, and the greenhouse diffusion effect below, it
makes all the world akin. And the oceans are so much
more fertile now-one can almost walk on the backs of the fish. There is such a lot more carbon in the carbon cycle than there used to be, such a lot more life on the earth. And more and more carbon is being put into the cycle every year." "That's true," said Harry Baldachin. "That's about the only industrialism that is still being carried out, the only industrialism that is still needed: burning coal and petroleum to add carbon to the cycle, burning it by the tens of thousands of cubic miles. Certain catastrophes of the past had buried great amounts of this carbon, had taken it out of the cycle, and the world tVas so much poorer for it. It was as if the fruit of whole suns had been buried uselessly in the earth. Now, in the hundred years since the forming or the reforming of the canopy, and to a lesser extent during the two hundred years before its forming, these buried suns have been dug up and put to use again." "The digging up of buried suns has caused all manner of mischief," Charles Broadman said. ft "You are an old fogy, Charles," Clement Flood told him. "A hundred years of amplitude have made no change at all in you." The hundred years had really made substantial changes in all of them. They hadn't aged exactly, not in the old way of aging. They had gone on growing in a new, or a very old way. They had thickened in face and body. They had become more sturdy, more solid, more everlasting. Triatomic oxygen, that old killer, was dense in the world canopy, shutting out the other killers; but it was very rare at ground level, a perfect arrangement. There was no wind under the canopy, and things held their levels well. How long persons might live now could only be guessed. It might be up to a thousand years.
232 S t r d.
n g e D o i n g s
Incased in Ancient Rind
233
marry this
“And how is the-ah-younger generation?” Harry
Baldachin asked. “How are you, Sally? We have not seen
you for a good round century.”
“I am wonderful, and I thought you'd never ask.
People take so much longer to get to the point now, you
know. The most wonderful news is that I now test
fertile. When I was seventeen I worried that I didn't test
out. The new times had already affected me, I believe.
But now my term has come around, and about time I'd
say. I'm a hundred and seventeen and there are cases of
girls no more than a hundred who are ready. I will
very
week and will have sons and daughters. I
will marry one of the last of the aviators who goes above
the
canopy. I myself have gone above the canopy
and
seen true colors and felt the thin wind.”
“It's not a very wise thing to do,” said Harry. “They
are going to put a stop to flights above the canopy, I
understand. They serve no purpose; and they are
unsettling."
“Oh, but I want to be unsettled,” Sally cried.
“You should be old enough not to want any such
thing, Sally,” Clement Flood advised. “We are given
length of days now, and with them wisdom should come
to us.”
“Well, has wisdom come?” Charles Broadman asked
reasonably. “No, not really. Only slowness has come to
>
us.
.
“Yes, wisdom, we have it now,” Harry Baldachin
insisted. “We enter the age of true wisdom. Long wis-
dom. Slow wisdom.'
“You are wrong, and unwise,” Charles Broadman said
out of his thickened and almost everlasting face. “There
is not, there has never been any such name or thing as
unqualified Wisdom. And there surely are not such
234 Strange Doings
things as Long Wisdom or Slow Wisdom.'
“But there is a thing named Swift Wisdom,” Sally
stated with great eagerness.
“There was once, there is not now, we lost it,”
Charles Broadman said sadly.
“We almost come to disagreement," Baldachin pro-
tested, “and that is not seemly for persons of the ample
age. Ah well, we have lingered five hours over the
walnuts and the wine, and perhaps it were the part of
wisdom that we leave each other now. Shall we make
these dinners a regular affair?”
“ “I want to,” Sally said.
“Yes, I'd rather like to continue the meetings at
regular intervals,” Clement Flood agreed.
“Fine, fine," Charles Broadman murmured. “We will
meet here again one hundred years from this evening.”
>
3
And some forget to leave or let
And some forget to die:
But may my right hand wither yet
If I forget the sky.
Lost Skies--O'Hanlon
We are not so simple as to say that the Baluchi-
therium returned. The Baluchitherium was of an earlier
age
of the earth and flourished under an earlier canopy.
Something that looked very like the Baluchitherium did
appear, however. It was not even of the rhinoceros
family. It was a horse grown giant and gangly. Horses of
course, being artificial animals like dogs, are quite
plastic and adaptable. A certain upper-lippiness quickly
Incased in Ancient Rind
235
appeared when this new giant animal had turned into a
giant leaf eater and sedge eater (“true” grass had about
disappeared: how could it compete with the richer and
fuller plants that flourished under the canopy?); a cer-
tain spreading of the hoofs, a dividedness more of
appearance than of fact, was apparent after this animal
had become a swamp romper. Well, it was a giant horse
and a mighty succulent horse, but it looked like the
Baluchitherium of old.
We are not so naive as to accept that the bronto-
saurus came back. No. But there was a small flatfooted
lizard that quickly became a large flatfooted lizard and
came to look more and more like the brontosaurus. It
came to look like this without changing anything except
its size and its general attitude towards the world. Put a
canopy over any creature and it will look different
without much intrinsic change.
We surely are not gullible enough to believe that the
crinoid plants returned to the ponds and the slack water
pools. Well, but certain conventional long-stemmed
water plants had come to look and behave very like the
crinoids.
All creatures and plants had made their peace with
the canopy, or they had perished. The canopy, in its
two hundredth year, was a going thing; and the blue-sky
days had ended forever.
There was still vestigial organic nostalgia for the blue-
sky days, however. Most land animals still possessed
eyes that would have been able to see full colors if there
were such colors to be seen; man himself stil possessed
such
eyes.
Most food browsers still possessed enough
crown to their teeth to have grazed grass if such an
inefficient thing as grass had remained. Many human
minds would still have been able to master the mathe-
236 Strange Doings
matics of stellar movements and positions, if ease and
the disappearance of the stellar content had not robbed
them of the inclination and opportunity for such things.
(There was, up to about two hundred years ago, a
rather cranky pseudo-science named astronomy.)
There were other vestiges that hung like words in the
fog and rank dew of the world.
And the name of the star is called Wormwood.'
'In the brightness of the saints, before the day-star.”
'It was the star-eater who came, and then the sky-
eater.'
“And the stars are not clear in his sight,” said Job.
“Poor Job,” said Sally.
>
The second hundred years had gone by, and the
diners had met at Mountain Top Club again. And an
extra diner was with them.
“Poor Sally,” said Harry Baldachin. “You are still a
giddy child, and you have already had sons and daugh-
ters. But you should not have brought your husband to
this dinner without making arrangements. You could
have proposed it this time, and had him here the next
time. After all, it would only be a hundred years.
We are not so soft-headed as to say that the Neander-
thal Men had returned. But the diners at Mountain Top
Club, with that thickening of their faces and bones and
bodies that only age will bring, had come to look very
like Neanderthals—even Sally a little.
“But I wanted him here this time,” Sally said. “Who
knows what may happen in a hundred years?"
“How could anything happen in a hundred years?"
Harry Baldachin asked.
“Besides, your husband is in ill repute,” Clement
Flood said with some irritation. “He's said to be an
a
Incased in Ancient Rind
237
>
outlaw flyer. I believe that a pickup order for his arrest
was put out some six years ago, so he may be picked up
at any time. In the blue-sky days he would have been
picked up within twenty-four hours, but we move more
graciously and slowly under the canopy."
“It's true that there's a pickup order out for me,”
said the husband. “It's true that I still fly above the
canopy, which is now illegal. I doubt if I'll be able to do
it much longer. I might be able to get my old craft up
one more time, but I don't believe I would be able to
get it down. I'll leave if you want me to.”
“You will stay,” Charles Broadman said. “You are a
member of the banquet now, and you and I and Sally
have them outnumbered.”
The husband of Sally was a slim man. He did not
seem to be properly thickened to joint and bone. It was
difficult to see how he could live a thousand years with
so slight a body. Even now he showed a certain nervous-
ness and anxiety, and that did not bode a long life.
“Why should anyone want to go above the canopy?”
Harry Baldachin asked crossly. “Or rather, why should
anyone want to claim to do it, since it is now assumed
that the canopy is endless and no one could go
above
it?”
“But we do go above it,” Sally stated. “We go for the
sun and the stars; for the thin wind there which is a type
of the old wind; for the rain even-do you know that
there is sometimes rain passing between one part of the
canopy and another?-for the rainbow-do you know
that we have actually seen a rainbow?”
“I know that the rainbow is a sour myth,” Baldachin
said.
“No, no, it's real,” Sally swore. “Do you recall the
lines of the old Vachel Lindsay: 'When my hands and
>
238 Strange Doings
my hair and my feet you kissed / When you cried with
your love's new pain / What was my name in the dragon
mist / In the rings of rainbowed rain?' Is that not
wonderful?”
Harry Baldachin pondered it a moment.
“I give it up, Sally,” he said then. “I can't deduce it.
Well, what's the answer to the old riddle? What is the
cryptic name that we are supposed to guess?”
“Forgive him," Charles Broadman murmured to the
husband and to Sally. “We have all of us been fog-bound
for too long a time below the canopy.'
“It is now believed that the canopy has always been
there,” Baldachin said stiffly.
“Almost always, Harry, but not always," Charles
Broadman answered him. “It was first put there very
early, on the second day, as a matter of fact. You likely
do not remember that the second day is the one that
God did not call good. It was surely a transient and
temporary backdrop that was put there to be pierced at
the proper times by early death and by grace. One of
the instants it was pierced was just before this present
time. It had been breached here and there for short ages.
Then came the clear instant, which has been called
glaciation or flood or catastrophe, when it was shattered
completely and the blue sky was seen supreme. It was
quite a short instant, some say it was not more than ten
thousand years, some say it was double that. It hap-
pened, and now it is gone. But are we expected to forget
that bright instant?”
“The law expects you to forget that instant, Broad-
man, since it never happened, and it is forbidden to say
that it happened,” Baldachin stated stubbornly. “And
you, man, the outlaw flyer, it is rumored that
you
have
your craft hidden somewhere on this very mountain.
In cased in Ancient Rind 239
>
Ah, I must leave you all for a moment.”
They sat for some five hours over the walnuts and
wine. It is the custom to sit for a long time after eating
the heavy steaks of any of the neo-saurians. Baldachin
returned and left several times, as did Flood. They
seemed to have something going between them. They
might even have been in a hurry about it if hurry were
possible to them. But mostly the five persons spent the
after-dinner hours in near congenial talk.
“The short and happy life, that is the forgotten
thing,” the husband of Sally was saying. “The blue-sky
interval-do you know what that was? It was the bright
-
death sword coming down in a beam of light. Do you
know that in the blue sky days hardly one man in ten
lived to be even a hundred years old? But do you know
a
that in the blue-sky days it wasn't sealed off? The sword
stroke was a cutting of the bonds. It was a release and
an invitation to higher travel. Are you not tired of living
in this prison for even two hundred years or three
hundred?”
“You are mad,” Harry Baldachin said.
Well of course the young man was mad. Broadman
looked into the young man's eyes (this man
probably no older than Sally, he likely was no more
than two hundred and twenty) and was startled by the
secret he discovered there. The color could not be seen
under the canopy, of course; the eyes were gray to the
canopy
world. But if he were above the canopy, Broad-
man knew, in the blue-sky region where the full colors
could be seen,
the
young
man's
eyes would have been
sky-blue.
“For the short and happy life again, and for the
infinite release," Sally's husband was saying. “For those
under the canopy there is no release. The short and
happy life and scorching heat and paralyzing cold. Hun-
>
was
240 Strange
Strange Doings
ger and disease and fever and poverty, all the wonderful
things! How have we lost them? These are not idle
dreams. We have them by the promise-the Bow in the
Clouds and the Promise that we be no more destroyed.
But you destroy yourselves under the canopy.
"
“Mad, mad. Oh, but they are idle dreams, young man,
and now they are over.” Harry Baldachin smiled an old
saurian smile. And the room was full of ponderous
guards.
“Take the two young ones,” Clement Flood said to
the thickened guards.
But the laughter of Sally Strumpet shivered their ears
and got under their thick skins.
“Take us?” she hooted. “How would they ever take
>
us?"
> >
>
“Girl, there are twenty of them, they will take you
easily,” Baldachin said slowly. But the husband of Sally
was also laughing.
“Will twenty creeping turtles be able to catch two
soaring birds on the high wing?” he laughed. “Would
two hundred of them be able to? But your rumor is
right, Baldachin, I do have my craft hidden somewhere
on this very mountain. Ah, I believe I will be able to get
the old thing up one more time.”
“But we'll never be able to get it down again,” Sally
whooped. “Coming, Charles?”
“Yes," Charles Broadman cried eagerly. And he
meant it, he meant it.
Those guards were powerful and ponderous, but they
were just too slow. Twenty creeping turtles were no way
able to catch those two soaring birds in their high flight.
Crashing through windows with a swift tinkle of glass,
then through the uncolored dark of the canopy world,
to the rickety craft named Swift Wisdom that would
go
>
Incased in Ancient Rind
241
up one more time but would never be able to come
down again, the last two flyers escaped through the
pachydermous canopy.
“Mad,” said Harry Baldachin.
“Insane,” said Clement Flood.
“No,” Charles Broadman said sadly. “No.” And he
sank back into his chair once more. He had wanted to
go with them and he couldn't. The spirit was willing but
the flesh was thickened and ponderous.
Two tears ran down his heavy cheeks but they ran
very slowly, hardly an inch a minute. How should things
move faster on the world under the canopy?
a
"The sea is ugly," said Sour John, " and it's peculiar that I'm the only one who ever noticed it. There have been millions of words written on the sea, but nobody has written this. For a time I thought it was just my imagination, that it was only ugly to me. Then I ana­ lyzed it and found that it really is ugly. "It is foul. It is dirtier than a cesspool; yet men who would not willingly bathe in a cesspool will bathe in it. It has the aroma of an open sewer; yet those who would not make a pilgrimage to a sewer will do so to the sea. It is untidy; it is possibly the most untidy thing in the world. And I doubt if there is any practical way to improve it. It cannot be drained; it cannot be covered up; it can only be ignored. "Everything about it is ignoble. Its animals are baser than those of the land. Its plant life is rootless and protean. It contaminates and wastes the shores. It is an open grave where the living lie down with dead." "It does smell a little, Sour John, and it is untidy. But I don't think it's ugly. You cannot deny that sometimes it is really beautiful." "I do deny it. It has no visual beauty. It is monoto-
242
li-tE Uqly SEA
The Ugly Sea
243
nous, with only four or five faces, and all of them
coarse. The sun and the sky over it may be beautiful;
the land that it borders may be fair; but the old sewer
itself is ugly.”
“Then why are you the only one who thinks so?"
“There could be several reasons. One, that I've long
suspected, is that I'm smarter than other people. And
another is that mankind has just decided to deny this
ugliness for subconscious reasons, which is to say for no
reason at all. The sea is a lot like the subconscious. It
may even be the subconscious; that was the teaching of
the Thalassalogians. The Peoples of the Plains dreamed
of the Sea before they visited it. They were guilty
dreams. They knew the sea was there, and they were
ashamed of it. The Serpent in the Garden was a Hydra, a
water snake. He ascended the river to its source to prove
that nothing was beyond his reach. That is the secret we
have always to live with: that even the rivers of Paradise
flow finally into that evil grave. We are in rhythm with
the old ocean: it rises irregularly twice in twenty-four
hours, and then repents of rising; and so largely do we.”
“Sour John, I will still love the sea though you say it
is ugly.”
“So will I. I did not say I did not love it. I only said it
was ugly. It is an open secret that God was less pleased
with the sea than with anything else he made. His own
people, at least, have always shunned it.
“O, they use it, and several times they have nearly
owned it. But they do not go to sea as seamen. In all
history there have been only three Jewish seamen. One
was in Solomon's navy; he filled a required berth, and
was unhappy. One served a Caliph in the tenth century;
why I do not know. And the third was Moysha Ufer-
wohner.”
>
244 Strange
Strange Doings
“Then let us hear about Moysha.'
“Moysha was quite a good man. That is what makes it
sad. And the oddest thing is what attracted him to the
evil sea. You could not guess it in ten years.
“Not unless it was a waterfront woman.”
“That is fantastic. Of all unlikely things that would
seem the most unlikely. And yet it's the truth and you
hit it at once. Not a woman in being, however, but in
potential (as the philosophers have it); which is to say,
quite a young girl.
“Likely you have run across her. So I will tell it all.”
This begins ten years ago. Moysha was then a little
short of his majority, and was working with his father in
an honorable trade not directly connected with the sea,
that of the loan shark. But they often loaned money to
seamen, a perilous business, for which reason the rates
were a little higher than you might expect.
Moysha was making collections and picking up a little
new trade. This took him to the smell of the sea, which
was painful to him, as to any sensible man. And it took
him to the Blue Fish, a water front cafe, bar, and
lodging house.
A twelve-year-old girl, a cripple, the daughter of the
proprietor, was playing the piano. It was not for some
time, due to the primacy of other matters, that Moysha
realized that she was playing atrociously. Then he
attempted to correct it. “Young lady, one should play
well or not at all. Please play better, or stop. That is
acutely painful.”
She looked as though she were going to cry, and this
disconcerted Moysha, though he did not know why it
did. Half an hour later the fact intruded itself on his
consciousness that she was still playing, and still playing
The Ugly Sea
245
badly; but now with a stilted sort of badness.
“Young lady, this is past all bearing. I suggest that
you stop playing the damned thing and go to your bed.
Or go anywhere and do anything. But this is hideous.
Stop it!”
The little girl really did cry then. And as a result of it
Moysha got into an altercation, got his head bloodied,
and was put out of the place; the first time that such a
thing had ever happened to him. Then he realized that
the seamen liked the little girl, and liked the way she
played the piano.
This does not seem like a good beginning for either a
tender love or a great passion. But it had to be the
beginning; that was the first time they ever saw each
other.
For the next three days Moysha was restless. A ser-
pent was eating at his liver and he could not identify it.
He began to take a drink in the middle of the day (it
had not been his custom); and on the third day he asked
for rum. There was a taste in his mouth and he was
trying to match it. And in the inner windings of his head
there was an awful smell, and it made him lonesome.
By the evening of the third day the terrible truth
came to him: he had to go down for another whiff of
that damned sea; and he possibly could not live through
another night unless hë heard that pretty little girl play
the piano again.
Bonny was pretty. She had a wise way with her, and a
willful look. It was as though she had just decided not
to do something very mean, and was a little sorry that
she hadn't.
She didn't really play badly; just out of tune and as
nobody else had ever played, with a great amount of
ringing in the ballad tunes and a sudden muting, then
246 Strange Doings
>
a sort of clashing and chiming. But she stopped playing
when she saw that Moysha was in the room.
Moysha did not get on well at the Blue Fish. He
didn't know how to break into the conversation of the
seamen, and in his embarrassment he ordered drink after
drink. When finally he became quarrelsome (as he had
never been before) they put him out of the place again.
Moysha lay on a dirty tarp out on a T head and
listened while Bonny played the piano again. Then she
stopped. She had probably been sent to bed.
But instead she came out to the T head where he was.
“You old toad, you give me the creeps.”
“I do, little girl?”
“Sure you do. And papa says ‘Don't let that Yehude
.
in the place again, he makes everybody nervous, if
someone wants to borrow money from him let them
borrow it somewhere else.' Even the dogs growl at you
down here."
“I know it.'
“Then why do you come here?”
“Tonight is the only time I ever did come except on
business.”
"Tonight is what I am talking about.”
“I came down to see you."
“I know you did, dear. O, I didn't mean to call you
that. I call everybody that.”
"Do
you
want to take it back?”
"No, I don't want to take it back. You old toad, why
aren't
you a seaman like everybody else?”
“Is everybody else a seaman?”
“Everybody that comes to the Blue Fish. How will
you come to the Fish now when Papa won't let
you
in
the place?”
"I don't know."
>
>
>
The Ugly Sea
247
“If you give me one of your cards I'll call you up.”
“Here.”
“And if you give me two dollars and a half I'll pay
you back three dollars and a quarter Saturday.”
“Here.”
“I can't play the piano any other way. If you were a
seaman I bet you'd like the way I play the piano. Good
night, you old toad.”
“Good night, Bonny.”
And it was then that the dismal thought first came to
Moysha: “What if I should be a seaman after all?”
Now this was the most terrible thing he could have
done. He could have become a Christian, he could have
married a tramp, he could have been convicted of
embezzlement. But to leave his old life for the sea
would be more than he could stand and more than his
family could stand.
And there was no reason for it: only that a twelve-
year-old girl looked at him less kindly than if he had
been a seaman. It is a terrible and empty thing to go to
sea: all order is broken up and there are only periods of
debauchery and boredom and work and grinding idle-
ness, and the sickening old pond and its dirty borders. It
was for such reasons that Moysha hesitated for three
months.
Bonny came to see him for possibly the tenth time.
She was now paying him interest of sixty cents a week
on an old debt which, in the normal state of affairs, she
would never be able to clear.
“Bonny, I wish there was something that I could say
to you.”
"You can say anything you want to me.
“O Bonny, you don't know what I mean.”
“You want to bet I don't?”
248 Strange Doings
“Bonny, what will you be doing in four years?”
“I'll be getting married to a seaman if I can find one
to take me.”
“Why shouldn't one take you?”
“For a seaman it is bad luck to marry a crippled
woman.'
So on the first day of summer Moysha went off to sea
as a lowly wiper. It broke his heart and shamed his
family. He woke and slept in misery for the foulness of
the life. He ate goy food and sinned in the
ports
in
attempting to be a salty dog. And it was nine weeks
before he was back to his home port; and he went to the
Blue Fish with some other seamen.
It was afternoon, and Bonny went for a walk with
him across the peninsula and down to the beach.
“Well, I'm thunderstruck is all I can say. Why in the
world would a sensible man want to go to sea?”'
“I thought you liked seamen, Bonny.
“I do. But how is a man going to turn into a seaman
if he isn't one to start with? A dog could turn into a fish
easier. That's the dumbest thing anyone ever did. I had
an idea when you came to the place today that you
turned into a seaman just for me. Did you?”
“Yes.”
“I could be coy and say 'Why Moysha, I'm only
twelve years old,' but I already knew how you felt. I
will tell you something. I never did a mean thing, and I
never saw anybody I wanted to be mean to till I met
you. But I could be mean to you. It would be fun to
ruin you. We aren't good for each other. You oughtn't
to see me ever again.”
“I have to."
“Then maybe I have to be mean to you. It's for both
of us that I ask you not to see me again. I don't want to
a
>
The Ugly Sea
249
>
ruin you,
and I don't want to be a mean woman; but I
will be if you keep coming around.'
“Well, I can't stay away.”
“Very well, then I'll be perverse. I'll shock you every
time I open my mouth. I'll tell you that I do filthy
things, and you won't know whether I'm lying or not.
You won't know what I mean, and you'll be afraid to
find out. You'll never be able to stay away from me if
you don't stay away now. I'll have husbands and still
keep you on a string. You'll stand outside in the dark
and look at the light in my win
window, and you'll eat your
own heart. Please go away. I don't want to turn mean.'
“But Bonny, it doesn't have to be that way.”
“I hope it doesn't, but it scares me every time I see
you. Now I'll make a bargain with you. If you try to
stay away I'll try to stay good. But if you come back
again I won't be responsible. You ought to go back
uptown and not try to be a seaman any more.”
After that the little girl went back to the Blue Fish.
Moysha did not go back uptown. He returned to the
sea, and he did not visit that port again for a year. And
there was a change in him. From closer acquaintance he
no longer noticed that the sea was foul. Once at sunset,
for a moment, he found something pleasant about it. He
no longer sinned excessively in the ports. Ashore he
traveled beyond the waterfront bars and visited the
countries behind and met the wonderful people. He got
the feel of the rough old globe in his head. In a pension
in Holland he played chess with another twelve-year-old
girl, who was not precocious, and who did not dread
turning into a mean woman. In a pub in Denmark he
learned to take snuff like the saltiest seaman of them all.
At an inn in Brittany he was told that the sea is the
heritage of the poor who cannot afford the land. It was
250 Strange Doings
in Brittany that he first noticed that he now walked like
an old salt.
After a year he went back to his home port and to
the Blue Fish.
“In a way I'm glad to see you,” said Bonny. “I've
been feeling contrary lately and you'll give me an
excuse. Every morning I wake up and say 'This day I'm
‘
going to raise hell.' Then I can't find anyone to raise hell
with. All those water rats I like so well that I can't be
mean to them. But I bet I know how to be mean to you.
Well go get a room and tell me where it is, and I'll come
to you tonight.”
“But you're only a little girl, and besides you don't
mean it.”
you think
a
“ “Then you're going to find out if I mean it. I intend
to come. If
you
love me because I'm pretty
and good, then I'll make you love me for a devil. There's
things you don't even know about, and you've been a
seaman for a year. I'll make you torture me, and it'll be
a lot worse torture to you. I'll show you what unnatural
really means. You're going to be mighty sorry you came
back."
“Bonny, your humor is cruel.”
“When did I ever have any humor? And you don't
know if I'm kidding, and you never will know. Would
you rather I did these things with someone else than
with you?”
"No."
“Well I will. If you don't tell me where your room is,
I'll
go to someone else's room tonight. I'll do things so
filthy you wouldn't believe it. And even if I don't go to
somebody, I'll tell you tomorrow that I did.”
But Moysha would not tell her where his room was.
So late that night when he left the Blue Fish she
The Ugly Sea
251
>
followed him. It was fantastic for a grown man to walk
faster and faster to escape a thirteen-year-old crippled
girl, and finally to run in panic through the dark streets.
But when finally she lost him she cried out with sur-
prising kindness: “Goodnight Moysha, I'm sorry I was
mean."
But she wasn't very sorry, for the next night she was
still mean.
“You see that old man with the hair in his ears? He's
filthy and we don't even understand each other's lan-
guage.
But he understood what I wanted well enough.
He's the one I spent last night with.”
“Bonny, that's a lie, and it isn't funny.”
“I know it isn't funny. But can you be sure that it's a
lie? I only lie part of the time, and you never know
when. Now tonight, if you don't tell me where your
room is, I'm going to take either that old red-faced
slobberer or that black man. And you can follow me,
since you run away when I follow you, and see that I go
with one of them. And you can stand out in the street
and look up at our light. I always leave the light on.”
“Bonny, why are you mean?”
“I wish I knew, Moysha, I wish I knew.”
After a week of this he went to sea again, and did not
come back to his home port for two years. He learned
of the sea-leaning giants.
“I do not know the name of this tree,” said Sour
John, “though once I knew it. This is the time of a story
where one usually says it's time for a drink. However,
for a long time I have been worried about my parasites
who are to me almost like my own children, and this
constant diet of rum and redeye cannot be good for
them. I believe if the young lady would fry me a platter
252 Strange
Strange Doings
of eggs it would please my small associates, and do me
more good than harm.”
He learned, Moysha did, of the sea-leaning giants.
They are massive trees of the islands and the more
fragmentary mainlands, and they grow almost hori-
zontal out toward the sea. They are not influenced by
the wind; from the time they are little whips the wind is
always blowing in from the sea, and they grow against it
and against all reason. They have, some of them, trunks
nine feet thick, but they always lean out over the sea.
Moysha began to understand why they did, though most
people would never understand it.
He acquired a talking bird of great versatility. He
acquired also a ring-tailed monkey and a snake that he
carried around inside his shirt, for Moysha was now a
very salty seaman.
He was prosperous, for he had never forsaken the
trade of the moneylender, and he was always a shrewd
buyer of novelties and merchandise. He turned them
over as he went from port to port, and always at a
profit.
He became a cool student of the ceaseless carnage of
the ocean, and loved to muse on the ascending and
descending corpses and their fragments in the old
watery grave.
He spent seven months on a certain Chinese puzzle,
and he worked it, the only Occidental who ever had
patience enough to do so.
When she was fifteen Bonny married a seaman, and
he was not Moysha. This happened just one week before
Moysha came back to port and to the Blue Fish. The
man she married was named Oglesby Ogburn; and if
you
think that's a funny name, you should have heard the
The Ugly Sea
253
>
a
handles of some of them that she turned down.
The very day that Moysha came to the Blue Fish was
the day that Oglesby left; for the honeymoon was over,
and he had to go back to sea. Bonny was now all
kindness to everyone. But she still put the old needle
into Moysha.
“I've had a husband for a week now, so I won't be
able to get along without a man. You stay with me
while you're in town; and after that I'll get another, and
then another and another. And by that time Oglesby
will be back for a week.”
“Don't talk like that, Bonny, even if I know you're
joking.”
“But you don't know that I'm joking. You never
know for sure."
“How can anyone who looks so like an angel talk like
that?”
“It does provide a contrast. Don't you think it makes
me more interesting? I didn't know you were the kind
who chased married women.”
“I'm not. But O Bonny! What am I to do?”
“Well I've certainly offered you everything. I don't
know how I can offer you any more.”
And a few days later when Moysha was leaving port
they talked again.
“You haven't even given me a wedding present or
wished me luck. And we do need it. It's always bad luck
for a seaman to marry a crippled woman. What are you
going to give me for a wedding present?”
“The only thing I will give you is the serpent from
.
my bosom.”
“O don't talk so flowery.”
Then he took the snake out of his shirt.
“O, I didn't know you had a real snake. Is he for me?
254
Strange Doings
That's the nicest present anyone ever gave me. What do
you call him?”
“Why, just a snake. Ular, that is, he's a foreign
.
snake."
So he went back to sea and left the little girl there
with the snake in her hands.
Bonny was a widow when she was sixteen, as every-
one had known she would be. It's no joke about it being
bad luck for a seaman to marry a cripple. They seldom
lose much time in perishing after they do it. Oglesby
died at sea, as all the Ogburns did; and it was from a
trifling illness from which he was hardly sick at all. It
was many weeks later that Moysha heard the news, and
then he hurried back to his home port.
He was too late. Bonny had married again.
“I thought you'd probably come, and I kind of
wanted it to be you. But you waited so long, and the
summer was half over, that I decided to marry Polycarp
Melish. I'm halfway sorry I did. He wouldn't let Ular
sleep with us, and he killed him just because he bit him
on the thumb.
“But I tell you what you do. What with the bad luck
and all, Polycarp won't last many months. Come around
earlier next year. I like to get married in the springtime.
I'll be a double widow then.'
“Bonny, that's a terrible way to talk even when
kidding."
“I'm not kidding at all. I even have an idea how we
can beat the jinx. I'll tell you about it after we get
married next year. Maybe a crippled girl gets to keep her
third husband."
“Do
you want Polycarp to die?"
“Of course I don't. I love him. I love all my husbands,
just like I'll love you after I marry you. I can't help it if
The Ugly Sea 255
9
I'm bad luck. I told him, and he said he already knew it;
but he wanted to do it anyhow. Will you bring me
another snake the next time you're in port?”
“Yes. And you can keep the monkey in place of it till
I come back. But you can't have the bird yet. I have to
keep someone to talk to."
“All right. Please come in the spring. Don't wait till
summer again or it'll be too late and I'll already be
married to someone else. But whether we get married or
not, I'm never going to be mean again. I'm getting too
old for that."
So he went to sea again happier than he ever had
before.
When she was seventeen Bonny was a widow again as
everyone had known she would be. Polycarp had been
mangled and chopped to pieces in an unusual accident
in the engine room of his ship.
Moysha heard of it very soon, before it could have
been heard of at home. And he took council with his
talking bird, and with one other, technically more
human.
“This other,” said Sour John, “was myself. It was
very early spring, and Moysha was wondering if it were
really best to hurry home and marry Bonny.
“ 'I am not at all superstitious,' he said. 'I do not
believe that a crippled woman is necessarily bad luck to
seamen. But I believe that Bonny may be bad luck to
everyone, including herself.'
“We were on a chocolate island of a French flavor
and a French name. On it were girls as pretty as Bonny,
and without her reputation for bad luck: girls who
would never be either wives or widows. And there is a
way to go clear around the world from one such place
to another.
256 Strange Doings
“ 'The Blue Fish is not necessarily the center of the
earth,' I told him. 'I have always believed it to be a little
left of center. And Bonny may not be the queen. But if
you think that she is, then for you she is so. Nine
months, or even a year is not very long to live, and you
will be at sea most of the time. But if you think a few
weeks with the little girl is enough, then it is enough for
you. A lot of others who will not have even that will be
dead by next Easter.' I said this to cheer him up. I was
always the cheerful type.
“ 'And what do you think?' Moysha asked the talking
bird.
‘Sampah,' said the bird in his own tongue. This
means rubbish. But whether he meant that the supersti-
tion was rubbish, or the idea of marrying with a conse-
quent early death was rubbish, is something that is still
locked up in his little green
head."
Moysha hurried home to marry Bonny. He brought a
brother of Ular for a present, and he went at once to the
Blue Fish.
“Well you're just in time. I was going to have the
banns read for me and somebody tomorrow, and if
you'd been an hour later it wouldn't have been you.”
“I was halfway afraid to come.”
“You needn't have been afraid. I told you I knew a
way to beat the jinx. I'm selling the Blue Fish. I wrote
you that Papa was dead. And we're going to take a
house uptown and forget the sea.
“Forget the sea? How could anyone forget the sea?”
“Why, you're only a toy seaman. You weren't raised
to it. When you go away from it you won't be a seaman
at all. And crippled women are only bad luck to seamen,
not to other men.”
“But what would I do? The sea is all I know.”
“Don't be a child, Moysha. You hate the sea,
The Ugly Sea
257
remember? You always told me that you did. You only
went to sea because you thought I liked seamen. You
know a hundred ways to make a dollar, and
you
don't
have to go near the sea for any of them.”
So they were married. And they were happy. Moysha
discovered that Bonny was really an angel. Her devil talk
had been a stunt.
It was worth all five dark years at sea to have her. She
was now even more lovely than the first night he had
seen her. They lived in a house uptown in the heart of
the city, and were an urbane and civilized couple. And
three years went by.
Then one day Bonny said that they ought to get rid
of the snake, and maybe even the monkey. She was
afraid they would bite one of the children, or one of the
children would bite them.
The talking bird said that if his friends left he would
leave, too.
“But Bonny,” said Moysha, “these three are all that I
have to remind me of the years when I was a seaman.”
“You have me, also. But why do you want to be
reminded of those awful days?”
“I know what we could do, Bonny. We could buy the
Blue Fish again. It isn't doing well. We could live there
and run it. And we could have a place there for the
snake and the monkey and the bird.”
“Yes, we could have a place for them all, but not for
the children. That is no place to raise children. I know,
and I was raised there. Now my love, don't be difficult.
Take the three creatures and dispose of them. And
remember that for us the sea isn't even there any more.”
.'
But it was still there when he went down to the Blue
Fish to try to sell the three creatures to the seaman. An
old friend of his was present and was looking for an
engineer first class to ship out that very night. And there
258
Strange Doings
was a great difficulty in selling the creatures.
He could not sell them unless he put a price on them,
and he was damned if he'd do that. That was worse than
putting a price on his own children. He had had them
longer than his children, and they were more peculiarly
his own. He could not sell them. And he could not go
home and tell his wife that he could not sell them.
“He went out and sat on the horns of the dilemma
and looked at the sea. And then his old friend (who
coincidentally was myself),” said Sour John, “came out
and said that he sure did need an engineer first class to
leave that very night.
“And then what do you think that Moysha did?”
“O, he signed on and went back to sea.'
Sour John was thunderstruck.
“How did you know that? You've hit it again. I never
will know how you do it. Well, that's what he did. In
the face of everything he left his beautiful wife and
children, and his clean life, and went to the filthy sea
again. It's incredible.”
“And how is he doing now?”.
“God knows. I mean it literally. Naturally he's dead.
That's been a year. You don't expect a seaman married
to a crippled woman to live forever do you?”
“And how is Bonny?”
“I went to see her this afternoon; for this is the port
where it all happened. She had out an atlas and a pencil
and piece of string. She was trying to measure out what
town in the whole country is furthest from the sea.
“She is lonely and grieves for Moysha, more than for
either of her other husbands. But O she is lovely! She
>
The Ugly Sea
259
supports herself and her brood by giving piano lessons.”
“Is there a moral to this?”
“No. It is an immoral story. And it's a mystery to me.
A man will not normally leave a clean home to dwell in
an open grave, nor abandon children to descend into a
sewer, nor forswear a lovely and loving wife to go faring
on a cesspool, knowing that he will shortly die there as a
part of the bargain.
“But that is what he did.”
Cliffs That Laughed
“Between ten and ten-thirty of the morning of
October 1, 1945, on an island that is sometimes called
Pulau Petir and sometimes Willy Jones Island (neither of
them its map name), three American soldiers dis-
appeared and have not been seen since.
“I'm going back there, I tell you! It was worth it. The
limbs that laughed! Let them kill me! I'll get there! Oh,
here, here, I've got to get hold of myself.
“The three soldiers were Sergeant Charles Santee of
Orange, Texas; Corporal Robert Casper of Gobey, Ten-
nessee; and PFC Timothy Lorrigan of Boston which is in
one of the eastern states. I was one of those three
soldiers.
“I'm going back there if it takes me another twenty
years!”
No, no, no! That's the wrong story. It happened on
Willy Jones Island also, but it's a different account
entirely. That's the one the fellow told me in a bar years
later, just the other night, after the usual “Didn't I used
to know you in the Islands?"
a
“One often makes these little mistakes and false
260
Cliffs That Laughed 261
>
,
says 'Hell,
starts,” Galli said. “It is a trick that is used in the trade.
One exasperates people and pretends to be embarrassed.
And then one hooks them."
Galli was an hereditary storyteller of the Indies.
“There is only one story in the world,” he said, “and it
pulls two ways. There is the reason part that says 'Hell,
it can't be' and there is the wonder part
that
maybe it is.' ” He was the storyteller, and he offered to
teach me the art.
For we ourselves had a hook into Galli. We had
something he wanted.
“We used the same stories for a thousand years,” he
said. “Now, however, we have a new source, the Amer-
ican Comic Books. My grandfather began to use these in
another place and time, and I use them now. I steal
them from your orderly tents, and I have a box full of
them. I have Space Comics and Commander Midnight; I
have Galactic Gob and Mighty Mouse and the Green
Hornet and the Masked Jetter. My grandfather also had
copies of some of these, but drawn by older hands. But
I do not have Wonder Woman, not a single copy. I
would trade three-for-one for copies of her. I would pay
a premium. I can link her in with an island legend to
create a whole new cycle of stories, and I need new stuff
all the time. Have you a Wonder Woman?”
When Galli said this, I knew that I had him. I didn't
have a Wonder Woman, but I knew where I could steal
one. I believe, though I am no longer sure, that it was
Wonder Woman Meets the Space Magicians.
I stole it for him. And in gratitude Galli not only
taught me the storyteller's art, but he also told me the
following story:
.
.
“Imagine about flute notes ascending,” said Galli. “I
haven't my flute with me, but a story should begin so to set the mood. Imagine about ships coming out of the Arabian Ocean, and finally to Jilolo Island, and still more finally to the very island on which we now stand. Imagine about waves and trees that were the great­ great-grandfathers of the waves and trees we now have.'' It was about the year 1 620, Galli is telling it, in the late afternoon of the high piracy. These Moluccas had already been the rich Spice Islands for three hundred years. Moreover, they were on the road of the Manila galleons coming from Mexico and the Isthmus. Arabian, Hindu, and Chinese piracy had decayed shamefully. The English were crude at the business. In trade the Dutch had become dominant in the Islands and the Portuguese had faded. There was no limit to the opportunities for a courageous and dedicated raider in the Indies. They came. And not the least of these new raiding men was Willy Jones. It was said that Willy Jones was a Welshman. You can believe it or not as you like. The same thing has been said about the Devil. Willy was twenty-five years old when he finally possessed his own ship with a mixed crew. The ship was built like a humpbacked bird, with a lateen sail and suddenly-appearing rows of winglike oars. On its prow was a swooping bird that had been carved in Muskat. It was named the Flying Serpent, or the Feathered Snake, depending on what language you use.
262 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
'Pause a moment,' said Galli. 'Set the mood. Imagine about dead men variously. We come to the bloody stuff at once.'
One early morning, the Feathered Snake overtook a tall Dutchman. The ships were grappled together, and
Cliffs That Laughed 263
the men from the Snake boarded the Dutch ship. The
men on the Dutchman were armed, but they had never
seen such suddenness and savagery as shown by the dark
men from the Snake. There was slippery blood on the
decks, and the croaking of men being killed.
'I forgot to tell you that this was in the passage
between the Molucca Sea and the Banda,' Galli said.
The Snake took a rich small cargo from the Dutch
ship, a few ablebodied Malay seamen, some gold specie,
some papers of record, and a dark Dutch girl named
Margaret. These latter things Willy Jones preempted for
himself. Then the Snake devoured that tall Dutchman
and left only a few of its burning bones floating in the
ocean.
.
'I forgot to tell you that the tall Dutch ship was
named the Luchtkastell,' Galli said.
Willy Jones watched the Luchtkastell disappearing
under the water. He examined the papers of record, and
the dark Dutch girl Margaret. He made a sudden decis-
ion: He would cash his winnings and lay up for a season.
He had learned about an island in the papers of
record. It was a rich island, belonging to the richest of
the Dutch spice men who had gone to the bottom with
the Luchtkastell. The fighting crew would help Willy
Jones secure the island for himself; and in exchange, he
would give them his ship and the whole raiding territory
and the routes he had worked out.
Willy Jones captured the island and ruled it. From the
ship he kept only the gold, the dark Dutch girl Margaret,
and three golems which had once been ransom from a
Jew in Oman.
'I forgot to tell you that Margaret was the daughter of
the Dutch spice man who had owned the island and the
tall ship and who was killed by Willy,' Galli said, “and
264
Strange Doings
the island really belonged to Margaret now as the
daughter of her father.'
For one year Willy Jones ruled the small settlement,
drove the three golems and the men who already lived
there, had the spices gathered and baled and stored
(they were worth their weight in silver), and built the
Big House. And for one year he courted the dark Dutch
girl Margaret, having been unable to board her as he had
all other girls.
She refused him because he had killed her father,
because he had destroyed the Luchtkastell which was
Family and Nation to her, and because he had stolen her
island.
This Margaret, though she was pretty and trim as a
kuching, had during the affair of the Feathered Snake
and the Luchtkastell twirled three seamen in the air like
pinwheels at one time and thrown them all into the
ocean. She had eyes that twinkled like the compounded
eyes of the devil-fly; they could glint laughter and fury
at the same time.
“Those girls were like volcanoes,” the man said.
,
.
“Slim, strong mountains, and we climbed them like
mountains. Man, the uplift on them! The shoulders were
cliffs that laughed. The swaying,”
No, no! Belay that last paragraph! That's from the
ramble of the fellow in the bar, and it keeps intruding.
'I forgot to tell you that she reminds me of Wonder
Woman, 'Galli said.
Willy Jones believed that Margaret was worth winning
unbroken, as he was not at all sure that he could break
her. He courted her as well as he could, and he used to
Cliffs That Laughed 265
advantage the background of the golden-green spicery
on which they lived.
'Imagine about the Permata bird that nests on the
moon,' Galli said, “and which is the most passionate as
well as the noblest-singing of the birds. Imagine about
flute notes soaring.'
Willy Jones made this tune to Margaret:
The Nutmeg Moon is the third moon of the year.
The Tides come in like loose Silk all its Nights.
The Ground is animated by the bare Feet of Margaret
Who is like the Pelepah of the Ko-eng Flower.
Willy made this tune in the Malaya language in which
all the words end in ang.
'Imagine about water leaping down rocky hills,' Galli
said. “Imagine about red birds romping in green groves.'
Willy Jones made another tune to Margaret:
A Woman with Shoulders so strong that a Man
might ride
upon
them
The while she is still the little Girl watching for the
black Ship
Of the Hero who is the same age as the Sky,
But she does not realize that I am already here.
Willy made this tune in the Dutch language in which
all the words end in lijk.
'Imagine about another flute joining the first one, and
their notes scamper like birds,' Galli said.
Willy Jones made a last tune to Margaret:
Damnation! That is enough of Moonlight and
Tomorrows!
Now there are mats to plait, and kain to sew.
Even the smallest crab knows to build herself a
house in the sand.
Margaret should be raking the oven coals and
baking a roti.
266 Strange Doings
I wonder why she is so slow in seeing this.
Willy made this tune in the Welsh language in which
all the words end in gwbl.
When the one year was finished, they were mated.
There was still the chilliness there as though she would
never forgive him for killing her father and stealing her
island; but they began to be in accord.
you
'Here pause five minutes to indicate an idyllic inter-
‘
lude,' Galli said. "We sing the song Bagang Kali Berjumpa
if know the tune. We flute, if I have my flute.'
The idyllic interlude passed.
Then Willy's old ship, the Feathered Snake, came
back to the Island. She was in a pitiful state of misuse.
She reeked of old and new blood, and there were none
left on her but nine sick men. These nine men begged
Willy Jones to become their captain again to set every-
thing right.
Willy washed the nine living skeletons and fed them
up for three days. They were fat and able by then. And
the three golems had refitted the ship.
“All she needs is a stong hand at the helm again,” said
Willy Jones. “I will sail her again for a week and a day. I
will impress a new crew, and once more make her the
terror of the Spice Islands. Then I will return to my
island, knowing that I have done a good deed in restor-
ing the Snake to the bloody work for which she was
born."
“If you go, Willy Jones, you will be
many
years,” said the dark Dutch Margaret.
“Only one at the most,” said Willy.
“And I will be in my grave when you return.”
“There is no grave could hold you, Margaret."
“Aye, it may not hold me. I'll out of it and confront
gone for
Cliffs That Laughed
267
>
you
when
you come back. But it gives one a weirdness
to be in the grave for only a few years. I will not own
you for my husband when you do come back. You will
not even know whether I am the same woman that you
left, and you will never know. I am a volcano, but I
banked my hatred and accepted you. But if you leave
me now, I will erupt against you forever.”
I
But Willy Jones went away in the Flying Serpent and
left her there. He took two of the golems with him, and
he left one of them to serve Margaret.
What with one thing and another, he was gone for
twenty years.
“We were off that morning to satisfy our curiosity
about the Big House,” the fellow said, “since we would
soon be leaving the island forever. You know about the
Big House. You were on Willy Jones Island too. The
Jilolos call it the House of Skulls, and the Malaya and
Indonesia people will not speak about it at all.
“We approached the Big House that was not more
than a mile beyond our perimeter. It was a large de-
cayed building, but we had the sudden feeling that it
was still inhabited. And it wasn't supposed to be. Then
we saw the two of them, the mother and the daughter.
We shook like we were unhinged, and we ran to them.
“They were so alike that we couldn't tell them apart.
Their eyes twinkled like the compounded eyes of a
creature that eats her mate. Noonday lightning! How it
struck! Arms that swept you off your feet and set your
bones to singing! We knew that they were not twins, or
even sisters. We knew that they were mother and
daughter.
“I have never encountered anything like them in my
life! Whatever happened to the other two soldiers, I
know it was worth it to them. Whatever happened to
268
Strange Doings
don't care if they kill me! They were perfect, those two
women, even though we weren't with them for five
minutes."
“Then it was the Badger.”
)
No, no, no! That's the wrong story again. That's not
the story Galli told me. That's part of the story the
fellow told me in the bar. His confused account keeps
interposing itself, possibly because I knew him slightly
when we were both soldiers on Willy Jones Island. But
he had turned queer, that fellow. “It is the earthquake
belt around the world that is the same as the legend
belt,” he said, "and the Middleworld underlies it all.
That's why I was able to walk it.” It was as though he
had been keel-hauled around the world. I hadn't known
him well. I didn't know which of the three soldiers he
was. I had heard that they were all dead. “Imagine
about conspiracy stuff now,” said Galli. “Imagine about
a whispering in a pinang grove before the sun is up.”
“How can I spook that man?” Margaret asked her
golem shortly after she had been abandoned by Willy
Jones. “But I am afraid that a mechanical man would
not be able to tell me how."
“I will tell you a secret,” said the golem. “We are not
mechanical men. Certain wise and secret men believe
that they made us, but they are wrong. They have made
houses for us to live in, no more. There are many of us
unhoused spirits, and we take shelter in such bodies as
we find. That being so, I know something of the house-
less spirits in the depth of every man. I will select one of
them, and we will spook Willy Jones with that one.
Willy is a Welshman who has become by adoption a
Dutchman and a Malayan and a Jilolo man. There is one
old spook running through them all. I will call it up
when it is time.”
>
Cliffs That Laughed 269
'I forgot to tell you that the name of Margaret's
golem was Meshuarat,” Galli said.
>
>
After twenty years of high piracy, Willy Jones re-
turned to his Island. And there was the dark Dutch
Margaret standing as young and as smouldering as when
he had left. He leapt to embrace her, and found himself
stretched flat on the sand by a thunderous blow.
He was not surprised, and was not (as he had at first
believed) decapitated. Almost he was not displeased.
Margaret had often been violent in her love-making.
“But I will have you,” Willy swore as he tasted his
own blood delightfully in his mouth and pulled himself
up onto hands and knees. “I have ridden the Margaret-
tiger before.”
“You will never ride my loins, you lecherous old
goat,” she rang at him like a bell. “I am not your wife. I
am the daughter that you left here in the womb. My
mother is in the grave on the hill.”
Willy Jones sorrowed terribly, and he went to the
grave.
But Margaret came up behind him and drove in the
cruel lance. “I told you that when you came back you
would not know whether I was the same woman you
had left," she chortled, “and you will never know!”
“Margaret, you are my wife!” Willy Jones gasped.
“Am I of an age to be your wife?” she jibed. “Regard
me! Of what age do I seem to be?”
“Of the same age as when I left," said Willy. “But
perhaps you have eaten of the besok nut and so do not
change your appearance.”
'I forgot to tell you about the besok nut,' said Galli.
'If one eats the nut of the besok tree, the tomorrow
tree, the time tree, that one will not age. But this is
270 Strange Doings
always accompanied by a chilling unhappiness.”
“Perhaps I did eat it,” said Margaret. “But that is my
grave there, and I have lain in it many years, as has she.
You are prohibited from touching either of us."
“Are you the mother or the daughter, Witch?”
“You will never know. You will see us both, for we
take turns,
and
you
will not be able to tell us apart. See,
the
grave
is always disturbed, and the entrance is easy."
“I'll have the truth from the golem who served you
while I was gone,” Willy swore.
‘A golem is an artificial man,' said Galli. “They were
made by the Jews and Arabs in earlier ages, but now
they say that they have forgotten how to make them. I
wonder that you do not make them yourselves, for you
have advanced techniques. You tell them and you pic-
ture them in your own heroic literature' (he patted the
comic books under his arm), 'but you do not have them
in actuality.”
The golem told Willy Jones that the affair was thus:
A daughter had indeed been born to Margaret. She
had slain the child, and had then put it into the middle
state. Thereafter, the child stayed sometimes in the
grave, and sometimes she walked about the island. And
she
grew as any other child would. And Margaret herself
had eaten the besok nut so that she would not age.
When mother and daughter had come to the same age
and appearance (and it had only been the very day
before that, the day before Willy Jones had returned),
then the daughter had also eaten the besok nut. Now
the mother and daughter would be of the same appear-
ance forever, and not even a golem could tell them
apart.
Cliffs That Laughed 271
>
> >
Willy Jones came furiously onto the woman again.
"I was sure before, and now I am even more sure that
you are Margaret,” he said, “and now I will have
you
in
my fury.”
“We both be Margaret," she said. “But I am not the
same one you apprehended earlier. We changed places
while
you talked to the golem. And we are both in the
middle state, and we have both been dead in the
grave,
and you dare not touch either of us ever. A Welshman
turned Dutchman turned Malayan turned Jilolo has this
spook in him four times over. The Devil himself will not
touch his own daughters.”
The last part was a lie, but Willy Jones did not know
it.
“We be in confrontation forever then,” said Willy
Jones. “I will make my Big House a house of hate and a
house of skulls. You cannot escape from its environs,
neither can any visitor. I'll kill them all and pile their
skulls up high for a monument to you.”
Then Willy Jones ate a piece of bitter bark from the
pokok ru.
'I forgot to tell you that when a person eats bark
from the pokok ru in anger, his anger will sustain itself
forever,' Galli said.
“If it's visitors you want for the killing, I and my
mother-daughter will provide them in numbers,” said
Margaret. “Men will be attracted here forever with no
heed for danger. I will eat a telor tuntong of the special
sort, and all men will be attracted here even to their
death.”
'I forgot to tell you that if a female eats the telor
tuntong of the special sort, all males will be attracted
272 Strange Doings
irresistibly,” Galli said. “Ah, you smile as though you
doubted that the besok nut or the bark of the pokok ru
or the telor tuntong of the special sort could have such
effects. But yourselves come now to wonder drugs like
little boys. In these islands they are all around you and
you too blind to see. It is no ignorant man who tells you
this. I have read the booklets from your orderly tents:
Physics without Mathematics, Cosmology without
Chaos, Psychology without Brains. It is myself, the
master of all sciences and disciplines, who tells you that
these things do work. Besides hard science, there is soft
science, the science of shadow areas and story areas, and
you
do wrong to deny it the name.
“I believe that you yourself can see what had to
follow, from the dispositions of the Margarets and Willy
Jones,” Galli said. “For hundreds of years, men from
everywhere came to the Margarets who could not be
resisted. And Willy Jones killed them all and piled up
their skulls. It became, in a very savage form, what you
call the Badger Game.”
Galli was a good-natured and unhandsome brown
man. He worked around the army base as translator,
knowing (besides his native Jilolo), the Malayan, Dutch,
Japanese and English languages, and (as every storyteller
must) the Arabian. His English was whatever he wanted
it to be, and he burlesqued the speech of the American
soldiers to the Australians, and the Australians to the
Americans.
“Man, it was a Badger!” the man said. “It was a
grizzle-haired, glare-eyed, flat-headed, underslung,
pigeon-toed, hook-clawed, clam-jawed Badger from
Badger Game Corner! They moved in on us, but I'd take
my chances and go back and do it again. We hadn't
Cliffs That Laughed 273
frolicked with the girls for five minutes when the Things
moved in on us. I say Things; I don't know whether
they were men or not. If they were, they were the
coldest three men I ever saw. But they were directed by
a man who made up for it. He was livid, hopping with
hatred. They moved in on us and began to kill us.”
No, No, that isn't part of Galli's story. That's some
more of the ramble that the fellow told me in the bar
the other evening.
It has been three hundred years, and the confronta-
tion continues. There are skulls of Malayan men and
Jilolo men piled up there; and of Dutchmen and
Englishmen and of Portuguese men; of Chinamen and
Philippinos and Goanese; of Japanese, and of the men
from the United States and Australia.
“Only this moming there were added the skulls of
two United States men, and there should have been
three of them,” Galli said. “They came, as have all
others, because the Margarets ate the telor tuntong of
the special sort. It is a fact that with a species (whether
insect or shelled thing or other) where the male gives his
life in the mating, the female has always eaten of this
telor tuntong. You'd never talk the males into such a
thing with words alone."
‘How is it that there were only two United States
skulls this morning, and there should have been three?' I
asked him.
'One of them escaped,' Galli explained, and that was
unusual. He fell through a hole to the middle land, that
third one of them. But the way back from the middle
land to one's own country is long, and it must be
walked. It takes at least twenty years, wherever one's
>
274 Strange Doings
own country is; and the joker thing about it is that the
man is always wanting to go the other way.
“That is the end of the story, but let it not end
abruptly,' Galli said. “Sing the song Chari Yang Besar if
you remember the tune. Imagine about flute notes
lingering in the air.'
“I was lost for more than twenty years, and that's a
fact,” the man said. He gripped the bar with the most
knotted hands I ever saw, and laughed with a merriment
so deep that it seemed to be his bones laughing. “Did
you know that there's another world just under this
world, or just around the corner from it? I walked all
day every day. I was in a torture, for I suspected that I
was going the wrong way, and I could go no other. And
I sometimes suspected that the middle land through
which I traveled was in my head, a derangement from
the terrible blow that one of the Things gave me as he
came in to kill me. And yet there are correlates that
convince me it was a real place.
“I wasn't trying to get home. I was trying to get back
to those girls even if it killed me. There weren't any
colors in that world, all gray tones, but otherwise it
wasn't much different from this one. There were even
bars there a little like the Red Rooster."
(I forgot to tell you that it was in the Red Rooster
bar that the soldier from the islands told me the parts of
his story.)
“I've got to get back there. I think I know the way
now, and how to get on the road. I have to travel it
through the middle land, you know. They'll kill me, of
course, and I won't even get to jazz those girls for five
Cliffs That Laughed 275
minutes; but I've got to get back there. Going to take
me another twenty years, though. That sure is a weary
walk.'
I never knew him well, and I don't remember which
of the names was his. But a man from Orange, Texas, or
from Gobey, Tennessee, or from Boston, in one of the
eastern states, is on a twenty-year walk through the
middle land to find the dark Dutch Margarets, and
death.
I looked up a couple of things yesterday. There was
Revel's recent work on Moluccan Narcotics. He tells of
the Besok Nut which does seem to inhibit aging but
which induces internal distraction and hypersexuality.
There is the Pokok Ru whose bitter bark impels even
the most gentle to violent anger. There is one sort of
Telor Tuntong which sets up an inexplicable aura about
a woman eater and draws all males overpoweringly to
her. There is much research still to be done on these
narcotics, Revel writes.
I dipped into Mandrago's Earthquake and Legend and
the Middle World. He states that the earthquake belt
around the world is also the legend belt, and that one of
the underlying legends is of the underlying land, the
middle world below this world where one can wander
lost forever.
And I went down to the Red Rooster again the next
evening, which was last evening, to ask about the man
and to see if he could give me a more cogent account.
For I had re-remembered Galli's old story in the mean-
while.
“No, he was just passing through town,” the barman
said. “Had a long trip ahead of him. He was sort of a
276 Strange Doings
nutty fellow. I've often said the same thing about you."
That is the end of the other story, but let it not end
suddenly. Pause for a moment to savor it. Sing the song
Itu Masa Dahulu if you remember the tune.
Imagine about flute notes falling. I don't have a flute,
but a story should end so.
