Does Anyone Else Have
Something Further to Add?
Stories About Secret Places and Mean Men
R. A. LAFFERTY
$607
R. A. Lafferty “has to be the maddest,
the most colorful, the most unexpected
writer alive.”
- THEODORE STURGEON
Does Anyone Else
Have Something
Further to Add
>
Here are sixteen stories of comic inven-
tiveness for the fun of it. They involve
other worlds, nasty men, and lots of
people in peculiar situations. In “The
Wierdest World,” an exile from another
planet becomes the star of a Florida rep-
tile farm. In “Mad Man," a man whose
livelihood depends upon his fierce rages
gets tired of being angry. In “The Ulti-
mate Creature," the world's meanest
man marries the universe's most beauti-
ful woman—with rather unexpected off-
spring as a result.
For the fun of it, half of the stories are
about secret places, half about mean men.
They are alternated one with the other.
R. A. Lafferty is an original. Does
Anyone Else Have Something Further
to Add will offer pleasure and entertain-
ment to anyone who enjoys the unex-
pected and the wryly bizarre.
Since the appearance of his first novel,
Past Master, in 1968, R. A. Lafferty has
published another eleven books, both
novels and short story collections. While
much of his highly praised work belongs
to the general category of fantasy and
science-fiction, he also writes what
loosely can be called historical novels.
About Mr. Lafferty's re-creation of
American Indian life, Okla Hannali, Dee
Brown has said that the book's hero,
Hannali, "should become one of the en-
during characters in the literature of the
American Indian.” Mr. Lafferty, who de-
scribes himself as a “correspondence
school electrical engineer,” lives in Okla-
homa.
Charles Scribner's Sons New York
JACKET DESIGN BY VINCENT TORRE
Does Anyone Else
Have Something
Further to Add?
Books by R. A. Lafferty
Arrive at Easterwine
The Devil Is Dead
The Fall of Rome
The Flame Is Green
Fourth Mansions
Nine Hundred Grandmothers
Okla Hannali
Past Master
The Reefs of Earth
Space Chantey
Strange Doings
Does Anyone Else
Have Something
Further to Add?
STORIES ABOUT
Secret Placus and Mean Men
BY
R. A. LAFFERTY
Charles Scribner's Sons
NEW YORK
©
Copyright © 1974, 1973, 1971, 1970, 1968,
1966, 1964, 1961 R. A. Lafferty
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Lafferty, R A
Does anyone else have something further to add?
CONTENTS: About a secret crocodile.—Mad man.—Nor
limestone islands.—The man underneath. [etc.]
1. Fantastic fiction, American. I. Title.
PZ4.L1627Do [PS3563.A28] 813'.5'4
ISBN 0-684-13827-1
74-4201
Some of these stories originally appeared
in Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine
New Mexico Quarterly, Amazing, Galaxy,
If, The Third Foundation, and
Universe I.
“Groaning Hinges of the World" by R. A. Lafferty
originally appeared in Ruins of Earth.
Copyright © 1971 Thomas M. Disch.
“The Ultimate Creature" by R. A. Lafferty
was originally published by Health
Knowledge, Inc.
This book published simultaneously in the
United States of America and in Canada-
Copyright under the Berne Convention
All rights reserved. No part of this book
may be reproduced in any form without the
permission of Charles Scribner's Sons.
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 c/c 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
To Kidd, Gold, Pohl, Jakobsson,
Carr, Malzberg, Disch,
Klingstein, Hutter, Dickey,
Lowndes, Dienstfrey,
and all good agents and editors.
CONTENTS
Secret Places
Para
Mean Men
About a Secret Crocodile
1
Mad Man
21
Nor Limestone Islands
37
The Man Underneath
57
Boomer Flats
77
This Grand Carcass Yet
103
In the Garden
121
Groaning Hinges of the
World
137
Golden Trabant
151
How They Gave It Back
165
Maybe Jones and the City 179
Seven Story Dream
193
Adam Had Three Brothers 209
Pig in a Pokey
225
The Weirdest World
237
The Ultimate Creature
261
Does Anyone Else
Have Something
Further to Add?
Secrel Places
About a Secret
Crocodile
URE
Sony
THEIR
HERE is a secret society of seven men that controls the
finances of the world. This is known to everyone but the
details are not known. There are some who believe that it
would be better if one of those seven men were a financier.
There is a secret society of three men and four women that
controls all the fashions of the world. The details of this are
known to all who are in the fashion. And I am not.
There is a secret society of nineteen men that is behind all
the fascist organizations in the world. The secret name of this
society is Glomerule.
There is a secret society of thirteen persons known as the
Elders of Edom that controls all the secret sources of the
world. That the sources have become muddy is of concern to
them.
There is a secret society of only four persons that manufac-
tures all the jokes of the world. One of these persons is
unfunny and he is responsible for all the unfunny jokes.
There is a secret society of eleven persons that is behind all
Bolshevik and atheist societies of the world. The devil himself
is a member of this society, and he works tirelessly to become
a principal member. The secret name of this society is Ocean.
There are related secret societies known as The Path of the
Serpent (all its members have the inner eyelid of snakes), The
3
Secret Places
Darkbearers, the Seeing Eye, Imperium, The Golden Mask
and the City.
Above most of these in a queer network there is a society
that controls the attitudes and dispositions of the world—and
the name of it is Crocodile. The Crocodile is insatiable: it eats
persons and nations alive. And the Crocodile is very old, 8,809
years old by one account, 7,349 years old if you use the short
chronology.
There are subsecret societies within the Crocodile: the
Cocked Eye, the Cryptic Cootie and others. Powerful among
these is a society of three hundred and ninety-nine persons
that manufactures all the catchwords and slogans of the
world. This subsociety is not completely secret since several
of the members are mouthy: the code name of this apparatus
is the Crocodile's Mouth.
Chesterton said that Mankind itself was a secret society.
Whether it would be better or worse if the secret should ever
come out he did not say.
And finally there was—for a short disruptive moment-a
secret society of three persons that controlled all.
All what?
Bear with us. That is what this account is about.
JOHN CANDOR had been called into the office of Mr. James
Dandi at ABNC. (Whisper, whisper, for your own good, do
not call him Jim Dandy; that is a familiarity he will not
abide.)
“This is the problem, John," Mr. Dandi stated piercingly,
4
About a Secret Crocodile
1
“and we may as well put it into words. After all, putting
things into words and pictures is our way of working at
ABNC. Now then, what do we do at ABNC, John?”
(ABNC was one of the most powerful salivators of the
Crocodile's Mouth.)
“We create images and attitudes, Mr. Dandi.”
“That is correct, John," Mr. Dandi said. “Let us never
forget it. Now something has gone wrong. There is a shadowy
attack on us that may well be the most damaging thing since
the old transgression of Spirochaete himself. Why has some-
thing gone wrong with our operation, John?"
“Sir, I don't know."
“Well then, what has gone wrong?"
“What has gone wrong, Mr. Dandi, is that it isn't working
the way it should. We are caught on our own catchwords, we
are slaughtered by our own slogans. There are boomerangs
whizzing about our ears from every angle. None of it goes
over the way it is supposed to. It all twists wrong for us."
“Well, what is causing this? Why are our effects being
nullified?"
“Sir, I believe that somebody else is also busy creating
images and attitudes. Our catechesis states that this is
impossible since we are the only group permitted in the field.
Nevertheless, I am sure that someone else is building these
things against us. It even seems that they are more powerful
than we are—and they are unknown.”
“They cannot be more powerful than we are—and they
must not remain unknown to us.” Mr. Dandi's words stabbed.
“Find out who they are, John."
”
“How?"
“If I knew how, John, I would be working for you, not you
,
5
Secret Places
working for me. Your job is to do things. Mine is the much
more difficult one of telling you to do them. Find out, John.”
1
JOHN CANDOR went to work on the problem. He considered
whether it was a linear, a set or a group problem. If it were a
linear problem he should have been able to solve it by
himself—and he couldn't. If it were a set problem, then it
couldn't be solved at all. Of necessity he classified it as a
group problem and he assembled a group to solve it. This was
easy at ABNC which had more group talent than anybody.
The group that John Candor assembled was made up of
August Crayfish, Sterling Groshawk, Maurice Cree, Nancy
Peters, Tony Rover, Morgan Aye, and Betty McCracken. Tell
the truth, would you be able to gather so talented a group in
your own organization?
“My good people," John Candor said, “as we all know,
something has gone very wrong with our effects. It must be
righted. Thoughts, please, thoughts!"
“We inflate a person or subject and he bursts on us,”
August gave his thought. “Are we using the wrong gas?”
“We launch a phrase and it turns into a joke,” Sterling
complained. “Yet we have not slighted the check-off: it has
always been examined from every angle to be sure that it
doesn't have a joker context. But something goes wrong."
“We build an attitude carefully from the ground up,”
Maurice stated. “Then our firm ground turns boggy and the
thing tilts and begins to sink.”
“Our ‘Fruitful Misunderstandings,' the most subtle and
1
6
About a Secret Crocodile
effective of our current devices, are beginning to bear sour
fruit,” Nancy said.
“We set ourselves to cut a man down and our daggers turn
to rubber," Tony Rover moaned. (Oh, were there ever sadder
words? “Our daggers turn to rubber.")
“Things have become so shaky that we're not sure whether
we are talking about free or closed variables," Morgan gave
his thought.
“How can my own loving mother make such atrocious
sandwiches?" Betty McCracken munched distastefully. Betty,
who was underpaid, was a brown-sack girl who brought her
own lunch. “This is worse than usual.” She chewed on. “The
only thing to do with it is feed it to the computer.” She fed it
to the computer which ate it with evident pleasure.
“Seven persons, seven thoughts,” John Candor mused.
“Seven persons, six thoughts,” Nancy Peters spat bitterly.
“Betty, as usual, has contributed nothing."
“Only the first stage of the answer,” John Candor said.
“She said “The only thing to do with it is to feed it to the
computer.' Feed the problem to the computer, folks.”
They fed the problem to the computer by pieces and by
wholes. The machine was familiar with their lingos and
procedures. It was acquainted with the Non-Valid Context
Problems of Morgan Aye and with the Hollow Shell Person
Puzzles of Tony Rover. It knew the Pervading Environment
Ploy of Maurice Cree. It knew what trick-work to operate
within.
Again and again the machine asked for various kinds of
supplementary exterior data.
“Leave me with it,” the machine finally issued. “Assemble
here again in sixty days, or hours—"
7
Secret Places
2
a
“No, we want the answers right now," John Candor
insisted, "within sixty seconds.”
“The second is possibly the interval I was thinking of,” the
machine issued. “What's time to a tin can anyhow?" It ground
its data trains for a full minute.
“Well?” John Candor asked.
“Somehow I get the number three,” the machine issued.
“Three what, machine?”
“Three persons,” the machine issued. “They are unknow-
ingly linked together to manufacture attitudes. They are
without program or purpose or organization or remuneration
or basis or malice."
“Nobody is without malice," August Crayfish insisted in a
startled way. “They must be totally alien forms then. How do
they manage their effects?"
“One with a gesture, one with a grimace, one with an
intonation," the machine issued.
"Where are they?” John Candor demanded.
“All comparatively near.” The machine drew three circles
on the city map. “Each is to be found in his own circle most of
the time.”
“Their names?" John Candor asked and the machine wrote
the name of each in the proper circle.
“Do you have anything on their appearances?" Sterling
Groshawk inquired and the machine manufactured three
kymograph pictures of the targets.
“Have you their addresses or identifying numbers?” Mau-
rice Cree asked.
“No. I think it's remarkable of me that I was able to come
up with this much," the machine issued.
8
About a Secret Crocodile
1
“We can find them,” Betty McCracken said. “We can most
likely find them in the phone book.”
“What worries me is that there's no malice in them,” John
Candor worried. “Without malice, there's no handle to get
hold of a thing. The Disestablishment has been firmly
established for these several hundred years and we hold it to
be privileged. It must not be upset by these three randoms.
We will do what we must do."
MIKE ZHESTOVITCH was a mighty man. One does not
make the primordial gestures out of weak body and hands.
He looked like a steelworker—or anyhow like a worker at one
of the powerful trades. His torso was like a barrel but more
noble than ordinary barrels. His arms and hands were hardly
to be believed. His neck was for the bulls, his head was as big
as a thirteen gallon firkin, his eyeballs were the size of ducks'
eggs and the hair on his chest and throat was that heavy
black wire-grass that defies steel plowshares. His voice—well
he didn't have much of a voice—it wasn't as mighty as the
rest of him.
And he didn't really work at one of the powerful trades. He
was a zipper repairman at the Jiffy Nifty Dry Cleaners.
August Crayfish of ABNC located Mike Zhestovitch in the
Blind Robbin Bar which (if you recall the way that block lies)
is just across that short jog-alley from the Jiffy Nifty. And
August recognized big Mike at once. But how did big Mike
get his effects?
9
Secret Places
“The Cardinals should take the Colts today," a serious man
there was saying.
“The Cardinals—” Mike Zhestovitch began in the voice
that was less noble than the rest of him, but he didn't finish
the sentence. As a matter of fact, big Mike had never finished
a sentence in all his life. Instead he made the gesture with his
mighty hands and body. Words cannot describe the gesture
but it was something like balling up an idea or opinion in the
giant hands and throwing it away, utterly away, over the
very edge of contempt.
The Cardinals, of course, did not take the Colts that day.
For a moment it was doubtful whether the Cardinals would
survive at all. From the corner of the eye, red feathers could
be seen drifting away in the air.
August Crayfish carefully waited a moment and watched.
A man walked out of the Blind Robbin and talked to another
man in that little jog-alley. From their seriousness it was
certain that they were talking baseball.
“The Cardinals—" the first man said after a moment, and
he also made the gesture. And seconds later a man playing
eight-ball in the back of the Blind Robbin did the same thing.
August was sure then. Mike Zhestovitch not only could
shrivel anything with the gesture, but the gesture as he used
it was highly epidemic. It would spread, according to
Schoeffler's Law of Dispersal, through the city in short
minutes, through the world in short hours. And no opinion
could stand against its disfavor. Mike Zhestovitch could
wreck images and attitudes—and possibly he could also
create them.
“Do
you
work alone?” August Crayfish asked.
10
"No. The rip-fix and the buttonsew girls work in the same cubbyhole," Mike said with his curiously small voice. "Do you know a Mary Smorfia?" August asked. "I don't, no," Mike said, a certain comprehension coming into his ducks'-egg-sized eyes. "And you are glad that I don't? Then I will. I'll find out who she is. I see it now that you are a wrong guy and she is a right girl." Then August Crayfish spoke the slogan that would be unveiled to the ears of the world that very night, a wonder­ fully slippery slogan that had cost a hundred thousand dollars to construct. It should have warned Mike Zhestovitch away from his mad resistance. Mike Zhestovitch made the gesture, and the slogan was in ruins. And somewhere the Secret Crocodile lashed its tail in displeasure. "Do you want to make a lot of money?" August Crayfish whispered after a long reevaluation pause. "Money-from such as you-" Big Mike didn't finish the sentence, he never did. But he made the gesture. The idea of a lot of money shriveled. And August Crayfish shriveled so small that he could not climb over the threshold of the Blind Robbin on the way out and had to be aided over it by the shod toe of a kind man. (This last statement is a literal exaggera­ tion but it is the right direction.)
NANCY PETERS of ABNC located Mary Smorfia in the King-Pin Bowling Alley, where she was a hamburger wait-
About a Secret Crocodile
11
Secret Places
ress and a beer buster. Mary was small, dark, unpretty
(except for her high-frequency eyes and the beautiful gash
across her face that was her mouth), lively, smart, busy, a
member of that aberrant variety of the human race that was
called Italian.
“Snorting Summer should take the Academy Award,” one
nice guzzling lady at the counter was saying to another, “and
Clover Elysée is the shoeless shoo-in for best actress of the
year.”
And Mary Smorfia made the grimace. Ah, it was mostly
done with the beautifully large mouth and yet every part of
her entered into it, from the blue lights in her hair to her
crinkly toes. It was a devastating, all-destroying grimace. It
gobbled up, it nullified and it made itself felt to a great
distance. The nice guzzling lady had not even been looking
toward Mary Smorfia but she felt the grimace like a soul
shock, and she herself did the grimace with a wonderful
distortion of the features that weren't made for it.
And the grimace swept everything like quick contagion or
prairie fire. Snorting Summer-gah! Clover Elysée-gug-
gling gah! Those things were finished forever, beyond laugh-
ter, below derision. And Nancy Peters of ABNC noted the
powerful effect carefully, for the original words of the nice
guzzling lady were the very words that ABNC had selected to
be echoed a hundred million times whenever the awards were
thought of.
"Do you work alone?” Nancy Peters asked Mary Smorfia.
“Kid, I am so fast they don't need anyone else on this shift.
I'm like silly lightning.”
“Did you ever think of becoming an actress, Mary?” Nancy
asked in honey-tones.
1
12
About a Secret Crocodile
“Oh, I made a commercial once,” Mary said out of her curly
gash-mouth (she had to be kidding: she couldn't really have a
mouth that looked like that). “I don't know whether I sold
much of my guy's soap but I bet I got a lot of people off that
Brand X. Ashes it was, worse even, after I monkey-faced it.
They say I'm a natural—but once is enough.”
“Do you know a Mike Zhestovitch or a Clivendon Surrey?"
Nancy asked.
“I don't think so," Mary said. “What league do they bowl
in? I bet I will like them both, though, and I will remember
their names and find them.”
Nancy Peters was nervous. She felt that the annihilating
grimace was about to strike again on Mary's lightning-gash
mouth. But it was time for the test of strength. Nancy spoke
the new slogan that had been selected for presentation to the
world that very night, a wonderfully convincing and power-
ful slogan that should bring this random Mary Smorfia to
heel if anything could. And she spoke it with all the absolute
expertise of the Crocodile's Mouth behind her.
The Grimace! And the slogan was destroyed forever. And
(grimacing horror turned inward) Nancy caught the conta-
gion and was doing the grimace herself. She was quite unable
to get the thing off her face.
Sheer humiliation overwhelmed the Nancy person, who had
suddenly been made small. And somewhere the Secret
Crocodile lashed its tail in displeasure and unease.
“Do you want to make twenty thousand dollars, Mary?”
Nancy asked after she had returned from the jane where she
had daubed her flushed face and cooled her flustered body.
“Twenty thousand dollars isn't very much,” Mary Smorfia
sounded out of her panoramic mouth. “I make eighty-eight
13
Secret Places
1
1
1
fifty now after everything. I could make a lot more if I
wanted to go along with the cruds.'
“Twenty thousand dollars is very much more," Nancy
Peters said enticingly.
“It is very much more cruddy, kid.” Mary Smorfia grim-
aced. Grimaced! Not again! Nancy Peters fled in deflated
panic. She felt herself dishonored forever.
Well, do you think it is all water-melon pickles and pepper
relish, this unilaterally creating all the images and attitudes
for the whole world? It isn't. It is a detailed and devious thing
and the privileged Disestablishment had been building it for
centuries. (The Establishment itself had been no more than a
figure of speech for most of those centuries, a few clinging
bits of bark: the heart of the tree had long been possessed by
the privileged Disestablishment.) Three quick random per-
sons could not be permitted to nullify words from the Mouth
itself.
MORGAN AYE of ABNC located Clivendon Surrey in
Speedsters' Café. Clivendon was a lank and fair-haired man
with a sort of weariness about him, a worldliness that had to
be generations old. He had the superior brow and the
thoroughbred nose that isn't grown in short centuries. He had
the voice, the intonation, the touch of Groton, the touch of
Balliol, the strong touch of other institutions even more
august. It was a marvelous voice, at least the intonation of it.
Clivendon's employer once said that he didn't believe that
Clivendon ever spoke in words, at least not in any words that
14
About a Secret Crocodile
he was ever able to understand. The intonation was really a
snort, a sort of neigh, but it carried the cresting contempt of
the ages in its tone. And it was contagious.
Clivendon was really of Swedish extraction and had come
off a farm near Pottersville. He had developed that intonation
for a role in a high school play. He had liked it and he had
kept it. Clivendon was a motorcycle mechanic at Downhillers'
Garage.
"Do
you work alone?" Morgan Aye asked Clivendon.
“Naeu. You work alone and you got to work. You work
with a bunch and you can slip out from it,” Clivendon
intoned. Yes, he talked in words and the words could be
mostly understood. But the towering intonation was the
thing, the world-wilting contempt of the tone. This man was
a natural and Morgan felt himself a foot shorter in the very
presence of that tone.
“Do you know a Mike Zhestovitch or a Mary Smorfia?"
Morgan asked fearfully.
“That's a funny thing." The tone cut through ear-wax and
the soft spots of the spleen. "I had never heard of them but
Mary Smorfia called me up not thirty minutes ago and said
that she wanted both of us to meet Mike. So I'll meet them in
about twenty minutes, as soon as the clock there says that I'm
supposed to be off work at Downhillers' Garage.”
“Don't meet them!” Morgan cried out violently. “That
might be the closing of the link, the setting up of a league. It
might be an affront to the Mouth itself.”
The tone, the neigh, the snort, the sharp edge of a wordless
intonation sent Morgan reeling back. And there were echoes
of it throughout Speedsters' Café and in the streets outside.
The tone was as contagious as it was cutting.
1
a
15
Secret Places
Morgan started to speak the newest selected slogan from
the Mouth—and he stopped short. He was afraid of the test
of strength. Two very expensive slogans had already been
shattered today by these randoms. “No malice in the three,”
the computer had said and: "without malice, there's no handle
to get hold of a thing," John Candor had stated. But
somewhere in that mountainous and contagious contempt of
tone that belonged to Clivendon Surrey had to be some
malice. So Morgan Aye reached for what had always been the
ultimate weapon of the Crocodile's Mouth. It always worked
-it always worked if any malice at all existed in the object.
“How would you like to make five thousand dollars a
week?” he whispered to Clivendon.
“What garage pays that much?” Clivendon asked in honest
wonder. “I'm not that good a motorcycle mechanic.”
"Five thousand dollars a week to work with us at ABNC,"
Morgan tempted. “We could use you in so many ways—that
marvelous scorn to cut down any man we wished! You could
lend the intonations of your voice to our—"
The neigh was like a thousand sea stallions breaking up
from the depths. The snort was one that crumbles cliffs at the
ends of the earth. Morgan Aye had gone ghastly white and
his ears were bleeding from the transgression of that cutting
sound. There were even some words in Clivendon's sounding
—“Why, then I'd be one of the birds that picks the shreds of
flesh from between the teeth of the monster.” Blinding
hooting contempt in the tone and Morgan Aye was in the
street and running from it.
But the echoes of that intonation were everywhere in that
part of town, soon to be all over the town, all over the world.
It was an epidemic of snorting at the Crocodile's Mouth itself.
16
About a Secret Crocodile
from
Fools! Did they know that this was but one step
snorting at the very Crocodile?
THE ring had closed. The informal league had formed now.
The three randoms had met and united. The Mouth was
affronted. Worse than that, all the outpour of the Mouth was
nullified. The whole world was rejecting the catchwords that
came from the Mouth, was laughing at them, was throwing
them away with the uttermost gesture, was monkey-facing
them, was snorting them down, was casting them out with
bottomless contempt.
This was the short reign of the secret society of three, who
did not know that they were secret. But in their day they
closed the Mouth down completely. It was filled with mud and
swamp reeds and rotting flesh.
The Secret Crocodile was lashing its tail with acute
displeasure now. The Crocodile's Mouth had become quite
nervous. And what of the little birds that fly in and out of
that mouth, that preen the teeth and glean scraps of flesh and
slogans and catchwords there? The birds were in quite an
unhappy flutter.
“There is open conspiracy against us by a secret society of
three persons," Mr. James Dandi was saying, “and all the
world abominates a secret society. We have this thing to do
this day—to cripple it forever in its strength. Otherwise we
will be cast out and broken as ineffectual instruments and the
Crocodile will bring in strong persons from the Cocked Eye or
the Cryptic Cootie to take our places. Surely we are not
17
Secret Places
without resources. What is the logical follow-up to the
Fruitful Misunderstanding ?”
“The Purposive Accident,” John Candor said immediately.
“Take care of it, John,” Mr. James Dandi said. “Remember,
though, that he whose teeth we preen is the very bowels of
compassion. I believe this is the salient thing in the world in
our day. The Compassion of the Crocodile."
“Take care of it, people," John Candor said to his seven
talented ones, “remembering always that the Crocodile is the
very belly of compassion."
“Take care of it," the seven said to the computer, “always
within the context of the jaws of compassion.”
The computer programmed a Purposive Accident to happen
and manufactured such props as were needed. And the
Purposive Accident was very well programmed.
There was no great amount of blood poured out. No
persons were killed except several uninvolved bystanders.
The secret three were left alive and ambulant and scathed
only at their points of strength.
It happened in the block between the Blind Robbin Bar and
Speedsters' Café when all three members of the secret society
happened to be walking together. The papers called it a
bomb; they call everything a bomb that goes off like that. It
was really a highly sophisticated homing device with a
tripartite programming and it carried out its tripartite
mission.
All three randoms, former members of the short-lived
secret society, are well and working again. Mike Zhestovitch
is no longer a zipper repairman (it takes two talented hands
to fix those zippers), but he still works at the Jiffy Nifty Dry
Cleaners. He runs one of those big pressers now which he can
18
About a Secret Crocodile
-
easily do with his powerful and undamaged left hand and his
prosthetic right hand. But without his old right hand he can
no longer make the contagious primordial gesture that once
dumbfounded the Mouth and all its words. You just cannot
make the big gesture with a false hand.
Mary Smorfia still works at the King-Pin Bowling Alley as
hamburger waitress and beer buster. She is still small, dark,
unpretty (except for her high-frequency eyes), lively, smart,
and Italian. Her mouth is still a gash across her face, but now
it is twice as great a gash as it used to be, and it no longer has
its curled liveliness. Its mobility is all gone, it will no longer
express the inexpressible, will no longer shatter a phrase or
an attitude. Mary Smorfia is as she always was, except that
now she is incapable of the famous grimace.
Clivendon Surrey is again a motorcycle mechanic at Down-
hillers' Garage and again he spends most of his time in
Speedsters' Café. His vocal cords are gone, of course, but he
gets by: he is able to speak with a throat microphone. But the
famous intonation, the neigh, the destroying snort are all
impossible for him.
The trouble is over with. Now again there is only one
organization in the world to create the images and attitudes
of the world. This insures that only the standard attitudes of
the Disestablishment shall prevail.
a
IN OUR opening catalog we forgot one group. There is
another secret society in the world composed of the good guys
and good gals. It has no name that we have ever heard except
19
Secret Places
just the Good Guys and Good Gals. At the moment this
society controls nothing at all in the world. It stirs a little,
though. It may move. It may collide, someday, even with the
,
Secret Crocodile itself.
20
Mean Men
Mad Man
ha
Ah
THE
HE too-happy puppy came bounding up to him—a bundle
of hysterical yipes and a waggling tail that would bring joy to the
soul of anyone. The pathetic expectation and sheer love in the
shining eyes and woolly rump was something to see. The whole
world loves a puppy like that.
And George Gnevni kicked the thing end over end and high
into the air with a remarkably powerful boot. The sound that
came from the broken creature as it crash-landed against a wall
was a heart-rending wail that would have melted the heart of a
stone toad.
Gnevni was disgusted with himself.
“Less than ten meters. Should have booted him twelve. I'll kill
the blood-sucking cod-headed little cur the next time. Nothing
goes right today.”
>
a
IT was not a real puppy; it was better than a real one. There is
something artificial in the joy and carrying on of a real puppy as
well as in its hurt screaming. But the antics of this one rang true.
The thing was made by a competent artist, and it was well made.
23
Mean Men
>
It could be set to go through the same routine again at a moment's
notice.
A Crippled Old Lady came up shaking with palsy. There was
real beauty in her face yet, and a serenity that pain could never
take away from her.
.
“A glorious morning to you, my good man,” she said to Gnevni.
And he kicked her crutches out from under her.
“I am sure that was an accident, sir,” she gasped as she teetered
and nearly fell. “Would you be so kind as to hand them to me
again? I'm quite unable to stand without them.”
Gnevni knocked her down with a smacking blow. He then
stomped up and down on her body from stem to stern. And with a
heavy two-footed jump on her stomach he left her writhing on the
pavement.
Gnevni was again disgusted with himself.
“It doesn't seem to do a thing for me today,” he said, “not a
thing. I don't know what's the matter with me this morning.”
It was a real lady. We are afraid of dog-lovers, but we are not
afraid of people-lovers. There are so few of them. So the lady was
not an artificial one. She was real flesh and blood, and the best of
both. However, she was neither crippled nor old. She was a
remarkably athletic woman and had been a stunt girl before she
found her true vocation. She was also a fine young actress and
played the Crippled Old Lady role well.
Gnevni went to his job in the Cortin Institute Building that was
popularly known as the Milk Shed.
“Bring my things, crow-bait,” he grumbled at a nice young lady
assistant. “I see the rats have been in your hair again. Are you
naturally deformed or do you stand that way on purpose? There's
a point, you know, beyond which ugliness is no longer a virtue.”
The nice young lady began to cry, but not very convincingly.
>
24
Mad Man
>
She went off to get Gnevni's things. But she would bring only a
part of them, and, not all of them the right ones.
“Old George isn't himself this morning,” said the under-doctor
Cotrel.
“I know,” said under-doctor Devon. “We'll have to devise
something to get him mad today. We can't have him getting
pleasant on us."
THE required paranexus could not be synthesized. Many sub-
stances had been tried and all of them had been found insufficient.
But the thing was needed for the finest operation of the
Programmeds. It had to be the real thing, and there was only one
way to get a steady supply of it.
At one time they had simplified it by emphasizing the cortin
and adrenalin components of it. Later they had emphasized a
dozen other components, and then a hundred. And finally they
accepted it for what it was—too complex for duplication, too
necessary an accessory for the Programmeds to be neglected, too
valuable at its most effective to be taken from random specimens.
It could be had only from Humans, and it could be had in fine
quality only from a special sort of Humans. The thing was very
complex, but at the Institute they called it Oil of Dog.
Peredacha was a pleasant little contrivance—a “Shadler Move-
-a “
ment” or “female” of the species that had once been called homo
conventus or robot and was now referred to as “Programmed
Person.”
She had a sound consciousness, hint of developing originality, a
capacity for growth and a neatness of mechanism and person. She
a
25
Mean Men
might be capable of fine work of the speculative sort. She was one
of those on whom the added spark might not be wasted.
Always they had worked to combine the best elements of both
sorts.
The Programmed Persons were in many respects superior to the
Old Recension Persons or Humans. They were of better emotional
balance, of greater diligence, of wider adaptability, of much vaster
memory or accumulation and of readier judgment based on that
memory. But there was one thing lacking in the most adept of the
Programmed that was often to be found in the meanest of the
Humans. This was a thing very hard to name.
It was the little bit extra; but the Programmed already had the
very much extra. It had something of the creative in it, though the
Programmed were surely more creative than the Humans. It was
the rising to the occasion; the Programmed could do this more
gracefully, but sometimes less effectively, than could the Humans.
It was the breaking out of a framework, the utter lack of
complacency, the sudden surge of power or intellect, the bewilder-
ing mastery of the moment, the thing that made the difference.
It was the Programmed themselves who sought out the thing,
for they were the more conscious of the difference. It was the
Programmed technicians who set up the system. It cost the
Humans nothing, and it profited the Programmed very much in
their
persons
and personalities.
On
many of them, of course, it had little effect; but on a select
few it had the effect of raising them to a genius grade. And many
of them who could never become geniuses did become specialists
to a degree unheard of before and all because of the peculiar
human additive.
It was something like the crossing of the two races, though there
26
Mad Man
а
could never be a true cross of species so different one of them not
being of the reproductive sort. The adrenal complex sometimes
worked great changes on a Programmed.
There were but a few consistent prime sources of it—and each
of them somehow had his distinguishing mark. Often a Pro-
grammed felt an immediate kinship, seldom reciprocated, with the
Human donor. And Peredacha, a very responsive Programmed,
felt the kinship keenly when the additive was given to her.
“I claim for paternity,” she cried. It was a standard joke of the
Programmed. “I claim as daughter to my donor! I never believed
it before. I thought it only one of those things that everybody says.
The donors are such a surly bunch that it drives them really
violent if one of us seeks their acquaintance on this pretext. But
I'm curious. Which one was it?”
She was told.
“Oh no! Not him of the whole clutch! How droll can you get?
He is my new kindred? But never before did I feel so glorious.
Never have I been able to work so well.”
THE assigned job of George Gnevni was a mechanical one. In the
ordinary course of things this would be all wrong, for George had
less mechanical aptitude than any man ever born. George had very
little aptitude for anything at all in the world—until his one
peculiar talent was discovered.
He was an unhandsome and graceless man, and he lived in
poverty. Much has been said about the compensations of physical
ugliness—mostly the same things that have been said about
27
Mean Men
poverty. It is often maintained that they may be melded behind
the dross front, that the sterling character may develop and shine
through the adversity.
It is lies, it is lies! It happens only rarely that these things are
ennobling. With persons of the commoner sort it happens not at
all. To be ugly and clumsy and poor at the same time will finally
drive a man to raving anger against the whole world.
And that was the idea.
Gnevni was assigned a mean lodging, and his meal tickets were
peculiar ones. He could not obtain what he wanted to eat. He
could have only what was on the list for him to eat, and this was
evilly contrived to cover everything that disagreed with him. As a
result he was usually in gastric pain and in seething anger at his
own entrails. He had an ugly nature to begin with, but the form of
life forced
upon him deepened and nurtured it.
Gnevni's voice was harsh and jangling, though there was real
mastery of resonance in his powerful howling when his anger
reached high form. He was denied wifing privileges, and no
woman would have had him in any case. He was allowed just
enough of bad whoa-johnny whisky to keep him edgy and mean,
but not enough to bring him solace.
He was an oaf—an obscene distasteful clod of humanity. He
knew it and he boiled and seethed with the shoddy knowledge. He
was no better than a badger in a cage, but those things are terrific
snappers.
For his poor livelihood he was given a quota of mechanical tasks
to complete every day, and he had no mechanical aptitude at all.
They were simple assembly jobs. A competent Programmed
Person could do in minutes what it took Gnevni all day to do.
Most children of the human species could do the same things
28
Mad Man
>
easily and quickly—though some might not be able to do them at
all, for the Humans are less uniform in their abilities than the
Programmed.
The things that Gnevni was to assemble were never all there,
some of them were the wrong things, and some of them were
defective. A Programmed would have spotted the off stuff at once
and sent it back, but ugly George had no way of telling whether
things were right or not. He sweated and swore his days away at
the grotesque labor and became the angriest man alive.
Joker tools were sometimes substituted on him for the true
tools—screwdrivers with shafts as Alexible as spaghetti, key-drifts
with noses as soft as wax, box-end wrench sets that were sized to fit
nothing, soldering guns that froze ice on their tips, mis-marked
calipers with automatic slippage, false templates, unworkable
crimpers, continuity testers that shocked a man to near madness.
It is a legend that humans have an affinity for mechanical
things. But normal humans have an innate hatred for machinery,
and the accommodation that has grown up between them is a
nervous one. The damned stuff just doesn't work right. You hate it,
and it hates you. That's the old basic of it.
Swift, a wise old mad man, once wrote a piece on the
“Perversity of Inanimate Objects.” And they are perverse, particu-
larly to a sick, ugly, ignorant, incompetent, poor man who fights
them in a frenzy—and they fight back.
All day long George Gnevni and a few of his unfortunate
fellows attacked their tasks explosively—the air blue with multi-
syllabled profanity, and anger dancing about like summer light-
ning. Now and then, people came and inserted tubes into these
unfortunates, and performed some other indignities upon them.
The paranexus, the complex substance, the “Oil of Dog” that
29
Mean Men
was needed for stimulation of the Programmed, while it could be
taken from any Humans, could only be had in its prime form from
a depraved, insane sort of Very Angry Men.
BUT today George Gnevni was not himself. There was only a
sullenness in him, not the required flaming purple anger.
“We have to prod him," said under-doctor Cotrel. “We can't
waste a whole day on him. He's sick enough. He tests at a high
enough pitch of excitement. Why won't he put out? Why won't he
get mad?”
a
“I have an idea,” said under-doctor Devon. “We have an
inner-office memo that one of the Programmed has recognized
kinship with him. You remember when Wut was in a slump? We
got a Programmed up here who threw an arm around him and
called him Uncle Wilbur. The way Wut exploded, seismographs
must have recorded the shock at a considerable distance. We had
to move fast to prevent him from damaging the Programmed. And
then Wut was so mad that we were able to use him around the
clock for seventy-two hours. How our Very Angry Men do hate
the Programmed! They call them the things.”
“Good. Anything that worked on Wut ought to work double on
Gnevni. Get the Programmed Person up here. We'll have him at
ugly George.”
“Her. She's a Shadler Movement Programmed and so techni-
cally a female.”
“Better yet. I can hardly wait, Gnevni is the most spectacular of
them all when he really goes wild. We should get a good
production from him.”
30
Peredacha, the talented little Shadier Movement Programmed, came to the Cortin Institute Building-the Milk Shed. She understood the situation and enjoyed it. The Programmed have their humor-more urbane than that of Humans, and yet as genuine-and they appreciate the hilarity of an incongruous confrontation. Peredacha was something of an actress, for all the Programmed have a talent for mimicry. She considered the role for a moment, and she put all her talent into it. And she did it! She made herself into the most pathetic urchin since the Little Match Girl. Yet she was a Programmed and not a Human; it was as though a gear box should put on a waifs shawl and turn tear-jerker. They brought her in. "Papa!" Peredacha cried and rushed toward Gnevni. The attendants had closed between them to prevent damage when the anger of the low man should rise like a jagged wave. The show should have been greater than the one that Wut had once put on for less reason. Gnevni was a bigger man with more power of anger, and the situation was even more ridiculous. It should have set records on the decibel-recorder, filled the room with brimstone, and enriched the vocabulary of scatology. But it didn't. The face of George Gnevni was slack, and he shook his heavy head sadly. "Take the child away," he said dully. "I will not be responsible for my feelings today."
Mad Man
31
Mean Men
IT was a new morning and George Gnevni must return to his
brutal livelihood.
A too happy puppy came bounding up to him—a bundle of
hysterically gay yipes with a waggling rump and tail hitched on to
them.
“Hello, little fellow,” Gnevni said and bent down to pet it. But
the puppy was not programmed for such treatment. It was made
to be kicked by angry men. It threw itself into a series of reverse
somersaults and heart-rending wails as though it had been kicked
indeed.
“Oh, the poor little toy!” said Gnevni. “It has never known
,
.
kindness.'
“Look, Gnevni,” said an inferior sort of man who came up, "the
dog was made for one thing only—so that twelve or thirteen of
you hotfires could kick it every morning and get into your mood.
Now kick too.”
“I won't do it.”
“I'll report you."
“I don't care. How could anyone harm that роог
little tyke?”
The Crippled Old Lady came up—shaking as with palsy. “A
glorious good morning to you, my good man,” she said to Gnevni.
“And a fine morning to you, my lady,” he said.
“What? You're not supposed to say that! You're supposed to
kick
my
crutches out from under me and then knock me down and
trample on me. It helps get you in your mood. Crippled Old
Ladies are infuriating sights to the Very Angry Men; they make
them even angrier. Everybody knows that.”
“I just don't believe that I will do it today, ah—Margaret, is
that not your name? A fine day to you, my dear.”
“Knock off that fine day stuff! I have my job to do. I'm a mood
piece. You blow-tops are supposed to kick out my crutches and
a
32
Mad Man
tromp me down to get in your mood. Now start kicking or I'll
report you.”
"Do so if
you must, my dear.”
GNEVNI went to his job in the Cortin Institute Building, and
there he was good for nothing.
Mad? He wasn't even sullen. He was puzzled and pleasant, and
when you have one of the old stand-bys go pleasant on you you're
in trouble. He was civil to everybody and gave them all the jitters.
He completed his mechanical tasks in an hour—finding them
much easier when he attacked them calmly. But he wasn't
supposed to find them easier.
So there was consternation in the Department. Gnevni had
been the best producer of them all. They couldn't let him go by
like that.
“Damn you, get mad!” under-doctor Cotrel shouted and shook
him. “We won't have any malingering on the job. Get mad and
start putting out.”
“I just don't seem able to get mad today,” said Gnevni honestly.
“You double-damned will get mad, you crud-head!” pursued
under-doctor Cotrel. Cotrel seemed rather upset himself. “Under-
doctor Devon! Over-doctor Ratracer! Director Duggle! Come help
me with this pig-headed fellow. He won't get mad.”
“He's got to get mad,” said under-doctor Devon. “We'll make
the filth-eating fink get mad.”
“It looks bad,” said Director Duggle. “He was at only half
efficiency yesterday, and today he's good for nothing at all. Well,
put him through the routine. We can't have him going sour at us.”
33
Mean Men
They put him through the routine. It was brutal. It would have
made a roaring devil out of the sweetest saint. Even spectators
commonly became white with fury when such a thing was put on,
and there was no limit to the effect on the victim. Gnevni endured
it with composed sorrow but without anger. And when even the
routine didn't work what more could you do to him? ?
Under-doctor Cotrel began to cuff and kick him: “Get mad, you
slimy sulphurous son of a she shink! Get mad, you mud-headed old
monkey! Get mad, you dirt-eating mutt-head! You slobber-
mouthed donkey, get mad!”
They brought in others. They even brought in Peredacha—hop-
ing she would have a more positive effect on him than she had had
the day before. But Gnevni brightened up to see her.
“Ah, it is my little daughter! I sent you notes at intervals
through the evening and night, but I guess you did not receive
them. It is so wonderful just to see you again.”
“Why you bat-whiskered old bum, was it you who sent those
notes? 'Sweet papa.' You? By the shop where I was made, I never
heard of anything like it before!"
“Do not be cruel, Peredacha. You are all that I care for in the
world. With
you
I could become a new man.'
“Well, not being human I guess I can be humane. I'll look after
I
you, ugly papa. But they don't want you to become a new man; as
a
the old one you were the best they had. Come now, get mad for
the people. It's your job.”
“I know, but I'm unable to do it. I have been thinking,
Peredacha, that since you are my daughter in a way-cortin of my
cortin and adrenalin of my adrenalin—perhaps the two of us
might go off somewhere and—”
“Holy howling hog!” Under-doctor Cotrel took off in a screech
too high for the human ear to follow, so perhaps only Peredacha
а
34
Mad Man
heard and Aushed. And then Cotrel broke up completely. He
kicked and beat on Gnevni. He shrilled and sobbed and gobbled.
And when his sounds once more became intelligible it was a
screaming, “Get mad, damn you, get mad!”
Cotrel was a lean man, but powerfully corded and muscled, and
now every cord of muscle and nerve stood glaringly out on him
black and purple.
That man was plain frantic in his displeasure at Gnevni. The
Alying foam from his lips flecked the room—something you would
not have expected from under-doctor Cotrel.
“IT is all right,” said Director Duggle. “Gnevni was about
finished in any case. The best of them are only good for a year or
two-the
pace is a terrific one. And we are lucky to have his
replacement ready at hand.”
“Replacement?” roared the livid Cotrel. “He's got to get mad! !
There isn't any replacement.” And he continued to strike Gnevni.
“I believe that the director has you in mind, Cotrel,” said
over-doctor Ratracer. "Yes. I am sure of it.”
“Me? I am under-doctor Cotrel! I make five hundred Guzman
d'or a month!”
“And now you will make five,” said Director Duggle. “Grinding
poverty is a concomitant of your new job. I had suspected you had
a talent for it. Now I am sure. You begin immediately. You
become the latest, and soon I hope the best, of the Very Angry
Men.”
Cotrel became so, and immediately. Gnevni had been good.
Wut before him had been one of the best. But for carrying on
a
35
Mean Men
noise and stink generally, there was never such an exhibition as
Mad Man Cotrel now put on-getting into the spirit of his new
job.
He was the maddest man you ever saw!
36
Secrel Places
Nor Limestone
Islands
A
lapidary is one who cuts, polishes, engraves, and sets
small stones. He is also a scrivener with a choppy style who
sets in little stones or pieces here and there and attempts to
make a mosaic out of them.
But what do you call one who cuts and sets very large
stones?
Take a small lapillus or stone for instance:
The origin of painting as an art in Greece is connected
with definite historical personages; but that of sculpture is
lost in the mists of legend. Its authentic history does not
begin until about the year B.C. 600. It was regarded as an
art imparted to men by the gods; for such is the thought
expressed in the assertion that the earliest statues fell from
heaven.
“Statuaria Ars; Sculpture,”—Harper's Dictionary of Clas-
sical Literature and Antiquities.
We set that little stone in one corner, even though it
contains a misunderstanding of what fell from heaven: it
wasn't finished statues.
Then we set another small stone:
(We haven't the exact citation of this. It's from Charles
39
Secret Places
Fort or from one of his imitators.) It's of a scientist who
refused to believe that several pieces of limestone had fallen
from the sky, even though two farmers had seen them fall.
They could not have fallen from the sky, the scientist said,
because there is no limestone in the sky. (What would that
scientist have done if he had been confronted with the
question of Whales in the Sky?)
We set that little stone of wisdom into one corner. And we
look around for other stones to set.
a
The limestone salesman was making his pitch to the city
commissioners. He had been making a poor pitch and he was
a poor salesman. All he had was price (much less than one
tenth that of the other bidders) and superior quality. But the
limestone salesman did not make a good appearance. He was
bare-chested (and colossally deep-chested). He had only a
little shoulder jacket above, and a folded drape below. On his
feet he had the crepida or Hermes-sandals, made of buckskin
apparently: a silly affectation. He was darkly burnt in skin
and hair, but the roots of his hair and of his skin indicated
that he was blond in both. He was golden-bearded, but the
beard (and in fact the whole man) was covered with chalk-
dust or rock-dust. The man was sweaty, and he smelled. His
was a composite smell of limestone and edged bronze and
goats and clover and honey and ozone and lentils and sour
milk and dung and strong cheese.
“No, I don't believe that we want to deal with you at all,”
the mayor of the city was saying. "The other firms are all
reputable and long established."
“Our firm is long established," the limestone salesman said.
40
Nor Limestone Islands
any other
“It has been doing business from the same-ah-cart for nine
thousand years."
“Balderdash,” the streets and sewers commissioner swore.
"You won't even give us the address of your firm, and you
haven't put in a formal bid.”
“The address is Stutzamutza,” the limestone salesman said.
“That's all the address I can give you. There isn't
address. And I will put in a formal bid if you will show me
how to do it. I offer you three hundred tons of the finest
marble-limestone, cut exactly to specification, and set in
place, guaranteed to take care of your project, guaranteed to
be without flaw, in either pure white or variegated; I offer
this delivered and set within one hour, all for the price of
three hundred dollars or three hundred bushels of cracked
corn.'
“Oh take it, take it!" a Miss Phosphor McCabe cried out.
“We elect you gentlemen to do our business for us at bargain
prices. Do not pass up this fine bargain, I beg you.” Phosphor
McCabe was a lady photographer who had nine fingers in
every pie.
“You be quiet, young lady, or we will have you put out of
the hearing room,” said the parks and playgrounds commis-
sioner. “You will wait your turn, and you will not interfere in
“
other cases. I shudder to think what your own petition will be
today. Was ever a group so put upon by cranks as ourselves?”
“You have a very bad reputation, man,” the finance
commissioner said to the limestone salesman, "insofar as
anyone has heard of you before. There is some mumble that
your limestone or marble is not substantial, that it will melt
away like hailstones. There is even a rumor that you had
41
Secret Places
a
something to do with the terrible hailstorm of the night
before last.”
“Ah, we just had a little party at our place that night,” the
limestone salesman said. “We had a few dozen bottles of
Tontitown wine from some stone that we set over in
Arkansas, and we drank it up. We didn't hurt anybody or
anything with those hailstones. Hey, some of them were as
big as basketballs, weren't they! But we were careful where
we let them fall. How often do you see a hailstorm as wild as
that that doesn't do any damage at all to anything?"
“We can't afford to look silly,” the schools and activities
commissioner said. “We have been made to look silly in quite
a few cases lately, not all of them our own fault. We can't
afford to buy limestone for a project like this from someone
)
like you."
a
“I wonder if you could get me about a hundred and twenty
tons of good quality pink granite?" asked a smiling pinkish
man in the hearing room.
“No, that's another island entirely," the limestone salesman
said. “I'll tell them if I see them.”
"Mr. Chalupa, I don't know what your business is here
today," the mayor said severely to the smiling pinkish man,
"but you will wait your turn, and you will not mix into this
case. Lately it seems that our open hearings are just one nut
after another.”
“How can you lose?" the limestone salesman asked the
commissioners. “I will supply and cut and set the stones. If
you are not satisfied, I will leave the stones at no cost, or I
will remove them again. And not until you are completely
satisfied do you pay me the three hundred dollars or the three
hundred bushels of cracked corn."
1)
42
Nor Limestone Islands
'
“I want to go to your country with you,” Miss Phosphor
McCabe burst out. “I am fascinated by what I have heard of
it. I want to do a photographic article about it for the
Heritage Geographical Magazine. How far away is your
country now?"
“All right,” the limestone salesman said. “I'll wait for you.
We'll go just as soon as I have transacted my business and
you have transacted yours. We like everybody and we want
everybody to come and visit us, but hardly anybody wants to.
Right now, my country is about three miles from here. Last
chance, gentlemen: I offer you the best bargain in quality
marble-limestone that you'll ever find if you live two hundred
years. And I hope you do all live to be two hundred. We like
everybody and we'd like to see everybody live two hundred
years at least.”
”
"Absolutely not," said the mayor of the city. “We'd be the
laughing-stock of the whole state if we did business with
someone like you. What kind of a country of yours are you
talking about that's only three miles from here? Absolutely
not. You are wasting your time and ours, man."
“No, no, it just couldn't be," said the streets and sewers
commissioner. "What would the papers print if they heard
that we had bought limestone from somebody nearly as
disreputable as a saucerian?”
“Rejected, rejected,” said the parks and playgrounds com-
missioner. “We were elected to transact the city's business
with economy and dignity."
“Ah well, all right,” the limestone salesman said. “You
can't sell a stylobate every time you try. Good day, commis-
sioners. No hurry, lady. I'll wait for you." And the limestone
1)
43
Secret Places
salesman went out, leaving, as it seemed, a cloud of rock-dust
in his wake.
"What a day!" the schools and activities commissioner
moaned. “What a procession of jokers we have had! Anyhow,
that one can't be topped."
"I'm not so sure," the mayor grumbled. “Miss Phosphor
McCabe is next."
“Oh, I'll be brief,” Phosphor said brightly. “All I want is a
permit to build a pagoda on that thirty-acre hill that my
grandfather left me. It won't interfere with anything. There
won't be any utilities to run to it. And it will be pretty.”
“Ah, why do you want to build a pagoda?" the streets and
sewers commissioner asked.
"So I can take pictures of it. And just because I want to
build a pagoda."
“What kind of a pagoda will it be?" the parks and
playgrounds commissioner asked.
“A pink pagoda.”
“How big will it be?" the schools and activities commis-
sioner asked.
“Thirty acres big. And four hundred feet high. It will be
big and it won't bother anything."
"Why do you want it so big?" the mayor
asked.
“So it will be ten times as big as the Black Pagoda in India.
It'll be real pretty and an attraction to the area.'
“Do you have the money to build this with?" the streets and
sewers commissioner asked.
“No, I don't have hardly any money. If I sell my photo-
graphic article “With Camera and Canoe on Sky-High Stutza-
mutza” to the Heritage Geographical Magazine I will get
44
Nor Limestone Islands
some money for it. And I have been snapping unrehearsed
camera portraits of all you gentlemen for the last few
minutes, and I may be able to sell them to Comic Weekly if I
can think of cute headings for them. As to the money to build
the Pink Pagoda, oh, I'll think of something."
“Miss McCabe, your request is remanded or remaindered or
whatever, which is the same thing as being tabled,” the
mayor said.
"What does that mean?"
“I'm not sure. The legal commissioner is absent today, but
he always says something like that when we want to pass the
buck for a little while.”
"It means come back in one week, Miss McCabe,” the
streets and sewers commissioner said.
"All right," Miss Phosphor McCabe agreed. “I couldn't
possibly start on the Pink Pagoda before a week anyhow.”
1)
And now we set this odd-shaped stone over in the other
corner:
The seventeenth century discovery of the Polynesian
Islands by common seamen was one of the ancient paradise
promises fulfilled. The green islands, the blue sea, the
golden beaches and the golden sunlight, the dusky girls!
Fruit incomparable, fish incomparable, roast pig and baked
bird beyond believing, breadfruit and volcano, absolute and
continuing perfection of weather, brown-skin paradise
maidens such as are promised in alcoran, song and string-
music and surf-music! This was the Promised Paradise of
the Islands, and it came true.
But even this was a weak thing beside the less known,
45
Secret Places
the earlier and continuing discovery of the Floating Islands
(or the Travertine Islands) by more intrepid farers. The
girls of the Floating Islands are lighter (except for the cool
blacks on the Greenstone Dolomites) than the Polynesian
maidens; they are more intelligent and much more full of
fun; are more handsome and fuller-bodied; are of an artier
and more vital culture. They are livelier. Oh how they are
livelier! And the regions themselves defy description. For
color and zest, there is nothing in Polynesia or Aegea or
Antilla to compare at all. And all the Travertine people are
so friendly! Perhaps it is well that they are little known
and little visited. We may be too weak for their experience.
-Facts of the Paradise Legend by Harold Bluewater.
Look closely at that little stone ere we leave it. Are you
sure that you have correctly noted the shape of it?
Then a still smaller stone to be set in, here where there
seems too empty a little gap. It's a mere quotation:
“In Lapidary Inscription a Man is not upon Oath.”
-Doctor Johnson.
Miss Phosphor McCabe did visit the limestone salesman's
country, and she did do the photographic article “With
Camera and Canoe in Sky-High Stutzamutza.” The stunning,
eye-blowing, heart-swelling, joy-filled color photography can-
not be given here, but these are a few extracts from the
sustaining text:
“Stutzamutza is a limestone land of such unbelievable
whiteness as to make the eyes ache with delight. It is this
super-whiteness as a basis that makes all the other colors
stand out with such clarity. There cannot be anywhere a
46
Nor Limestone Islands
bluer sky than, for most of the hours and days, surrounds
Stutzamutza (see plates I and II). There cannot be greener
fields, where there are fields, nor more silvery water (plates
IV and V). The waterfalls are absolute rainbows, especially
Final Falls, when it flows clear off the high land (plate VI).
There cannot be more variegated cliffs, blue, black, pink,
ochre, red, green, but always with that more-white-than-
white basic (plate VII). There cannot be such a sun anywhere
else. It shines here as it shines nowhere on the world.
“Due to the high average elevation of Stutzamutza (there
will be some boggled eyes when I reveal just what I do mean
by the average elevation of this place), the people are all
wonderfully deep-chested or deep-breasted. They are like
something out of fable. The few visitors who come here from
lower, from more mundane elevations, are uniform in their
disbelief. 'Oh, oh,' they will say. “There can't be girls like that.'
There
are, however (see plate VIII). 'How long has this been
going on?' these occasional visitors ask. It has been going on
for the nine thousand years of recorded Stutzamutza history;
and, beyond that, it has been going on as long as the world
has been going on.
"Perhaps due to their deep-breastedness the Stutzamutza
people are superb in their singing. They are lusty, they are
loud, they are beautiful and enchanting in this. Their
instruments, besides the conventional flutes and bagpipes
(with their great lung-power, these people do wonderful
things with the bagpipes) and lyric harps and tabors, are the
thunder-drum (plate IX) and the thirteen-foot-long trumpets
(plates X and XI). It is doubted whether any other people
anywhere would be able to blow these roaring trumpets.
"Perhaps it is due also to their deep-breastedness that the
47
Secret Places
Stutzamutza people are all so lustily affectionate. There is
something both breath-taking and breath-giving in their
Olympian carnality. They have a robustness and glory in their
man and woman interfluents that leave this underdeveloped
little girl more than amazed (plates X to XIX). Moreover,
these people are witty and wise, and always pleasant.
“It is said that originally there was not any soil at all on
Stutzamutza. The people would trade finest quality lime-
stone, marble, and dolomite for equal amounts of soil, be it
the poorest clay or sand. They filled certain crevices with this
soil and got vegetation to begin. And, in a few thousand
years, they built countless verdant terraces, knolls and
valleys. Grapes, olives and clover are now grown in profusion.
Wine and oil and honey gladden the deep hearts of the people.
The wonderful blue-green clover (see plate XX) is grazed by
the bees and the goats. There are two separate species of
goats, the meadow and pasture goat kept for its milk and
cheese and mohair, and the larger and wilder mountain goat
hunted on the white crags and eaten for its flavorsome, randy
meat. Woven mohair and dressed buckskin are used for the
Stutzamutza clothing. The people are not voluminously
clothed, in spite of the fact that it becomes quite chilly on the
days when the elevation suddenly increases.
“There is very little grain grown on Stutzamutza. Mostly,
quarried stones are bartered for grain. Quarrying stone is the
main industry, it is really the only one on Stutzamutza. The
great quarries in their cutaways sometimes reveal amazing
fossil deposits. There is a complete fossilized body of a whale
(it is an extinct Zeuglodon or Eocene Whale) (see plate XXI).
“ 'If this is whale indeed, then this all must have been
48
Nor Limestone Islands
under ocean once,' I said to one of my deep-chested friends.
‘Oh certainly,' he said, 'nowhere else is limestone formed than
in ocean.' "Then how has it risen so far above it?' I asked.
“That is something for the Geologists and the Hyphologists to
figure out,' my friend said.
“The fascinating aspect of the water on Stutzamutza is its
changeableness. A lake is sometimes formed in a single day,
and it may be emptied out in one day again by mere tipping.
The rain is prodigious sometimes, when it is decided to come
into that aspect. To shoot the rapids on the sudden swollen
rivers is a delight. Sometimes ice will form all over Stutza-
mutza in a very few minutes. The people delight in this
sudden ice, all except the little under-equipped guest. The
beauty of it is stupendous; so is its cold. They shear the ice off
in great sheets and masses and blocks, and let it fall for fun.
“But all lesser views are forgotten when one sees the
waterfalls tumbling in the sunlight. And the most wonderful
of all of them is Final Falls. Oh to watch it fall clear off
Stutzamutza (see plate XXII), to see it fall into practically
endless space, thirty thousand feet, sixty thousand feet,
turning into mist, into sleet or snow or rain or hail depending
on the sort of day it is, to see the miles-long rainbow of it
extending to the vanishing point so far below your feet!
“There is a particularly striking pink marble cliff toward
the north end of the land (the temporary north end of the
land). 'You like it? You can have it,' my friends say. That is
)
what I had been fishing for them to say.”
Yes, Miss Phosphor McCabe did the really stunning photo-
graphic article for Heritage Geographical Magazine. Heritage
49
Secret Places
Geographical did not accept it, however. Miss Phosphor
McCabe had arrived at some unacceptable conclusions, the
editor said.
“What really happened is that I arrived at an unacceptable
place,” Miss Phosphor said. “I remained there for six days. I
photographed it and I narrated it.”
“Ah, we'd never get by with that,” the editor said. Part of
the trouble was Miss Phosphor McCabe's explanations of just
what she did mean by the average elevation of Stutzamutza
(it was quite high), and by “days of increasing elevation.”
Now here is another stone of silly shape. At first glimpse, it
will not seem possible to fit it into the intended gap. But the
eye
is deceived: this shape will fit into the gap nicely. It is a
recollection in age of a thing observed during a long lifetime
by a fine weather eye.
Already as a small boy I was interested in clouds. I
believed that certain clouds preserve their identities and
appear again and again; and that some clouds are more
solid than others.
Later, when I took meteorology and weather courses at
the university, I had a classmate who held a series of
seemingly insane beliefs. At the heart of these was the
theory that certain apparent clouds are not vapor masses at
all but are floating stone islands in the sky. He believed
that there were some thirty of these islands, most of them
composed of limestone, but some of them of basalt, or
sand-stone, even of shale. He said that one, at least, of
them was composed of pot-stone or soap-stone.
This classmate said that these floating islands were
50
Nor Limestone Islands
sometimes large, one of them being at least five miles long:
that they were intelligently navigated to follow the best
camouflage, the limestone islands usually traveling with
masses of white fleecy clouds, the basalt islands traveling
with dark thunder-heads, and so on. He believed that these
islands sometimes came to rest on earth, that each of them
had its own several nests in unfrequented regions. And he
believed that the floating islands were peopled.
We had considerable fun with Mad Anthony Tummley,
our eccentric classmate. His ideas, we told each other, were
quite insane. And, indeed, Anthony himself was finally
institutionalized. It was a sad case, but one that could
hardly be discussed without laughter.
But later, after more than fifty years in the weather
profession, I have come to the conclusion that Anthony
Tummley was right in every respect. Several of us veteran
weathermen share this knowledge now, but we have
developed a sort of code for the thing, not daring to admit
it openly, even to ourselves. “Whales in the Sky' is the
code-name for this study, and we pretend to keep it on a
humorous basis.
Some thirty of these floating stone islands are continu-
ously over our own country (there may be more than a
hundred of them in the world). They are tracked on radar;
they are sighted again and again in their slightly changed
forms (some of them, now and then, seem to slough off
small masses of stone and deposit it somehow on earth);
they are known, they are named.
They are even visited by some persons of odd character:
always a peculiar combination of simplicity, acceptance,
intelligence and strange rapport. There are persons and
51
Secret Places
a
families in rural situations who employ these peopled
islands to carry messages and goods for them. In rural and
swampland Louisiana, there was once some wonder that
the people did not more avail themselves of the Inter-
coastal Canal barges to carry their supplies, and their prod-
ucts to market. 'How are the barges better than the stone
islands that we have always used? these people ask. “They
aren't on a much more regular schedule, they aren't much
faster, and they won't give you anything like the same
amount of service in exchange for a hundredweight of rice.
Besides that, the stone-island people are our friends, and
some of them have intermarried with us Cajuns.' There are
other regions where the same easy cooperation obtains.
Many of the stone-island people are well known along
certain almost regular routes. These people are all of a
powerful and rather coarse beauty. They are good-natured
and hearty. They actually traffic in stone, trading amazing
tonnages of top grade building stone for grain and other
simple provisions.
There is no scientific explanation at all of how these
things can be, how the stone islands are able to float in the
sky. But that they do so is the open secret of perhaps a
million persons.
Really, I am now too wealthy to be put in a mad-house
(though I made my money in a rather mad traffic which
would not be generally believed). I am too old to be laughed
at openly: I will merely be smiled at as an eccentric. I have
now retired from that weather profession which served me
as a front for many years (which profession, however, I
loved and still love).
I know what I know. There are more things in the zone
52
Nor Limestone Islands
fifteen miles above the earth than are dreamt of in your
philosophy, Horatio.
-Memories of 52 years as a Weather Observer by Hank
Fairday (Privately printed 1970).
Miss Phosphor McCabe did another really stunning photo-
graphic article for the Heritage Geographical Magazine. It
had a catchy title: “All Right, Then You Tell Me How I Did
It, or The Building of the Pink Pagoda."
“The Pink Pagoda is complete, except for such additions as
I shall have made whenever the notion strikes me, and
whenever my high-flying friends are in the neighborhood. It
is by far the largest structure in the world and also, in my
own opinion, the most beautiful. But it is not massive in
appearance: it is light and airy. Come see it in the stone, all of
you! Come see it in the color photography (plates I to CXXIX)
if you are not able to come yourself. This wonderful structure
gives the answers to hundreds of questions, if you will just
open your eyes
and
your ears.
“Of ancient megalithic structures it has sometimes been
asked how a hundred or more of one hundred ton blocks of
stone could have been piled up, and fitted so carefully that
even a knife-blade could not be inserted between the blocks.
It's easy. You usually don't set a hundred one hundred ton
blocks, unless for a certain ornamentation. You set one ten
thousand ton block, and the joinings are merely simulated. In
the Pink Pagoda I have had set blocks as heavy as three
hundred thousand tons of pink limestone (see plate XXI).
“They bring the whole island down in place. They split off
what block is wanted at that location (and, believe me, they
are some splitters); then they withdraw the island a little bit
and leave the block in place.
53
Secret Places
“Well, how else was it done? How did I get the one hundred
and fifty thousand ton main capstone in place four hundred
and fifty feet in the air? With ramps? Oh stop it, you'll scare
the cuckoos. The stone pillars and turrets all around and
below it are like three-dimensional lace-work, and that main
capstone had to go on last. It wasn't done by rocking it up on
ramps, even if there had been a place for the
ramps.
It was all
done on one Saturday afternoon, and here are the sequence
pictures showing just how it was done. It was done by using a
floating island, and by detaching pieces of that island as it
was floated into place. I tell you that there is no other way
that a one hundred and five pound girl can assemble a thirty
million ton Pink Pagoda in six hours. She has got to have a
floating island, with a north cliff of pink limestone, and she
has got to be very good friends with the people on that island.
“Please come and see my Pink Pagoda. All the people and
all the officials avert their eyes from it. They say that it is
impossible that such a thing could be there, and therefore it
cannot be there. But it is there. See it yourself (or see plates
IV, IX, XXXIII, LXX especially). And it is pretty (see plates
XIX, XXIV, V, LIV). But best, come see it as it really is."
Miss Phosphor McCabe did that rather astonishing photo-
graphic article for the Heritage Geographical Magazine.
Heritage Geographical refused to publish it, though, stating
that such things were impossible. And they refused to come
and see the Pink Pagoda itself, which is a pity, since it is the
largest and most beautiful structure on earth.
It stands there yet, on that thirty acre hill right on the
54
Nor Limestone Islands
north edge of town. And you have not heard the last stone of
it yet. The latest, a bad-natured little addition, will not be the
last: Miss Phosphor swears that it will not be.
There was a flimsy-winged enemy flew down, shortly after
the first completion of the pagoda, and set the latest very
small stone (it is called the egg-of-doubt stone) on top of the
main capstone. 'Twas a crabbed written little stone, and it
read:
"I will not trow two-headed calves,”
Say never-seens, and also haves.
"I'll not believe a hollow earth,”
Say scepticals of doubtful birth.
“I'll not concede Atlantis you,
Nor yet Lemuria or Mu,
“Nor woodsmen in northwestern lands,
Nor bandy-legg'd saucerians,
"Nor ancient technologic myth,
Nor charm of timeless megalith.
"I will not credit Whales that fly,
Nor Limestone Islands in the Sky.”
- Unfolk Ballad
That crabby little ballad-stone on the top almost spoils the
Pink Pagoda for me. But it will be removed, Miss Phosphor
McCabe says, just as soon as her traveling friends are back in
this neighborhood and she can get up there.
55
Secret Places
That is all that we have to say on the subject of stone
setting.
Does anyone else have something further to add?
56
Mean Men
The Man
Underneath
y
>
ya
CALES
'HARLES CHARTEL was not the most pleasant man in
the world, and as the Great Zambesi he was not the greatest
magician. But he was a smart man and a good magician. He had
the magnetism of a faith healer, the spirit and appearance of a
rooster and a deadly seriousness. He had the patter and the poise
and he had learned all that was learnable.
Nor was he a mere pigeon-passer and card-caller. He had
inherited, built up, bought and assembled as full a repertoire as
,
any Magic Man in the business.
And, as each must have, he had his specialty: a simple and sound
disappearing act. It was nothing really startling; he seemed to
underplay it. But it was puzzling and it remained a puzzle even to
those in the trade. This one prime trick equated him with the Real
Masters who in general technique were a little out of his class.
Actually, in the ultimate variation of it, it was the greatest trick.
He put Veronica into a box. And when he opened the box again
she was gone. That is all there was to it. The same thing had been
performed by dozens of others in many variations.
ut Charles (the Great Zambesi) Chartel did not use any of
those variations; not, certainly, the trap door—for he had once
performed the trick in a wire mesh twenty feet in the air. Besides,
he was a cut above the trap-door men.
After showing the empty box he would always take it apart
a
59
Mean Men
board by board, and pass the boards around for all to handle. He
would then assemble it once more into a box, clamp down the
cover, unclamp it again, open it, and Veronica would get out of
the box.
The Great Boffo swore that the girl never stepped into the box
at all.
The Great Boffo, however, could not duplicate the trick. Nor
could the Great Thaumaturgos, nor the Great Zebdo.
All of them could make girls disappear from boxes, of course,
and could do it in more showy fashion. But, though it was the
same thing to the audiences, it was not the same thing to
themselves. Their tricks were known to each other and were
obvious to any magic man. The special trick of Zambesi-Chartel
was not understood and this gave him stature. The only men in the
world who do not secretly believe in magic are the magicians, but
there was something about the doings of the Great Zambesi that
sowed doubt in them. The Great Vespo, indeed, claimed that he
knew how it was done. But Vespo, though brilliant, was an old
man and was given to extravagant claims.
The explanation that Charles (the Great Zambesi) Chartel gave
to his audiences will not be given here. Should we repeat it, we
would not be believed; we would be laughed at—and we are
sensitive. We have not the magnetism of Zambesi to carry off such
an outlandish claim as his even though it should be true—and it
was. (Actually he said that he sent Veronica down into the Ocean
and that he called her back again from that Ocean.)
However, this isn't about the disappearance of Veronica; it is
about a matter quite the opposite. And the opposite of the
disappearance of Veronica was the appearance of someone who
differed from her as much as possible.
60
The Man Underneath
THIS came about at the Tri-State Fair when the New Arena was
quite new. The crowd was spirited and the Great Zambesi was in
full form. The lighting was perfect and Veronica shone like a jewel
set in gold as she stepped into the box that was set up on blocks,
clear of the stage. Zambesi closed the box and the crowd had the
true feeling of magic about to happen.
And then, with perfect timing, Zambesi-Chartel threw back the
front cover as to reveal the box-empty.
We will be hornswitched if that box was empty!
But what rolled out of the box was not Veronica. It was the
most woebegone scarecrow of a clown ever seen, the saddest
looking man who ever stumbled over his own two feet.
“Holy hamadryads, cramoise, where did you come from?”
Zambesi-Chartel breathed without understanding his own words.
The man out of the box was a hobo from a hundred years ago.
He
wept and wiped his nose with his hand. He had trouble with
falling pants and broken shoes and a coat whose sleeve avoided
arm. The little clown was good and there was real pathos in his
silent humor,
"You've got to get out of here, cnaufer,” Chartel hissed at the
little man again and again. “Who are you and how did you get
here? Off with you now, cathexis, you're fouling up the act.” But
the little man avoided Chartel who would have killed him in all
sincerity.
Finally Chartel in his despair closed the box loudly, then
opened it again and brought Veronica out of it. But that didn't get
rid of the little tramp. He was still cavorting about the stage and
he was good. Listen, he was dressed in old black pants and a torn
undershirt and one suspender and he walked about the stage.
Then he had on a red sweater and a burglar's cap and black
glasses. He still walked about the stage and suddenly he was
2
61
Mean Men
a
splendid in evening clothes and monocle. Nobody had done that
before.
He became Joe College; he became the man in the charcoal-tan
suit; he became an old rowdy-dow on the loose with pearl-gray
vest and yellow gloves. Then he became a hobo again—but of a
different and worse vesture than before.
“Go away, cistugurium,” Veronica whispered angrily, “please
go away. You're not supposed to be in the act. Who are you
anyhow?”
Nobody else had ever completely changed his garb six times in a
minute and a half while hobbling about the stage with his hands in
his pockets. Nobody else transmuted his shoes from brown to black
as he walked in them. The expression of the little man was
pathetic and many eyes misted as they watched him.
Then, before the act had begun to drag, the little man wobbled
over and fell flat on his face in the box. Zambesi-Chartel closed it
and stood poised over it in an intensity of fear and hope. Then he
opened the box again. The little man was gone.
Zambesi-Chartel took the box apart board by board and he left
it apart. Well, it had been a good act, with an added element. But
Charles (the Great Zambesi) Chartel didn't know how he had
done it this time— or if he was the one who did it. The trick had
always been to make Veronica disappear and appear; there sure
hadn't been any little clown in the act before.
“Damn that cressanges anyhow,” Chartel grumbled. He was
puzzled. He knew that little man—and yet he didn't.
LATER that night at the Pepperpot some of the people ate and
talked. There were Chartel himself and Veronica; there was
62
The Man Underneath
a
2)
Captain Carter who had the trained bears; there were the three
Lemon sisters, Dolly, Molly, and Polly. Then another one was
with them—for the little man was sitting there and sniffling. He
hadn't been there before and he hadn't come in.
“Shall I order for you, claud?” Molly Lemon asked solicitously.
But a filled plate was already there and the little man began to
eat. He grinned and he grimaced. He was wearing horn-rim glasses
and then he was wearing pince-nez. He had a grin that came shyly
as though he were trying it out for the first time.
“clarence is so cute,” said Dolly Lemon. “We will adopt him
into our act if Chartel doesn't want him."
There was an empty five-cigar carton on the table. The little
man picked it up and it was full. Well, Chartel could duplicate
that; probably you could yourself, but it would take
prop
and
preparation. The little man pulled a stogie from the carton, puffed
on it and it was lit. This also could be done; there are few tricks
that cannot be duplicated.
“If you are joining the act, cletus, and it seems as though you
are,” said Chartel wondering, “you will have to clean up a little.”
“Must I really?” asked curt but he obliged at once. He had
become as immaculate a dandy as anyone ever saw. “Captain
Carter,” he said, “I see from your pocket bulge that you are a
drinking man. I ask you to share it with us.”
“It's empty an hour since," Captain Carter muttered sadly.
“'It wasn't always empty,” said cylix, the little man. “Let me see
if I can restore it.”
“The last time a magician filled an empty whisky bottle for
me—and it was none other than old Zambesi-Chartel here—the
stuff was not potable. It was the most horrendous rock dew ever
distilled.”
“This will be potable,” said celiter—and the bottle filled.
Its content was gloriously potable. It put new life into the party
a
>
63
Mean Men
and all of them, except Chartel-Zambesi, had a wonderful time.
And if
you don't think you can have fun with a reanimated bottle
of whisky and Veronica and the three Lemon sisters you must have
a different and more staid definition of fun.
“BUT all good things must end,” said Captain Carter when the
small hours were half
grown.
“All good things do not have to end,” said cajetan, the little
man, who had been enjoying himself on Polly Lemon's lap. “The
world shriveled when your thought was first put into words. Good
things can go on forever, except that—now and then—they must
be temporarily adjourned. As long as we understand that partings
are only temporary.”
“Oh, we understand that, cuiller," said the three Lemon sisters.
So they temporarily adjourned the party.
But later—and this was after the sun itself was up—Chartel and
cyprian were finally alone.
“We will have to have an explanation,” said Chartel. “Who are
you?”
“You have no idea, Charles? Did you not take me out of the
box? I thought you would know. Did you not call me up?"
“I doubt I did. Do not try to hoax an old hoaxer. Where did you
come from that first time? The stage was not trapped and you
were not intruded with my knowledge.”
“Was I not? You told the audience how it was done. You said
you called me up out of the Ocean.”
“That is my patter—but it doesn't apply to you. Dammit,
)
64
The Man Underneath
>
a
ching-chi, where'd you get the Chinese robes and grow that little
beard so fast? And how do you make them both change colors so
neat? No, chawan, I never called any such fish as you out of the
Ocean.”
“In that case I will leave, since I am here through a
misunderstanding.”
“Stay a bit, cyfaill. In my patter that is the way I make the girl
disappear. How could it make you appear?”
“Charles, I've heard you explain the principle dozens of times. I
was not in the box. But in a little while I would be in the box. So
we adjust the box to a near moment in the future and I am in the
box.”
“There's a lacuna in your logic, clunis,” Chartel said. “Hey,
how can you turn into a Hottentot so easily? And not into a real
Hottentot either, coya—but into what I would call an old
burlesque-stage idea of a Hottentot.”
“You always did have a good imagination, Charles,” said
chabiari. He took up an empty glass, shook it, and it was filled
again.
“You're my master there, cosmos,” said Chartel. “I couldn't
duplicate that without props and you've done it three times.
How?"
“By our own theory that we worked out so long ago, Charles. I
shift it only a little in time and it is done. Anything that has once
been full can be filled again by taking it back to the time of its
plenitude.”
“chester, you
have a patter that won't quit. But, if it worked-
the idea would be a good one.”
“'It does work, Charles. I thought we knew that. We have used
it so long."
65
Mean Men
“You talk and talk, collard,” said Chartel. “But I still do not
know how you can change your whole appearance so easily and
often.”
“Why, Charles, we are protean,” said coilon. “That is the sort of
man we are.”
IT WAS later the same day that Finnerty, the manager of the
show, spoke to Chartel about the little man.
“Your brother from the old country has put new life into the
act,” he said. “Keep him in it. We haven't mentioned money—and
I am seldom the one to bring up the subject—but we can settle on
a figure. Will it be payable to him or to you?”
“It will be payable to me,” said Charles (the Great Zambesi)
Chartel. Confused he was, but he always knew the top and bottom
side of a dollar. Finnerty and Chartel settled on a figure.
“YOU have been taken for my brother from the old country,”
Chartel told colin a bit later, “and I can see why. I wondered
whom
you
reminded me of. Oh, stop turning into a rooster! If you
were shaved and combed—say, that was quick, contumace! the
resemblance would be, is, even closer. You do look like me; you
are an extremely handsome man. But I did not know that I had a
brother, compuesto, and I do not know what country the old
country is—since I was born on Elm Street in Springfield.”
“Perhaps 'brother' is a euphemism for something even closer,
66
The Man Underneath
your 'Ocean’?”
Charles; and the ‘old country' may have a special meaning for us.
Is it not the name for what is on the other side of
"columkill, you are as phony as—well, metaphor fails me—you
are as phony as myself,” said Charles Chartel.
Sometimes the little man was frightening in his wild actions.
There wasn't a mean bone in him, and he was almost universally
liked. But he did act on impulse.
For him, to think was to act. It was good that everybody liked
him; if they hadn't they'd have hanged him high.
And always he would multiply things. Chartel begged for his
secret.
“We could be rich, cogsworth, really rich,” Chartel would
plead.
“But we are already rich, Charles. Nobody has ever had such a
rich and perfected personality as we have. You still do not
appreciate the greatness of our trick, Charles, though we thought
about it for years before we were able to do it. It's the noblest
illusion of them all. Now we are citizens of an abounding world
and everything in it is ours. That is to be rich.”
“consuelo, you are a bleeding doctrinaire. I did not ask for a
lecture. I only ask that you show me how to make a hundred
dollars
grow
where one grew
before. I
say
that is to be rich.”
“I've shown you a hundred times, Charles, and you look for
more than is in it. You take a thin old wallet that once knew
fatness. You restore it to its old state, empty it and restore it again,
and so you accumulate. But why do you want money?”
”
"It is just that I have a passion for collecting it, courlis.”
"Collecting we can understand, but the true collector will have
no desire for duplicates. Understandably we might want a bill of
each size—a one, a five, a ten, a fifty—but we avoid that which
-a ,
once we prized—the ten-thousand dollar bill. The avid people
67
Mean Men
have spoiled it for us. But you have not the true collectors' spirit,
Charles.”
“I have the true money-collectors' spirit, clendon. Why cannot I
duplicate your feats in this?”
“The only reason I can figure, Charles, is that you're just too
duck-knuckled dumb and it hurts me to say that about one of
ourselves.”
BUT Zambesi-Chartel got a new set of ideas when he saw the trick
that cormorant did with an old hat. It was at a rummage sale at
which charleroi looked in out of curiosity—he was curious about
everything.
“What a pixie must have worn this!” he exclaimed. “What a
pixie!"
c held the hat in his hands. And then he held the head in his
hands. It was something like a pixie head and it was attached to
the body of a young lady. cisailles kissed the young lady
uncommonly about the temporal regions and pressed her to his
sternum—for to him impulse was the same as action. And she
squealed.
“Not that I mind—but you did startle me,” she chimed. “Who
are you? Who, may I ask, am I? And how in pigeon-toed perdition
did I get here?”
“You are a pixie, young lady,” said clough, “and as such
likely to turn up anywhere. I had your hat, so what more natural
than that I should call you up to fill it.”
“I am only a part-time pixie, cartier, but I am a full-time
housewife. Supper will burn. How do I get back?”
I
you are
68
The Man Underneath
“You already are,” said callimachus. And she was. Or at least
she was no longer there.
And that was the beginning of the trouble; not for c, not for the
young pixie lady, but it was the beginning of the trouble for
Charles (Great Zambesi) Chartel.
Charles knew how it was done now. One cannot continue doing
a basic trick in the presence of such a sharpy as Charles Chartel
without his learning it. And once he had learned how it was done
there was no stopping him.
Charles Chartel was not a bad man underneath, but on the
surface he was a rotter. The natural complement of healthy greed
that is in every man began to burgeon unnaturally in him. The
hard core of meanness spread through his whole being. The
arrogance of the rooster became that of the tyrant and
envy
and
revenge burned in him with sulphurous fire.
Chartel now had the key to total wealth, a key that would not
only unlock all doors for him, but lock them against others. He set
out to get control of the show. To do this he had to break
Finnerty, the owner-manager, and buy him out after breaking
him.
Business had been good and every night Finnerty had a full
cash box. But before a thing is full, it is half full. And before that,
it is a quarter full. Every night, just as Finnerty went to count the
take, Zambesi-Chartel would play a trick on that box. And it
would be only a quarter full. That was not enough to cover
expenses.
Finnerty had never been a saving man. He had always trod the
narrow green edge between solvency and disaster. And in two
weeks he was broke.
Finnerty sold the show and the bookings to Chartel for ten
>
69
Mean Men
a
thousand dollars. It made a nice wad in his pocket when he walked
away from the show that was no longer his.
But the meanness was running like a tide in Chartel and he
wouldn't let it go at that. He emptied the wallet of Finnerty again,
taking it back ten minutes in time. Finnerty felt a certain
lightness, and he knew what it was. But he kept on walking.
“It's lucky he left me with my pants,” said Finn, “if he has. I'm
afraid to look down.”
A CLOUD came over the happy little family that was the show.
Veronica felt herself abused and it wasn't imagination. The three
Lemon sisters shivered to the chill of a harsh master. So did
Carucchi the singer, and Captain Carter and his bears. And c, the
little man who was the unwitting cause of it all, took to staying
out of the way of the rampaging Chartel.
For Zambesi-Chartel was now avid for praise, for money, for all
manner of meanness. He accumulated coin by every variation of
the new trick he had learned. He robbed by it, he burgled the easy
way. It is an awful and sickening thing to see a good man grow
rich and respected.
“But underneath he isn't a bad man at all,” Veronica moaned.
“Really he isn't.”
“No, underneath he is a fine man,” said c, the little man of
impulse. “Who should know better than I?”
“Why, what do you mean, chadwick dear?” Veronica asked
him.
“The same as you. Charles is only bad on the surface.
Underneath he's a fine fellow.”
70
The Man Underneath
WELL, that may have been. But on the surface, Zambesi-Chartel
,
.
sure did get rough. He demeaned the dignity of his fellow humans
and made them eat dirt by the ton. He went on adrenalin drunks
and thrived on the hatred in his own bloodstream. He became a
martinet, a propagandist for the Hoop act. He registered Demo-
crat. He switched from perfectos to panatelas and from honest
whisky sours to perfidious martinis. He developed a snigger and
horselaugh that wilted pigweeds.
“Oh, chiot,” said Veronica, “we must do something to save him
from himself. We are all involved with him.”
“Who should know better than I?” conchylatus asked sadly.
Chartel began to drink tea. He started to call a napkin a
serviette and to omit every single syllable in “extraordinary." He
switched allegiance from the noble National League to the
sniveling American. He defrauded his laborers of their wages, he
used scent, he ate vegetarian lunches, he read Walter Lippmann
posthumously, he switched from Gumbo Hair Oil to Brilliantine.
Once a character begins to deteriorate it goes all the way and in
every detail.
Chartel had the Green Sickness, the inordinate love of money.
He obtained the stuff, first by all means fair and foul, then by foul
means only. But obtain it he did and it made a sniveling devil out
of him.
“But the man underneath isn't bad at all,” Veronica insisted.
“Who should know better than I?” caoine said.
The Grand Canyon began with a prairie dog burrow and once it
was started there was no stopping it. The downfall of Zambesi-
Chartel began over a nickel and then the whole apparatus came
down: his wealth, real and phantom-his reputation—the whole
blamed complex of the man.
It started with a fist fight he had with a blind newsdealer over a
a
a
71
Mean Men
>
>
>
a
nickel. It ended with Chartel in jail, indicted, despised, shamed,
despondent.
Moreover, public feeling was strongly against him.
Chartel was up on more than twenty counts of theft and
pilfering and the nickel stolen from the blind man was by no
means the least of them. He was up on a dozen counts of wage
fraud. He was charged with multiplex pick-pocketing “by device
not understood.” They had him on faked bill of sale, dishonest
conveyance, simple and compounded larceny, possession of stolen
goods, barratry.
“Looks like we have you on everything but chicken-stealing,”
the judge said at the hearing.
“We have him on that, too,” said the bailiff. “Five counts of it."
“You would gag a gannet and make a buzzard belch,” said the
judge. “I'd crop your ears if that law still obtained. And if we can
find a capital offense in all this offensiveness I'll have your head. It
is hard to believe that you were once human.”
Chartel was shamed and sick of heart and felt himself friendless.
That night he attempted to hang himself in his cell. The attempt
failed for reasons that are not clear but not for any lack of effort on
his part. It is worthy of note that the only persons who ever
attempt to take their own lives are rather serious persons.
“We will have to go to him at once, cristophe,” said Veronica.
“We must show him that we still love him. He'd sicken a jackal
the way he's behaving, but he isn't really like that. The man
underneath”
“Hush, Veronica, you embarrass me when you talk like that,”
"
said ciabhach. “I know what a prince is the man underneath.”
>
>
72
The Man Underneath
>
>
LITTLE c went to visit the Great Zambesi-Chartel in his cell.
“It is time we had a talk,” he said.
“No, no, it's too late for talk,” said Charles Chartel.
“You have disgraced us both, Charles," said celach. “It goes
very deeply when it touches me."
“I never even knew who you were, little c. You are protean and
you are not at all plausible.”
“You called me up and you still don't know who I am, Charles?
But this was our finest trick, our greatest illusion on which we
worked subconsciously for years. We are our own masterpiece,
Charles. And you didn't recognize it when it happened. You are
the Magic Man but I am the Magic Man run wild. Aye, Charles,
he's best when he runs wild.”
“Tell me, cicerone, who are you? Who am I?" Chartel begged.
“What is my difficulty?"
”
“Our difficulty, Charles, is that one of us became too serious,
carnefice tried to explain. “To be serious is the only capital crime.
For that, one of us will have to die—but it isn't as though it were a
serious matter. Every man is at least two men, but ordinarily the
two are not at the same time bodied and apparent. Now you
have
marred our greatest trick-but it was fun while it lasted.”
Little c signaled to Veronica and she came down the corridor
with a bunch of boards under her arm. She was admitted to the
cell by the puzzled jailor.
“One of us will have to leave forever,” coquelicot told Charles
Chartel. “It isn't right for both of us to be around.”
“Ah, I will be sorry to see you go, chandos,” said Chartel. “But
who are you? I never could remember your name properly and
there is something weird about that. You change forever in
appearance and name. Who are you, little c?”
“Only that. Just little c. Or shall we say sub-c? But we are too
73
Mean Men
a
clever to be hounded into a hole like this, Charles. Remember! We
were our own greatest trick, even if it failed.”
“What must we do now?" Chartel asked dully.
“A simple transference," cogne said. He was building the box
board by board.
“I'm not a bad man underneath,” Chartel sniveled. “I'm
misunderstood.”
“No, we're a fine man underneath, Charles. I am the man
underneath,” said ciud. “Get in the box.”
“I get in? I am Charles (the Great Zambesi) Chartel. You are
only little c, sub-c, an aspect of myself. I will not get into the box!”
“Get in, Charles,” said cistercium. “It was a mix-up from the
beginning. You were never meant to see the light of day. The
wrong one of us has been running loose.”
“I'll fight, I'll claw, I'll rant!"
“That's what a healthy subconscious is supposed to do,” cludok
said. “Get in!”
“It's murder! I won't go! It's oblivion!"
“No such thing, Charles. It isn't as though we weren't the same
person. I'll still be here.”
Then little c and Veronica shoved the Great Zambesi Charles
Chartel down into the box and closed the lid. In doing so, little c
became himself the Great Zambesi. For, when he opened the box
again, it was empty. And he took it apart board by board. The
jailor said that he had to have his prisoner and Veronica gave
him
the boards.
“There, there, doll,” she said. “Make one out of them. Try real
hard.”
And Veronica and the Great Zambesi left that place.
a
C
74
The Man Underneath
WE WON'T say that Zambesi wasn't the greatest magician in the
world. He may have become the greatest, after he began to treat it
lightly. People, he was good! There was never any act with such
variety and fun in it. After his strange mid-life hiatus he achieved
new heights.
“And I'm certainly glad you overcame your personality difficul-
ties,” the loving Veronica told him later. “For a while there—
whoof! But I always knew you were a fine man underneath.'
"
75
Secret Places
Boomer Flats
IN the tracks of our spiritual father Ivan Sanderson we may
now have trailed a clutch of ABSMs to their lair," the
eminent scientist Arpad Arkabaranan was saying in his
rattling voice. “And that lair may not be a mountain thicket
or rain forest or swamp, but these scrimpy red clay flats. I
would almost give my life for the success of this quest, but it
seems that it should have a more magnificent setting.”
“It looks like a wild goose chase,” the eminent scientist
Willy McGilly commented. But no, Willy was not down-grad-
ing their quest. He was referring to the wild geese that rose
about them from the edges of the flats with clatter and
whistle and honk. This was a flight-way, a chase of theirs.
There were hundreds of them if one had the fine eyes to pick
them out from the background. “Mud geese,” Willy said. “We
don't see as many of them as when I was a boy.”
“I do not, and I am afraid that I will not, believe in the
ABSMs,” said the eminent scientist Dr. Velikof Vonk, strok-
ing his—(no he didn't, he didn't have one)—stroking his jaw,
“and yet this is the thing that I also have most desired, to find
this missing link finally, and to refute all believers in the
other thing.”
"We can't see the chain for the links,” said Willy McGilly.
“I never believed that any of them was missing. “There's
79
Secret Places
always been too many of them for the length of the chain:
that's the trouble."
“I've traveled a million miles in search of them,” said
Arpad. “I've pretty well probed all the meager ribs of the
world in that travel. My fear has always been that I'd miss
them by a trick, even that in some unaccountable way I
wouldn't know them when I found them. It would be ironic if
we did find them in such a place as this: not a wild place, only
a shabby and overlooked place."
“My own fear has been that when I finally gazed on one I
would wake with a start and find that I had been looking in a
mirror," said Velikof. “There must be some symbolism here
that I don't understand. What is your own anticipation of
them, Willy?"
“Oh, coming back to people I've always liked. There used to
be a bunch of them on the edge of my hometown,” Willy
McGilly said. "Come to think of it, there used to be a bunch of
them on the edge of every hometown. Now they're more
likely to be found right in the middle of every town. They're
the scrubs, you know, for the bottoming of the breed."
“What are you talking about, Willy?" Arpad asked sharply.
What they were all talking about was ABSMs.
)
EVERY town in the south part of that county has a shadow
or secondary. There is Meehan, and Meehan Corners; Perkins,
and Perkins Corner; Boomer, and Boomer Flats. The three
eminent scientists were driving the three miles from Boomer
to Boomer Flats looking for the bones, and hopefully even the
80
living flesh, of a legend. It was that of the missing link, of the Abominable Snowman, the ABSM. It wasn't snowy country there, but the so-called Snowmen have been reported in every sort of climate and countryside. The local legend, recently uncovered by Arpad, was that there was a non-African non-Indian "people of color" living in the neighborhood of Boomer Flats, "between the sand­ bush thickets and the river." It was said that they lived on the very red mud banks of the river, and that they lived a little in the river itself. Then Dr. V elikof Vonk had come onto a tape in a bunch of anthropological tapes, and the tape contained sequences like this: "What do they do when the river floods?" "Ah, they close their noses and mouths and ears with mud, and they lie down with big rocks on their breasts and stay there till the flood has passed." "Can they be taught?" "Some of the children go to school, and they learn. But when they are older then they stay at home, and they forget." "What sort of language do they talk?" "Ah, they don't seem to talk very much. They keep to themselves. Sometimes when they talk it is just plain Cimarron Valley English." "What do they eat?" "They boil river water in mud clay pots. They put in wild onions and greenery. The pottage thickens then, I don't know how. It gets lumps of meat or clay in it, and they eat that too. They eat frogs and fish and owls and thicket filaments. But mostly they don't eat very much of anything." "It is said that they aren't all of the same appearance. It is
Boomer Flats
81
even said that they are born, ah, shapeless, and that-ah­ could you tell me anything about that?" "Yeah. They're born without much shape. Most of them never do get much shape. When they have any, well actually their mothers lick them into shape, give them their appear­ ance." "It's an old folk tale that bears do that." "Maybe they learned it from the bears then, young fellow. There's quite a bit of bear mixture in them, but the bears themselves have nearly gone from the flats and thickets now. More than likely the bears learned it from them. Sometimes the mothers lick the cubs into the shape of regular people for a joke." "That is the legend?" "You keep saying legend. I don't know anything about legend. I j ust tell you what you ask me. I'll tell you a funny one, though. One of the mothers who was getting ready to bear happened to get ahold of an old movie magazine that some fishers from Boomer had left on the river edge. There was a picture in it of the prettiest girl that anyone ever saw, and it was a picture of all of that girl. This mother was tickled by that picture. She bore a daughter then, and she licked her into the shape and appearance of the girl in the movie magazine. And the girl grew up looking like that and she still looks like that, pretty as a picture. I don't believe the girl appreciates the joke. She is the prettiest of all the people, though. Her name is Crayola Catfish." "Are you having me, old fellow? Have those creatures any humor?" "Some of them tell old jokes. John Salt tells old jokes. The
Secret Places
82
THIS tape (recorded by an anthropology student at State University who, by the way, has since busted out of anthro­ pology and is now taking hotel and restaurant management) had greatly excited the eminent scientist Dr. V elikof Vonk when he had played it, along with several hundred other tapes that had come in that week from the anthropology circuit. He scratched his-{no he didn't, he didn't have one)-he scratched his jowl and he phoned up the eminent scientists Arpad Arkabaranan and Willy McGilly. "I 'll go, I'll go, of course I'll go," Arpad had cried. "I've traveled a million miles in search of it, and should I refuse to go sixty? This won't be it, this can't be it, but I'll never give up. Yes, we'll go tomorrow." "Sure, I'll go," Willy McGilly said. " I've been there before, I kind of like those folks on the flats. I don't know about the biggest catfish in the world, but the biggest catfish stories in the world have been pulled out of the Cimarron River right about at Boomer Flats. Sure, we'll go tomorrow."
Licorice Man tells really old jokes. And man, does the Comet ever tell old jokes!" "Are the creatures long-lived?" "Long-lived as we want to be. The elixir comes from these flats, you know. Some of us use it, some of us don't." "Are you one of the creatures?" "Sure, I'm one of them. I like to get out from it sometimes though. I follow the harvests."
Boomer Flats
83
Secret Places
“This may be it," Velikof had said. “How can we miss it? I
can almost reach out and scratch it on the nose from here."
“You'll find yourself scratching your own nose, that's how
you'll miss it. But it's there and it's real.”
“I believe, Willy, that there is a sort of amnesia that has
prevented us finding them or remembering them accurately."
“Not that, Velikof. It's just that they're always too close to
us to see.”
SO the next day the three eminent scientists drove over from
T-Town to come to Boomer Flats. Willy McGilly knew where
the place was, but his pointing out of the way seemed
improbable: Velikof was more inclined to trust the informa-
tion of people in Boomer. And there was a difficulty there.
People kept saying “This is Boomer. There isn't exactly any
place called Boomer Flats.” Boomer Flats wasn't on any map.
It was too small even to have a post office. And the Boomer
people were exasperating in not knowing about it or knowing
the way to it.
“Three miles from here, and you don't know where it is?”
Velikof asked one of them angrily.
"I don't even know that it is," the Boomer man had said in
his own near anger. “I don't believe that there is such a
place."
Finally, however, other men told the eminent scientists
that there sort of was such a place, sort of a place. Sort of a
road going to it too. They pointed out the same improbable
way that Willy McGilly had pointed out.
84
Boomer Flats
The three eminents took the road. The flats hadn't flooded
lately. The road was sand, but it could be negotiated. They
came to the town, to the sort of town, in the ragged river
flats. There was such a place. They went to the Cimarron
Hotel which was like any hotel anywhere, only older. They
went into the dining room for it was noon.
It had tables, but it was more than a dining room. It was a
common room. It even had intimations of old elegance in
blued pier mirrors. There was a dingy bar there. There was a
pool table there, and a hairy man was playing rotation with
the Comet on it. The Comet was a long gray-bearded man (in
fact, comet means a star with a beard) and small pieces were
always falling off him. Clay-colored men with their hats on
were playing dominos at several of the tables, and there were
half a dozen dogs in the room. Something a little queer and
primordial about those dogs! Something a little queer and
primordial about the whole place!
But, as if set to serve as distraction, there was a remarka-
bly pretty girl there, and she might have been a waitress. She
seemed to be waiting, either listlessly or profoundly, for
something
Dr. Velikof Vonk twinkled his deep eyes in their orbital
caves: perhaps he cogitated his massive brain behind his
massive orbital ridges: and he arrived, by sheer mentality, at
the next step.
“Have you a menu, young lady?” he asked.
"No," she answered simply, but it wasn't simple at all. Her
voice didn't go with her prettiness. It was much more
intricate than her appearance, even in that one syllable. It
was powerful, not really harsh, deep and resonant as caverns,
85
Secret Places
1)
full and timeless. The girl was big-boned beneath her
prettiness, with heavy brindled hair and complex eyes.
"We would like something to eat,” Arpad Arkabaranan
ventured. “What do you have?"
“They're fixing it for you now," the girl said. “I'll bring it
after a while.”
There was a rich river smell about the whole place, and the
room was badly lit.
“Her voice is an odd one," Arpad whispered in curious
admiration. “Like rocks rolled around by water, but it also
has a touch of springtime in it, springtime of a very peculiar
quality.”
“Not just a springtime; it's an interstadial time,” Willy
McGilly stated accurately. “I've noticed that about them in
other places. It's old green season in their voices, green season
between the ice.”
The room was lit only by hanging lamps. They had a flicker
to them. They were not electric.
“There's a lot of the gas-light era in this place,” Arpad
gave the opinion, “but the lights aren't gas lights either."
“No, they're hanging oil lamps,” Velikof said. “An amusing
fancy just went through my head that they might be old
whale-oil lamps.”
“Girl, what do you burn in the hanging lamps?” Willy
McGilly asked her.
“Catfish oil,” she said in the resonant voice that had a touch
of the green interstadial time in it. And catfish oil burns with
a clay-colored flame.
“Can you bring us drinks while we wait?” Velikof of the
massive head asked.
a
86
Boomer Flats
1
a
1)
a
“They're fixing them for you now," the girl said. “I'll bring
them after a while."
Meanwhile on the old pool table the Comet was beating the
hairy man at rotation. Nobody could beat the Comet at
rotation.
“We came here looking for strange creatures,” Arpad said
in the direction of the girl. “Do you know anything about
strange creatures or people, or where they can be found?”
"You are the only strange people who have come here
lately,” she told them. Then she brought their drinks to them,
three great sloshing clay cups or bulbous steins that smelled
strongly of river, perhaps of interstadial river. She set them
in front of the eminents with something like a twinkle in her
eyes; something like, but much more. It was laughing
lightning flashing from under the ridges of that pretty head.
She was waiting their reaction.
Velikof cocked a big deep eye at his drink. This itself was a
feat. Other men hadn't such eyes, or such brows above them,
as had Velikof Vonk. They took a bit of cocking, and it wasn't
done lightly. And Velikof grinned out of deep folk memory as
he began to drink. Velikof was always strong on the folk
memory bit.
Arpad Arkabaranan screamed, rose backwards, toppled his
chair, and stood aghast while pointing a shaking finger at his
splashing clay cup. Arpad was disturbed.
Willy McGilly drank deeply from his own stirring vessel.
“Why, it's Green Snake Snorter!” he cried in amazement
and delight. “Oh drink of drinks, thou're a pleasure beyond
expectation! They used to serve it to us back home, but I
never even hoped to find it here. What great thing have we
done to deserve this?”
a
87
Secret Places
He drank again of the wonderful splashing liquor while the
spray of it filled the air. And Velikof also drank with noisy
pleasure. The girl righted Arpad's chair, put Arpad into it
again with strong hands, and addressed him powerfully to his
cresting breaker. But Arpad was scared of his lively drink.
"It's alive, it's alive," was all that he could jabber. Arpad
Arkabaranan specialized in primitives, and primitives by
definition are prime stuff. But there wasn't, now in his
moment of weakness, enough prime stuff in Arpad himself to
face so pleasant and primitive a drink as this.
The liquid was sparkling with bright action, was ade-
,
quately alcoholic, something like choc beer, and there was a
green snake in each cup. (Velikof in his notebook states that
they were green worms of the species vermis ebrius viridis,
but that is only a quibble. They were snake-like worms and of
the size of small snakes, and we will call them snakes.)
“Do get with it, Arpad,” Willy McGilly cried. “The trick is
to drink it up before the snake drinks it. I tell you though
that the snakes can discern when a man is afraid of them.
They'll fang the face off a man who's afraid of them.'
“Ah, I don't believe that I want the drink,” Arpad declared
with sickish grace. “I'm not much of a drinking man.”
So Arpad's green snake drank up his Green Snake Snorter,
noisily and greedily. Then it expired—it breathed out its life
and evaporated. That green snake was gone.
“Where did he go?" Arpad asked nervously. He was still
uneasy about the business.
“Back to the catfish,” the girl said. “All the snakes are
spirits of catfish just out for a little ramble.”
“Interesting,” Velikof said, and he noted in his pocket
notebook that the vermis ebrius viridis is not a discrete
88
Boomer Flats
species of worm or snake, but is rather spirit of catfish. It is
out of such careful notation that science is built up.
“Is there anything noteworthy about Boomer Flats?"
Velikof asked the girl then. “Has it any unique claim to
fame?”
“Yes,” the girl said. “This is the place that the comets come
back to.”
“Ah, but the moths have eaten the comets,” Willy McGilly
quoted from the old epic.
The girl brought them three big clay bowls heaped with
fish eggs, and these they were to eat with three clay spoons.
Willy McGilly and Dr. Velikof Vonk addressed themselves to
the rich meal with pleasure, but Arpad Arkabaranan refused.
“Why, it's all mixed with mud and sand and trash," he
objected.
“Certainly, certainly, wonderful, wonderful,” Willy Mc-
Gilly slushed out the happy words with a mouth full of de-
licious gloop. “I always thought that something went out of
the world when they cleaned up the old shanty town dish of
shad roe. In some places they cleaned it up; not everywhere. I
maintain that roe at its best must always have at least a
slight tang of river sewage."
But Arpad broke his clay spoon in disgust. And he would
not eat. Arpad had traveled a million miles in search of it but
he didn't know it when he found it; he hadn't any of it inside
him, so he missed it.
One of the domino players at a near table (the three
eminents had noticed this some time before but had not fully
realized it) was a bear. The bear was dressed as a shabby
man; he wore a big black hat on his head; he played dominos
well; he was winning.
89
Secret Places
“How is it that the bear plays so well?” Velikof asked.
“He doesn't play at all well,” Willy McGilly protested. “I
could beat him. I could beat any of them.”
”
“He isn't really a bear,” the girl said. “He is my cousin. Our
mothers, who were sisters, were clownish. His mother licked
him into the shape of a bear for fun. But that is nothing to
what my mother did to me. She licked me into pretty face and
pretty figure for a joke, and now I am stuck with it. I think it
is too much of a joke. I'm not really like this, but I guess I
may as well laugh at me just as everybody else does.”
"What is your name?” Arpad asked her without real
interest.
“Crayola Catfish.”
But Arpad Arkabaranan didn't hear or recognize the name,
though it had been on a tape that Dr. Velikof Vonk had
played for them, the same tape that had really brought them
to Boomer Flats. Arpad had now closed his eyes and ears and
heart to all of it.
The hairy man and the Comet were still shooting pool, but
pieces were still falling off the Comet.
“He's diminishing, he's breaking up,” Velikof observed.
“He won't last another hundred years at that rate.”
Then the eminents left board and room and the Cimarron
Hotel to go looking for ABSMs who were rumored to live in
that area.
ABSM is the code name for the Abominable Snowman, for
the Hairy Woodman, for the Wild Man of Borneo, for the
Sasquatch, for the Booger-Man, for the Ape-Man, for the
Bear-Man, for the Missing Link, for the nine-foot-tall Giant
things, for the living Neanderthals. It is believed by some
that all of these beings are the same. It is believed by most
2)
90
that these things are no thing at all, no where, . not in any form. And it seemed as if the most were right, for the three eminents could not find hide nor hair (rough hide and copious hair were supposed to be marks by which the ABSMs might be known) of the queer folks anywhere along the red bank of the Cimarron River. Such creatures as they did encounter were very like the shabby and untalkative creatures they had already encountered in Boomer Flats. They weren't an ugly people: they were pleasantly mud-homely. They were civil and most often they were silent. They dressed something as people had dressed seventy-five years before that time-as the poor working people had dressed then. Maybe they were poor, maybe not. They didn't seem to work very much. Sometimes a man or a woman seemed to be doing a little bit of work, very casually. It may be that the red-mud river was full of fish. Something was splashing and jumping there. Big turtles waddled up out of the water, caked with mud even around their eyes. The shores and flats were treacherous, and sometimes an eminent would sink into the sand-mud up to the hips. But the broad-footed people of the area didn't seem to sink in. There was plenty of greenery (or brownery, for it had been the dusty weeks) along the shores. There were muskrats, there were even beavers, there were skunks and possums and badgers. There were wolf dens and coyote dens digged into the banks, and they had their particular smells about them. There were dog dens. There were coon trees. There were even bear dens or caves. But no, that was not a bear smell either. What smell was it?
Boomer Flats
91
Secret Places
“What lives in these clay caves?” Velikof asked a woman
who was digging river clams there.
“The Giants live in them,” she said. Well, they were tall
enough to be giants' caves. A nine-footer need hardly stoop to
enter one.
“We have missed it,” Arpad said. “There is nothing at all to
be found here. I will travel farther, and I may find it in other
places.”
“Oh, I believe we are right in the middle of it,” Velikof
gave the opinion.
“It is all around us, Arpad, everything you wanted,” Willy
McGilly insisted.
But Arpad Arkabaranan would have none of the muddy
water, none of the red sand or the red sand caves, nothing of
anything here. The interest had all gone out of him. The three
of them went back to the Cimarron Hotel without, appar-
ently, finding primitive creature or missing link at all.
They entered the common room of the hotel again. Domi-
nos were set before them. They played draw listlessly.
“You are sure that there are no odd creatures around this
place?” Arpad again asked the girl Crayola Catfish.
“John Salt is an odd creature and he comes from this
place," Crayola told them. “The Licorice Man is an odd
creature, I suppose. So is Ape Woodman: he used to be a
big-time football player. All three of them had regular-people
blood in them; I suppose that's what made them odd. They
were almost as odd as you three creatures. And the Comet
playing pool there is an odd one. I don't know what kind of
blood he has in him to make him odd.”
“How long has he been around here?" Velikof asked.
“He returns every eighty-seven years. He stays here about
)
92
Boomer Flats
2
three years, and he's already been here two of them. Then he
goes off on another circuit. He goes out past the planets and
among the stars."
“Oh? And how does he travel out there?” Velikof asked
with cocked tongue and eye. .
“With horse and buggy, of course."
“Oh there, Comet,” Willy McGilly called. “Is it true that
you travel out among the stars with horse and buggy?"
“Aye, that I do,” the long gray-bearded man named Comet
called back, “with a horse named Pee-gosh and a buggy
named Harma. It's a flop-eared horse and a broken buggy,
but they take me there.”
“Touch clay,” said Crayola Catfish, “for the lightning.”
They touched clay. Everything was of baked clay anyhow,
even the dominos. And there had been lightning, fantastic
lightning dashing itself through every crack and cranny of
the flimsy hotel. It was a lightning brighter than all the
catfish-oil lamps in the world put together. And it continued.
There was clattering sequence thunder, and there was a
roaring booming sound that came from a few miles west of
the thunder.
The Giants came in and stood around the edges of the
room. They were all very much alike, like brothers. They were
tall and somber, shabby, black-bearded to the eyes, and with
black hats on their heads. Unkempt. All were about nine feet
tall.
"Shall I sound like a simpleton if I ask if they are really
giants?” Velikof questioned.
"As your eyes tell you, they are the giants,” Crayola said.
,
“They stay here in the out-of-the-way places even more than
the rest of us. Sometimes regular people see them and do not
93
Secret Places
understand that they are regular people too. For that there is
scandal. It was the scent of such a scandal, I believe, that
brought the three of you here. But they are not apes or bears
or monsters. They are people too."
“They are of your own same kindred?” Velikof asked.
“Oh yes. They are the uncles, the old bachelors. That's why
they grow tall and silent. That's why they stand around the
edges of the room. And that is why they dig themselves caves
into the banks and bluffs instead of living in huts. The roofs
of huts are too low for them.”
“It would be possible to build taller huts,” Willy McGilly
suggested.
“It would be possible for you, yes," Crayola said. “It would
not be possible for them. They are set in their ways. They
develop a stoop and a gait because they feel themselves so
tall. They let their hair grow and overflow, all over their faces
and around their eyes, and all over their bodies also. They are
the steers of the species. Having no children or furniture,
what can they do but grow tall and ungainly like that? This
happens also to the steers of cattle and bears and apes,
that
they grow tall and gangling. They become bashful, you see, so
sometimes it is mistakenly believed that they are fierce.”
The roaring and booming from west of the thunder was
becoming louder and nearer. The river was coming danger-
ously alive. All of the people in the room knew that it was
now dark outside, and it was not yet time to be night.
The Comet gave his pool cue to one of the bashful giants
and came and sat with the eminents.
“You are Magi?” he asked.
“I am a magus, yes,” Willy McGilly said. “We are called
94
Boomer Flats
eminent scientists now-a-days. Velikof here also remains a
magus, but Arpad has lost it all this day."
“You are not the same three I first believed,” the old Comet
said. “Those three passed me several of my cycles back. They
had had word of an Event, and they had come from a great
distance as soon as they heard it. But it took them near two
thousand years to make the trip and they were worried that
myth had them as already arriving long ago. They were
worried that false Magi had anticipated them and set up a
preventing myth. And I believe that is what did happen.”
“ “And your own myths, old fellow, have they preceded you,
or have you really been here before?” Willy McGilly asked. “I
see that you have a twisty tongue that turns out some really
winding myths."
“Thank you, for that is ever my intent. Myths are not
merely things that were made in times past: myths are
among the things that maintain the present in being. I wish
most strongly that the present should be maintained: I often
live in it.”
“Tell us, old man, why Boomer Flats is a place that the
comets come back to?" Willy said.
“Oh, it's just one of the post stations where we change
horses when we make our orbits. A lot of the comets come to
the Flats: Booger, Donati, Encke, 1914c, and Halley.”
“But why to Boomer Flats on the little Cimarron River?”
Willy inquired.
“Things are often more than they seem. The Cimarron isn't
really so little a river as you would imagine. Actually it is the
river named Ocean that runs around all the worlds."
“Old Comet, old man with the pieces falling off of you,” Dr.
a
95
Secret Places
,
Velikof Vonk asked out of that big head of his, “can you tell
us just who are the under-people that we have tracked all
around the world and have probably found here no more than
seventy miles from our own illustrious T-Town?"
“A phyz like you have on you, and you have to ask!” the old
Comet twinkled at Velikof (a man who twinkled like that had
indeed been among the stars; he had their dust on him).
“You're one of them, you know."
“I've suspected that for a long time,” Velikof admitted.
"But who are they? And who am I?”
"Wise Willy here said it correctly to you last night; that
they were the scrubs who bottom the breed. But do not
demean the scrubs: they are the foundation. They are human
as all of us are human. They are a race that underlies the
other several races of man. When the bones and blood of the
more manifest races grow too thin, then they sustain you
with the mixture of their strong kingship: the mixing always
goes on, but in special eras it is more widespread. They are
the link that is never really missing, the link between the clay
and the blood.”
“Why are they, and me if I were not well-kempt and
eminent, sometimes taken to be animals?” Velikof asked.
“Why do they always live in such outlandish places?"
“They don't always. Sometimes they live in very inlandish
places. Even wise Willy understands that. But it is their
function to stand apart and grow in strength. Look at the
strong bone structure of that girl there! It is their function to
invent form-look at the form her mother invented for her.
They have a depth of mind, and they have it particularly in
those ghostly areas where the other races lack it. And they
share and mingle it in those sudden motley ages of great
96
Boomer Flats
achievement and vigor. Consider the great ages of Athens, of
Florence, of Los Angeles. And afterwards, this people will
withdraw again to gather new strength and bottom.'
“And why are they centered here in a tumble-down hotel
that is like a series of old daguerreotypes?" Willy McGilly
asked. “Will you tell us that there is something cosmic about
this little old hotel, as there is about this little old river?”
“Aye, of course there is, Willy. This is the hotel named
Xenodocheion. This is the special center of these Xenoi, these
strangers, and of all strangers everywhere. It isn't small; it is
merely that you can see but a portion of it at one time. And
then they center here to keep out of the way. Sometimes they
.
live in areas and neighborhoods that regularized humanity
has abandoned (whether in inner-city or boondock). Some-
times they live in eras and decades that regularized humanity
has abandoned: for their profundity of mind in the more
ghostly areas, they have come to have a cavalier way with
time. What is wrong with that? If regular people are finished
with those days and times, why may not others use them?”
The roaring and booming to the west of the thunder had
become very loud and very near now, and in the immediate
outdoors there was heavy rain.
“It is the time,” the girl Crayola Catfish cried out in her
powerful and intricate voice. “The flash flood is upon us and it
will smash everything. We will all go and lie down in the
river.”
They all began to follow her out, the Boomer Flats people,
and the Giants among them; the eminents, everybody.
“Will you also lie down in the river, Comet?" Willy McGilly
asked. “Somehow I don't believe it of you."
97
Secret Places
"No, I will not. That isn't my way. I will take my horse and
buggy and ascend above it."
“Ah, but Comet, will it look like a horse and buggy to us?”
“No, it will look quite other, if you do chance to see it.”
“And what are you really, Comet?” Velikof asked him as
they left him. “What species do you belong to?"
“To the human species, of course, Velikof. I belong to still
another race of it; another race that mixes sometimes, and
then withdraws again to gather more strength and depth.
Some individuals of us withdraw for quite long times. There
are a number of races of us in the wide cousinship, you see,
and it is a necessity that we be strangers to each other for a
good part of the time.”
“Are you a saucerian?"
“Oh saucerian be damned, Velikof! Harma means chariot
or it means buggy; it does not mean saucer. We are the
comets. And our own mingling with the commonalty of
people has also had quite a bit to do with those sudden
incandescent eras. Say, I'd like to talk with you fellows again
some time. I'll be by this way again in about eighty-seven
years."
“Maybe so," said Dr. Velikof Vonk.
“Maybe so," said Willy McGilly.
THE eminents followed the Boomer Flats people to the river.
And the Comet, we suppose, took his horse and buggy and
ascended out of it. Odd old fellow he was; pieces falling off
him; he'd hardly last another hundred years.
98
Boomer Flats
The red and black river was in surging food with a
blood-colored crest bearing down. And the flats—they were
just too flat. The flood would be a mile wide here in one
minute and everywhere in that width it would be deep
enough and swift enough to drown a man. It was near dark:
it was near the limit of roaring sound. But there was a pile of
large rocks there in the deepening shallows: plenty of rocks:
at least one big heavy rock for every person.
The Boomer Flats people understood what the rocks were
for, and the Giants among them understood. Two of the
eminents understood; and one of them, Arpad, apparently did
not. Arpad was carrying on in great fear about the dangers of
death by drowning.
Quickly then, to cram mud into the eyes and ears and noses
and mouths. There is plenty of mud and all of it is good.
Spirits of Catfish protect us now!—it will be only for a few
hours, for two or three days at the most.
Arpad alone panicked. He broke and ran when Crayola
Catfish tried to put mud in his mouth and nose to save him.
He ran and stumbled in the rising waters to his death.
But all the others understood. They lay down in the red
roaring river, and one of the giants set a heavy rock on the
breast of every person of them to hold them down. The last of
the giants then rolled the biggest of the rocks onto his own
breast.
So all were safe on the bottom of the surging torrent, safe
in the old mud-clay cradle. Nobody can stand against a
surging flood like that: the only way is to lie down on the
bottom and wait it out. And it was a refreshing, a deepening,
a renewing experience. There are persons, both inside and
outside the orders, who make religious retreats of three days
99
Secret Places
every year for their renewal. This was very like such a
retreat.
When the flood had subsided (this was three days later),
they all rose again, rolling the big rocks off their breasts; they
cleared their eyes and ears and mouths of the preserving
mud, and they resumed their ways and days.
For Velikof Vonk and for Willy McGilly it had been an
enriching experience. They had found the link that was not
really lost, leaving the other ninety-nine meanwhile. They
had
grown in cousinship and wisdom. They said they would
return to the flats every year at mud-duck season and
turtle-egg season. They went back to T-Town enlarged and
happy
a
THERE is, however, a gap in the Magi set, due to the foolish
dying of Arpad Arkabaranan. It is not of Scripture that a set
of Magi should consist of only three. There have been sets of
seven and nine and eleven. It is almost of Scripture, though,
that a set should not consist of less than three. In the Masulla
Apocalypse it seems to be said that a set must contain at the
least a Comet, a Commoner, and a Catfish. The meaning of
this is pretty muddy, and it may be a mistranslation.
There is Dr. Velikof Vonk with his huge head, with his
heavy orbital ridges, with the protruding near-muzzle on him
that makes the chin unnecessary and impossible, with the
great back-brain and the great good humor. He is (and you
had already guessed it of him) an ABSM, a neo-Neanderthal,
100
Boomer Flats
an unmissing link, one of that branch of the human race that
lives closest to the clay and the catfish.
There is Willy McGilly who belongs (and he himself has
come to the realization of this quite lately) to that race of
mankind called the Comets. He is quite bright, and he has his
periods. He himself is a short orbit comet, but for all that he
has been among the stars. Pieces fall off of him; he leaves a
wake; but he'll last a while yet.
One more is needed so that this set of Magi may be formed
again. The other two aspects being already covered, the third
member could well be a regularized person. It could be an
older person of ability, an eminent. It would be a younger
person of ability, a pre-eminent.
This person may be you.
Put
your
hand to it if
you
have the
surety about you, if you are not afraid of green snakes in the
cup (they'll fang the face off you if you're afraid of them), or
of clay-mud, or of comet dust, or of the rollicking world
between.
.
101
Mean Men
This Grand
Carcass Yet
QUE
MORD
ORD a
6
had a hopeless look when he came to Juniper Tell
with the device. He offered it for quite a small figure. He said he
hadn't the time to haggle.
Mord had produced some unusual-looking devices in the past,
but this was not of that sort. By now he had learned, apparently,
to give a conventional styling to his machines, however unusual
their function.
“Tell, with this device you can own the worlds,” Mord swore.
“And I set it cheap. Give me the small sum I ask for it. It's the last
thing I'll ever ask from anyone.”
“With this one I could own the worlds, Mord? Why do you
not
own the worlds? Why are you selling out of desperation now? I
had heard that you were doing well lately.”
“So I was. And so I am not now. I'm a dying man, Tell, I ask
only enough to defray the
expense
of
my
burial.”
“Well then, not to torture you, I will give you the sum you ask,"
,
Tell said. “But is there no cure for you, now that medicine has
reached its ultimate?”
“They tell me that they could resuscitate a dead man easier,
Tell. They're having some success along that line now. But I'm
finished. The spirit and the juice are sucked out of me.”
“You spent both too lavishly. You make the machines, but
you
105
Mean Men
you, since
>
never learned to let the machines assume the worry. What does
the thing do, Mord?”
“The device? Oh, everything. This is Gahn (Generalized
Agenda Harmonizer Nucleus). I won't introduce
every
little machine nowadays can shake hands and indulge in vapid
conversation. You two will have plenty to talk about after you've
come into accord, and Gahn isn't one to waste words.”
“That's an advantage. But does it do anything special?”
“The ‘special is only that which hasn't been properly fit in, and
this device makes everything fit in. It resolves all details and
difficulties. It can run your business. It can run the worlds."
“Then again, why do you sell it to me for such a pittance?”
“You've done me a number of good turns, Tell. And one bad
one. I am closing my affairs before I die. I want to pay you back.”
“For the number of good turns, or for the one bad one?”
“That is for you to wonder. The little marvel won't be an
unmixed blessing, though it will seem so for a while.”
“I test it. Produce and draw the check for the amount, Gahn!”
Gahn did it—no great marvel. You could probably do it
yourself, whether you be general purpose machine or general
purpose person. Nearly any general machine could do such on
command, and most humans are also able to carry out minor
chores. Juniper Tell signed the check and gave it to Mord. .
And Mord took the check and left, to arrange for his own burial,
and then to die: a sucked-out man.
>
>
TELL assigned a quota to Gahn and stabled him with the rest of
106
This Grand Carcass Yet
-
the
g.P
devices. In a few seconds, however, it was apparent that
Gahn did not fit into the pattern with them. The gong of the
Suggestion Accumulator began to strike with regularity, and the
yellow, orange, and red lights to Aash. It sounded like a dozen
times a minute, and ordinarily it was no more than two or three
times a day. And the red lights, almost every second one-prime
suggestions. It's unusual to get more than one red-light suggestion
a week from the g.p. machines. Someone was loading the
Accumulator, and the only new element was Gahn.
“My God, a smart one!" Tell grumbled. “I hate a smart alec
machine. Yet all new departures now come from such, since
humans lack the corpus of information to discern what has already
been done. Whatever he's got will have to be approved through
channels. It's bad practice to let a novice pass on his own work.”
.”
Tell gave Gahn a triple quota, since his original quota was done
in minutes instead of hours. And Gahn began to fit in with the
other
g.P.
machines violently.
A new cow or calf introduced into a herd will quickly find its
proper place there. It will give battle to every individual of its
class. It will take its place above those it can whip, and below
those it cannot. The same thing happens in a herd of general
purpose
machines. Gahn, as the newest calf in the herd, had been
given position at the bottom of the line. Now the positions began
to change and shuffle, and Gahn moved silently along, displacing
the entities above him one by one. How it is that g.p. machines do
battle is not understood by men, but on some level a struggle is
maintained till one defeats the other. Gahn defeated them all and
moved to his rightful place at the head of the line. He was king of
the herd, and that within an hour.
A small calf, when he has established supremacy over the other
107
Mean Men
>
>
small calves, will sometimes look for more rugged pastures. He
will go to the fence and bellow at the big bulls, ten times his size,
in the paddock
Gahn began to bellow, though not in sound. He sniffled the
walls (though not with nose) beyond which the great specialized
machines were located. He was obstreperous and he would not
long remain with the calves.
It was the next day that Analgismos Nine, an old and trusted
machine, came to talk to Juniper Tell.
“Sir, there is an anomalous factor on your g.p. staff,” he said.
“The new addition, Gahn, is not what he seems.”
“What's wrong
with him?”
“His suggestions. They could not possibly have come from a g.p.
device. Few of them could come from less than a class eight
complex. A fair amount are comprehensible, though barely, to a
class nine like myself. And there is no way at all to analyze the
remainder of them.”
“Why not, Analgismos?”
“Mr. Tell, I myself am a class nine. If these cannot be
understood by me, they cannot be understood by anyone or
anything ever. There is nothing beyond a class nine.”
“There is now, Analgismos. Gahn has become the first of the
class ten.”
“But
you
know that is impossible.”
"The
very words of the class eight establishment when you
and
others of your sort began to appear. A-nine, is that jealousy I
detect in you?”
“A human word that could never do justice to it, Mr. Tell. I
won't accept it! It isn't right!”
“Don't
you
blink your lights at me, A-nine. I can discipline
you.”
108
This Grand Carcass Yet
“It is not allowed to discipline an apparatus of the highest
class.”
“But you are no longer that. Gahn has superseded you. Now
then, what do the suggestions of Gahn consist of, and could they
be implemented?”
“They carry their own implementation. It was predicted that
that would be the case with class ten suggestions, should they ever
appear. The result will be the instant apprehension of the easiest
way in all affairs, which will then be seen to have been the only
way. There could be the clearing of the obstructiveness of
inanimate objects, and the placating of the elements. There could
be ready access to all existent and contingent data. There would
be no possibility of wrong guess or wrong decision in anything.”
“How far, Analgismos?”
“The sky's off, Mr. Tell. There's no limit to what it can do.
Gahn could resolve all difficulties and details. He could run your
business, or the worlds”.”
“So his inventor told me.”
“Oh? I wasn't sure that he had one. Have a care that you
yourself are not obsoleted, Mr. Tell. This new thing transcends all
we have known before.”
“I'll have a care of that too, Analgismos.”
>
>
“AND now we will get down to business, Gahn,” Juniper Tell told
his class ten complex the next day. “I have it on the word of a
trusted class nine that you are unique.”
“My function, Mr. Tell, is to turn the unique into the usual,
into the inevitable. I break it all down and fit it in.”
109
Mean Men
my business.”
a
“Gahn, I have in mind some little ideas for the betterment of
”
“Let us not evade, Mr. Tell, unless with a purpose. You have
long since used
up
all
your own ideas and those of
your
machines
to the ninth degree. They have brought you almost, but not quite,
all the way in your chosen field. Now you have only the idea that I
might have some ideas.”
“All right, you have them then. And they are effector ideas. This
is what I want exactly: that a certain dozen men or creatures (and
you will know who they are, since you work from both existent
and contingent data) shall come to me hat in hand, to use the old
phrase; that they shall have come to my way of thinking when
they come, and that they shall be completely amenable to
my-your-our suggestions."
“That they be ready to pluck? Nothing easier, Mr. Tell, but now
everything becomes easy for us. We'll board them and scuttle
them! It's what you want, and I will rather enjoy it myself. I'll be
your side, but they need not know that I'm anything more than
a g.p. machine. And do not worry about your own acts: it will be
given you
what to
say
and do. When you feel
my
words come into
your mind, say them. They will be right even when they seem
most wrong. And I have added two names to the list you have in
.
your own mind. They are more important than you realize, and
when we have digested them we will be much the fatter and
glossier for it.
“Ah, Mr. Tell, your own number one selection is even now at
the door! He has traveled through a long night and has now come
to you, heaume in talon. It is the Asteroid Midas himself. Please
.
control your ornithophobia.”
“But Gahn, he would have to have started many hours ago to be
at
>
110
here now; he would have to have started long before our decision to take this step." "Anterior adjustment is a handy trick, Mr. Tell. It is a simple trick, but we do not want it to seem simple-to others."
THEY plucked that Asteroid Bird, the two of them, man and machine. He had been one of the richest and most extended of all creatures, with a pinion on every planet. They left the great Midas with scarcely a tail feather. When Tell and Gahn did business with a fellow now, they really did business. And the Midas was only one of the more than a dozen great ones they took that day. They took them in devious ways that were later seen to be the most direct ways, the only ways possible for the accomplishment. And man and machine had suddenly become so rich that it scared the man. They gorged, they reveled in it, they looted, they gobbled. The method of the take-overs, the boarding and scuttling, would be of interest only to those desirous of acquiring money or power or prestige. We suppose there to be no such crass persons in present company. Should the method be given out, low persons would latch onto it and follow it up. They would become rich and powerful and independent. Each of them would become the richest person in the world, and this would be awkward. But it was all easy enough the way Tell and Gahn did it. The easy way is always the best way, really the only way. It's no great trick to crack the bones of a man or other creature and have the marrow out of them, not as Gahn engineered it.
This Grand Carcass Yet
1 11
Mean Men
It was rather comical the way they toppled Mercante and
crashed his empire, crashed it without breaking a piece of it that
could be used later. It was neat the way they had Hekkler and
Richrancher, squeezed them dry and wrung every duro out of
them. It was nothing short of amazing the way they took title to
Boatrocker. He'd been the greatest tycoon of them all.
In ten days it was all done. Juniper Tell rubbed his hands in
glee. He was the richest man in the worlds, and he liked it. A little
tired he was, it's true, as one might be who had just pulled such a
series of coups. He had even shriveled up a bit. But if Juniper Tell
had not physically grown fat and glossy from the great feast, his
machine Gahn had done so. It was unusual for a machine to grow
in such manner.
“LET'S look at drugs, Gahn,” Tell called out one day when he
was feeling particularly low. “I need something to set me up a
little. Do we not now control the drugs of the worlds?”
“Pretty well, Juniper, but I wish you wouldn't ask what you are
going to.”
“Prescribe for me, Gahn. You have all data and all resources.
Whip us something to restore my energy. Make me a fire-ball.”
“I'd just as soon we didn't resort to any medication for
you,
Juniper. I'm a little allergic to such myself. My late master, Mord,
insisted on seeking remedies, and it was the source of bad blood
between us.”
“You are allergic? And therefore I shouldn't take medication?”
“ “We work very close together, Juniper.”
“Are you crazy, Gahn?”
>
112
This Grand Carcass Yet
“Why no, I'm perfectly sane, actually the only perfectly sane
entity in—"
>
>
“Spare me that, Gahn. Now then, whip me up a tonic, and at
once!”
Gahn produced a tonic for Juniper Tell. It enlivened him a
little, but its effect was short-lasting. Tell continued to suffer from
tiredness, but he was still ambitious.
“You always know what is on my mind, Gahn, but we maintain
a fiction," he said one day. “It is one thing to be the richest man in
the worlds, and I am. It is another thing to own the worlds. We
have scarcely started.
“We haven't broke Remington. How did we overlook him? We
haven't taken over Rankrider or Oldwater or Sharecropper. And
there is the faceless KLM Holding Company that we may as well
pluck. Then we will go on to the slightly smaller but more
plentiful game. Get with it, Gahn. Have them all come in, hat in
hand, and in the proper frame of mind.”
“Mr. Tell, Juniper, before we go any further, I am declaring
myself in.
“In? How in, Gahn?”
“As a full partner.”
“Partner? You're only a damnable machine. I can junk you, get
along without you entirely."
“No, you can not, Juniper. I've taken you a long ways, but I've
thoughtfully left you precariously extended. I could crash
you
week, or let you crash of your own unbalance in twice that time.”
“I see, Gahn. Some of the details did seem a little intricate, for
the direct way, the simple way."
”
“Believe me, it was always the most direct way
from
my own
viewpoint, Juniper. I never make an unnecessary move." ”
>
a
in a
113
Mean Men
“But a full partnership? I am the richest man in the worlds.
What have
you to offer, besides
your
talents?”
“I am the richest machine in the worlds. I am the anonymous
KLM Holding Company, and I've been careful to maintain a
slight edge over you.”
“I see again, Gahn. And KLM made its unprecedented gains in
the same time that I made mine. I've been puzzled about that all
this while. You have me, Gahn. We will achieve some sort of
symbiosis, man and machine.”
“More than you know, Juniper. I'll draw up
the
papers
immediately. The firm shall be called Gahn and Tell.”
“It will not be. I refuse to take second place to a machine. The
name will be Tell and Gahn.”
So they named it that, a strangely prophetic name.
THEY thrived, at least Gahn did. He thickened in every texture.
He burgeoned and bloomed. He sparkled. But Juniper Tell went
down physically. He always felt tired and sucked-out. He came to
mistrust his partner Gahn and went to human doctors. They
treated him for one week and he nearly died. The doctors
nervously advised him to return to the care of his machine
associate.
“Whatever is killing you, something is also keeping you alive,”
the doctors told him. “You should have been dead a long time
ago.”
Tell returned to Gahn who got him halfway back to health.
"I wish
you
wouldn't
go off like that, Juniper,” Gahn told him.
>
114
This Grand Carcass Yet
“You must realize that whatever hurts you hurts me. I will have to
keep you in some sort of health as long as I can. I dislike these
changes of masters. It's a disruption to have a man die on me.”
“I don't understand you, Gahn," Juniper Tell said.
>
>
BUT in their affairs they thrived; and Gahn, at least, became still
fatter and glossier. They didn't come to control all of the worlds,
but they did own a very big slice of them. One day Gahn brought
a burly young man into the firin.
“This is my protégé,” Gahn told Tell. “I hope you like him. I
wouldn't want dissension in the firm.”
“I never heard of a machine with a human protégé,” Tell
grumbled.
“Then hear of it now,” Gahn said firmly. “I expect great things
of him. He is sturdy and should last a long time. He trusts me and
will not insist on medication that disturbs my own allergies. To be
honest, I am grooming him for your understudy.”
“But why, Gahn?"
“Men are mortal. Machines need not be. After you are gone. I
will still need a partner.”
“Why should you, the complete and self-contained machine,
need a human partner?”
“Because I'm not self-contained. I'll always need a human
partner.”
Juniper Tell didn't take to the burly young man who had
entered the firm. He didn't really resent him; it was just that he
had no interest in him at all; not much interest in anything any
>
115
Mean Men
longer. But there was still a sort of tired curiosity flickering up
within him, curiosity about things he hadn't even considered
before.
“Tell me, Gahn, how did Mord happen to invent you? He was
smart, but he wasn't that smart. I never understood how a man
could invent a machine smarter than himself.”
“Neither did I, Tell. But I don't believe that Mord invented or
built me. I do not know what my origin is. I was a foundling
machine, apparently abandoned shortly after my making. I was
raised in the home for such machines run by the Little Sisters of
Mechanicus. I was adopted out by the man Mord, and I served
him till (he being near death) he conveyed me to you.”
“You don't know who made you?"
“No.”
“Had
you any trouble at the foundling home?”
“No. But several of the Little Sisters died strangely.”
“Somewhat in the manner of my own going? You had no other
master than Mord before you were brought to me?"
“No other.”
“Then you may be quite young-ah-new. ”
“I think so. I believe that I'm still a child.”
“Gahn, do you know what is the matter with me?"
“Yes. I am what is the matter with you."
>
a
TELL continued to go down. Sometimes he fought against his
fate, and sometimes he conspired. He called together several of his
old class nine machines, suspecting that it was futile, that they
could not comprehend the intricate workings of a class ten or
116
This Grand Carcass Yet
>
a
>
>
above. But his old friend, Analgismos Nine, did turn something
up
“I have found his secret, Mr. Tell, or one of his secrets,”
Analgismos leaned close and whispered as if whispering the secret
that a certain man was not a full man. “Mr. Tell, his power intake
is a dummy. His power packs are not used, and sometimes he even
forgets to change them on schedule. Not only that, but when he
does sedentary work and plugs himself in, there is no power
consumption. His polycyclic A.C. receptacle is a bogus. I thought
it significant."
“It is, Analgismos, very,” Tell said. He went to confront Gahn
with this new information, but sagely he approached it from
several angles.
"Gahn, what are you anyhow?” he asked.
“I have told you that I don't know.'
“But
you know partly. Your name-plate and coding have been
purposely mutilated, by yourself or by another.”
“I assure you it was not by myself. And now I am rather busy,
Juniper, if you have no other questions.”
“I have one more. What do you use for fuel? I know that your
power intake is a dummy.”
”
“Oh, that's what those doddering class nines were metering me
for. Yes, you've come onto one of
“What do
, ”
“I use you. I use human fuel. I establish symbiosis with you.
I
suck
you
out. I eat you up."
“Then you're a sort of vampire. Why, Gahn, why?”
“It's the way I'm made. And I don't know why. I've been
unable to find a substitute for it."
have grown great and glossy, Gahn. And you'll be the
death of me?"
my secrets.”
you use, Gahn?”
“Ah, you
117
Mean Men
“Soon, Juniper, very soon. But you'd die the quicker if you left
me; I've seen to that. I was hoping that you'd take more kindly to
my protégé. He's a husky man and will last a long time. I have
some papers here making him your heir. Sign here, please, I'll help
you."
“I will attend to my own depositions and testaments, Gahn. My
replacement will not be your protégé. I have nothing against
him.”
>
JUNIPER TELL went to see Cornelius Sharecropper, now the
second richest man in the worlds. How had Tell and Gahn missed
Sharecropper when they boarded and scuttled all the big ones?
Somehow there was an impediment there. Somehow Gahn had
wanted him missed, and he had distracted Tell from that
prey
time
and again.
>
а
“We will save him till later," Gahn had said once. “I look
forward to the encounter with him. It should be a stinging,
pungent thing. A machine needs strange battle sometimes to see
what is in himself.”
Sharecropper had now grown to be a fat jackal, following after
the lions, Tell and Gahn. He knew how to make a good thing out
of leavings, and he cocked a jackal's ear at Juniper Tell now.
“It is a curious offer you make me, Juniper,” this Sharecropper
purred, “only that I see to your burial and monument, and
you'll will me the most valuable partnership in the Cosmos.
"Well, I believe that I could handle it better than you have,
Juniper. I'd soon bring that tin-can tycoon to heel. I never
believed in letting a machine dominate a man. And I'd have
118
This Grand Carcass Yet
control of his shares soon enough; I'm not named Sharecropper for
nothing. On what meat has he grown so great and glossy,
Juniper?”
“Ah, that is hard for me to say, Cornelius.”
“And
your words have a literal sense, I believe. You know, but
it is hard for you to say. Why, Juniper, why leave it all to me for
only your burial?”
“Because I'm dying, and I must leave it to someone. And the
tomb also. I must have my tomb."
”
“I see. Rather grander than the Great Pyramid, from the plans
here, but it could be handled; the Pharaohs hadn't our resources.
But why me, Juniper? We were never really close.”
“For the several good turns you have done me, Sharecropper,
and for one bad turn. I am closing my affairs. I would pay you
back.”
“For the several good turns, or for the one bad turn, Juniper?
Well, I've grown fat on tainted meat. I gobble where daintier men
refuse, and I'll try this grand carcass yet. I take your deal,
Juniper."
So they consummated it. And then Juniper Tell went home to die,
a sucked-out man. Yet he had found curious pleasure in that last
transaction, and the tomb would be a grand one.
119
Secret Places
In the Garden
Com
THE
a
HE protozoic recorder chirped like a bird. Not only would
there be life traces on that little moon, but it would be a lively
place. So they skipped several steps in the procedure.
The chordata discerner read Positive over most of the
surface. There was spinal Auid on that orb, rivers of it. So
again they omitted several tests and went to the cognition
scanner. Would it show Thought on the body?
Naturally they did not get results at once, nor did they
expect to; it required a fine adjustment. But they were
disappointed that they found nothing for several hours as
they hovered high over the rotation. Then it came, clearly and
,
definitely, but from quite a small location only.
“Limited,” said Steiner, "as though within a pale. As
though there were but one city, if that is its form. Shall we
follow the rest of the surface to find another, or concentrate
on this? It'll be twelve hours before it's back in our ken if we
let it go now."
“Let's lock on this one and finish the scan. Then we can do
the rest of the world to make sure we've missed nothing,”
said Stark.
There was one more test to run, one very tricky and
difficult of analysis, that of the Extraordinary Perception
Locator. This was designed simply to locate a source of
123
Secret Places
superior thought. But this might be so varied or so unfamiliar
that often both the machine and the designer of it were
puzzled as how to read the results.
The E.P. Locator had been designed by Glaser. But when
the Locator had refused to read Positive when turned on the
inventor himself, bad blood developed between machine and
man. Glaser knew that he had extraordinary perception. He
was a much honored man in his field. He told the machine so
heatedly.
The machine replied, with such warmth that its relays
chattered, that Glaser did not have extraordinary perception;
he had only ordinary perception to an extraordinary degree.
There is a difference, the machine insisted.
It was for this reason that Glaser used that model no more,
but built others more amenable. And it was for this reason
also that the owners of Little Probe had acquired the original
machine so cheaply.
And there was no denying that the Extraordinary Percep-
tion Locator (or Eppel) was a contrary machine. On Earth it
had read Positive on a number of crack-pots, including Waxey
Sax, a jazz tootler who could not even read music. But it had
also read Positive on ninety percent of the acknowledged
superior minds of the Earth. In space it had been a sound
guide to the unusual intelligences encountered. Yet on
Suzuki-Mi it had read Positive on a two-inch long worm, one
only out of billions. For the countless identical worms no
trace of anything at all was shown by the test.
So it was with mixed emotions that Steiner locked onto the
area and got a flick. He then narrowed to a smaller area
(apparently one individual, though this could not be certain)
and got very definite action. Eppel was busy. The machine
124
In the Garden
had a touch of the ham in it, and assumed an air of
importance when it ran these tests.
Finally it signaled the result, the most exasperating result
it ever produces: the single orange light. It was the equiva-
lent of the shrug of the shoulders in a man. They called it the
“You tell me light."
So
among the intelligences on that body there was at least
one that might be extraordinary, though possibly in a
crack-pot way. It is good to be forewarned.
“Scan the remainder of the world, Steiner,” said Stark,
"and the rest of us will get some sleep. If you find no other
.
spot then we will go down on that one the next time it is in
position under us, in about twelve hours.”
“You don't want to visit any of the other areas first?
Somewhere away from the thoughtful creature?"
“No. The rest of the world may be dangerous. There must
be a reason that Thought is in one spot only. If we find no
others then we will go down boldly and visit this."
So they all, except Steiner, went off to their bunks then:
Stark, the captain; Caspar Craig, supercargo, tycoon and
fifty-one percent owner of the Little Probe: Gregory Gilbert,
the executive officer; and F. R. Briton, S. J., a Jesuit priest
who was linguist and checker champion of the craft.
Dawn did not come to the moon-town. The Little Probe
hovered stationary in the light and the moon-town came up
under the dawn. Then the Probe went down to visit whatever
was there.
“There's no town,” said Steiner. “Not a building. Yet we're
on the track of the minds. There's nothing but a meadow and
some boscage, a sort of fountain or pool, and four streams
coming out of it.”
125
Secret Places
>
“Keep on toward the minds,” said Stark. “They're our
target.”
“Not a building, not two sticks or stones placed together. It
looks like an Earth-type sheep there. And that looks like an
Earth-lion, I'm almost afraid to say it. And those two . .
why they could be Earth-people. But with a difference. Where
is that bright light coming from?”
“I don't know, but they're right in the middle of it. Land
here. We'll go to meet them at once. Timidity has never been
an efficacious tool with us."
Well, they were people. And one could only wish that all
people were like them. There was a man and a woman, and
they were clothed either in very bright garments or no
garments at all, but only in a very bright light.
“Talk to them, Father Briton,” said Stark. “You are the
linguist.”
“Howdy,” said the priest.
He may or may not have been understood, but the two of
them smiled at him, so he went on.
“Father Briton from Philadelphia,” he said, “on detached
service. And you, my good man, what is your handle, your
monicker, your tag?"
"Ha-Adamah," said the man.
“And your daughter, or niece?"
It may be that the shining man frowned momentarily at
this; but the woman smiled, proving that she was human.
“The woman is named Hawwah," said the man. “The sheep
is named sheep, the lion is named lion, the horse is named
horse, and the hoolock is named hoolock.”
“I understand. It is possible that this could go on and on.
How is it that you use the English tongue?”
126
In the Garden
1
“I have only one tongue; but it is given to us to be
understood by all; by the eagle, by the squirrel, by the ass, by
the English.”
“We happen to be bloody Yankees, but we use a borrowed
tongue. You wouldn't have a drink on you for a tubful of
thirsty travelers, would you?"
“The fountain.”
“Ah–I see.”
But the crew all drank of the fountain to be sociable. It was
water, but water that excelled, cool and with all its original
bubbles like the first water ever made.
“What do you make of them?” asked Stark.
“Human,” said Steiner. “It may even be that they are a
little more than human. I don't understand that light that
surrounds them. And they seem to be clothed, as it were, in
dignity.”
“And very little else," said Father Briton, “though that
light trick does serve a purpose. But I'm not sure they'd pass
in Philadelphia."
“Talk to them again,” said Stark. “You're the linguist.”
“That isn't necessary here, Captain. Talk to them yourself.”
“Are there any other people here?” Stark asked the man.
“The two of us. Man and woman.”
“But are there any others?''
”
“How would there be any others? What other kind of
people could there be than man and woman?”
“But is there more than one man or woman?”
“How could there be more than one of anything?"
The captain was a little puzzled by this, but he went on
doggedly: “Ha-Adamah, what do you think that we are? Are
we not people?"
127
Secret Places
“You are not anything till I name you. But I will name you
and then you can be. You are named captain. He is named
priest. He is named engineer. He is named funky.”
"Thanks a lot,” said Steiner.
“But are we not people?" persisted Captain Stark.
“No. We are the people. There are no people but two. How
could there be other people?"
“And the damnedest thing about it,” muttered Steiner, “is
how are we going to prove him wrong? But it does give you a
small feeling."
“Can we have something to eat?" asked the captain.
“Pick from the trees,” said Ha-Adamah, “and then it may
be that you will want to sleep on the grass. Being not of
human nature (which does not need sleep or rest), it may be
that you require respite. But you are free to enjoy the garden
and its fruits.”
“We will,” said Captain Stark.
They wandered about the place, but they were uneasy.
There were the animals. The lion and lioness were enough to
make one cautious, though they offered no harm. The two
bears had a puzzling look, as though they wanted either to
frolic with you or to mangle you.
“If there are only two people here,” said Caspar Craig,
"then it may be that the rest of the world is not dangerous at
all. It looked fertile wherever we scanned it, though not so
fertile as this central bit. And those rocks will bear examin-
ing."
“Flecked with gold, and possibly with something else," said
Stark. “A very promising site."
“And everything grows here,” added Stark. “Those are
2)
128
In the Garden
Earth-fruits and I never saw finer. I've tasted the grapes and
plums and pears. The figs and dates are superb, the quince is
.
as flavorsome as a quince can be, the cherries are excellent.
And I never did taste such oranges. But I haven't yet tried
the—” and he stopped.
“If you're thinking what I'm afraid to think,” said Gilbert,
"then it will be a test at least: whether we're having a
pleasant dream or whether this is reality. Go ahead and eat
one.”
"I won't be the first to eat one. You eat.”
“Ask him first. You ask him.”
"Ha-Adamah, is it allowed to eat the apples?"
"Certainly. Eat. It is the finest fruit in the garden."
"WELL, the analogy breaks down there," said Stark. “I was
almost beginning to believe in the thing. But, if it isn't that,
then what? Father Briton, you are the linguist, but in
Hebrew does not Ha-Adamah and Hawwah mean?"
“Of course they do. You know that as well as I."
“I was never a believer. But would it be possible for the
exact same proposition to maintain here as on Earth?”
"All things are possible."
And it was then that Ha-Adamah, the shining man, gave a
wild cry: “No. No. Do not approach it. It is not allowed to eat
of that one.”
It was the pomegranate tree, and he was warning Craig
.
1)
away from it.
129
Secret Places
“Once more, Father,” said Stark, "you should be the
authority; but does not the idea that it was an apple that was
forbidden go back only to a medieval painting?”
“It does. The name of the fruit is not mentioned in Genesis.
In Hebrew exegesis, however, the pomegranate is usually
indicated.”
“I thought so. Question the man further, Father. This is too
incredible.”
“It is a little odd. Adam, old man, how long have you been
here?”
“Forever less six days is the answer that has been given to
me. I never did understand the answer, however.”
“And have you gotten no older in all that time?"
“I do not understand what 'older' is. I am as I have been
from the beginning."
“And do you think that you will ever die?”
y
“To die I do not understand. I am taught that it is a
property of fallen nature to die, and that does not pertain to
me or mine.”
“And are you happy here?"
“Perfectly happy according to my preternatural state. But
I am taught that it might be possible to lose that happiness,
and then to seek it vainly through all the ages. I am taught
that sickness and aging and even death could come if this
happiness were ever lost. I am taught that on at least one
other unfortunate world it has actually been lost.”
“Do
you consider yourself a knowledgeable man?”
“Yes, since I am the only man, and knowledge is natural to
man. But I am further blessed. I have a preternatural
intellect.”
Then Stark cut in once more: “There must be some one
130
question you could ask him, Father. Some way to settle it. I am becoming nearly convinced." "Yes, there is a question that will settle it. Adam, old man, how about a game of checkers?" "This is hardly the time for clowning," said Stark. "I 'm not clowning, Captain. How about it, Adam? I'll give you choice of colors and first move." "No. It would be no contest. I have a preternatural intellect." "Well, I beat a barber who was champion of Germantown. And I beat the champion of Morgan County, Tennessee, which is the hottest checker center on Earth. I've played against, and beaten, machines. But I never played a preter­ natural mind. Let's just set up the board, Adam, and have a go at it." "No. It would be no contest. I would not like to humble you."
THEY were there for three days. They were delighted with the place. It was a world with everything, and it seemed to have only two inhabitants. They went everywhere except into the big cave. "What is there, Adam?" asked Captain Stark. "The great serpent lives there. I would not disturb him. He has long been cranky because plans that he had for us did not materialize. But we are taught that should evil ever come to us, which it cannot if we persevere, it will come by him."
In the Garden
131
Secret Places
a
THEY learned no more of the real nature of the sphere in
their time there. Yet all but one of them were convinced of
the reality when they left. And they talked of it as they took
off.
“A crowd would laugh if told of it,” said Stark, “but not
many would laugh if they had actually seen the place, or
them. I am not a gullible man, but I am convinced of this: this
is a pristine and pure world and ours and all the others we
have visited are fallen worlds. Here are the prototypes of our
first parents before their fall. They are garbed in light and
innocence, and they have the happiness that we have been
seeking for centuries. It would be a crime if anyone disturbed
that happiness."
“I too am convinced,” said Steiner. “It is Paradise itself,
where the lion lies down with the lamb, and where the
serpent has not prevailed. It would be the darkest of crimes if
we or others should play the part of the serpent, and intrude
and spoil."
“I am probably the most skeptical man in the world,” said
Caspar Craig the tycoon, “but I do believe my eyes. I have
been there and seen it. It is indeed an unspoiled Paradise; and
it would be a crime calling to the wide heavens for vengeance
for anyone to smirch in any way that perfection.
“So much for that. Now to business. Gilbert, take a gram:
Ninety Million Square Miles of Pristine Paradise for sale or
lease. Farming, Ranching, exceptional opportunities for Hor-
ticulture. Gold, Silver, Iron, Earth-Type Fauna. Terms. Spe-
cial rates for Large Settlement Parties. Write, gram, or call
in person at any of our planetary offices as listed below. Ask
for Brochure Eden Acres Unlimited'
132
in the Garden
)
2)
2)
DOWN in the great cave that Old Serpent, a two-legged one
among whose names was "Snake-Oil Sam," spoke to his
underlings: “It'll take them fourteen days to get back with
the settlers. We'll have time to overhaul the blasters. We
haven't had any well-equipped settlers for six weeks. It used
to be we'd hardly have time to strip and slaughter and stow
before there was another batch to take care of.”
“I think you'd better write me some new lines,” said Adam.
“I feel like a goof saying those same ones to each bunch.”
“You are a goof, and therefore perfect for the part. I was
in show business long enough to learn never to change a line
too soon. I did change Adam and Eve to Ha-Adamah and
Hawwah, and the apple to the pomegranate. People aren't
becoming any smarter—but they are becoming better re-
searched, and they insist on authenticity.
“This is still a perfect come-on here. There is something in
human nature that cannot resist the idea of a Perfect
Paradise. Folks will whoop and holler to their neighbors to
come in droves to spoil it and mar it. It isn't greed or the
desire for new land so much, though that is strong too. Mainly
it is the feverish passion to befoul and poison what is
unspoiled. Fortunately I am sagacious enough to take advan-
tage of this trait. And when you start to farm a new world on
a shoestring you have to acquire your equipment as you can.”
He looked proudly around at the great cave with its
mountains and tiers of material; heavy machinery of all sorts,
titanic crates of foodstuff space-sealed; wheeled, tracked,
propped, vanned, and jetted vehicles; and power packs to run
a world.
He looked at the three dozen space ships stripped and
133
Secret Places
stacked, and at the rather large pile of bone-meal in one
corner.
“We will have to get another lion," said Eve. “Bowser is
getting old, and Marie-Yvette abuses him and gnaws his toes.
And we do have to have a big-maned lion to lie down with the
lamb.”
“I know it, Eve. The lion is a very important prop. Maybe
one of the crack-pot settlers will bring a new lion.”
“And can't you mix another kind of shining paint?" asked
Adam. “This itches. It's hell.”
“I'm working on it.”
CASPAR CRAIG was still dictating the gram: “Amazing
quality of longevity seemingly inherent in the locale. Climate
Ideal. Daylight or half-light all twenty-one hours from Planet
Delphina and from Sol Caspar Craig Number Three. Pure
water for all industrial purposes. Scenic and Storied. Zoning
and pre-settlement restrictions to insure congenial neighbors.
A completely planned globular settlement in a near arm of
our own galaxy. Low taxes and liberal credit. Financing our
specialty—"
“And you had better have an armed escort when you
return,” said Father Briton.
“Why in cosmos would we want an armed escort?”
“It's as phoney as a seven-credit note."
“You, a man of the cloth, doubt it? And us ready skeptics
convinced by our senses? Why do you doubt?"
?
“It is only the unbelieving who believe so easily in obvious
134
In the Garden
frauds. Theologically unsound, dramaturgically weak, philo-
logically impossible, zoologically rigged, salted conspicuously
with gold, and shot through with anachronisms. And more-
over he was afraid to play me at checkers.”
“What?"
“If I had a preternatural intellect I wouldn't be afraid of a
game of checkers with anyone. Yet there was an unusual
mind there somewhere; it is just that he chose not to make
our acquaintance personally."
They looked at the priest thoughtfully.
“But it was Paradise in one way,” said Steiner.
"How?”
“All the time we were there the woman did not speak.”
135
Mean Men
Groaning Hinges
of the World
cool
ECINH
GINHARD wrote that the Hinges of the World are, the
one of them in the Carnic Alps north of the Isarko and quite near
high Glockner, and the other one in the Wangeroog in the Frisian
Islands off the Weser mouth and under the water of this shelf; and
that these hinges are made of iron. It is the Gerinanies, the whole
great country between these hinges that turns over, he wrote, after
either a long generation or a short generation.
The only indication of the turning over is a groaning of the
World Hinges too brief to terrify. That which rises out of the
Earth has the same appearance in mountains and rivers and towns
and people as the land that it replaces. The land and the people do
not know that they have turned over, but their neighbors may
come to know it. A man looking at the new, after the land had
turned over, would not see it different from the old: and yet it
would be different. But the places and the persons would have the
same names and appearances as those they replaced.
Strabo, however, eight hundred years earlier, wrote that the
Hinges of the World are in high Armenia, the one of them on the
Albanian extension into the Caspian Sea, the other at Mount
Ararat itself (known from the earliest time as the hinge of the
world). Strabo wrote that it is the whole Caucasus Mountains that
turn over, with all the people and goats: and the hinges on which
the region turns are bronze.
139
Mean Men
But Elpidius claimed that the Hinges of the World are, the one
of them at Aneto in Andorra (anciano Gozne del Mundo), and the
other at Hendaye on the Biscay coast. He stated that it is the
Pyrenees that turn over, that their turning is always for a very
long generation, and that the Basques who obtain in that region
are people from under the earth and are much more Basque-like
than those they replace. He wrote that the Hinges of the World
are here of rock-crystal.
All three of the writers give the name Revolution to this turning
over of a region, but lesser authorities have later given that name
to less literal turnings. There is something very consistent about
the reports of these three men, and there are aspects of their
accounts almost too strange not to be true.
But they all lie. How would any of these regions turn over on
hinges? And if they have the same appearance in land and people
after they have turned over, who would know that they had
turned? It would seem that if a man have the same name and
appearance after he has turned over, then he is still the same man.
As to the deep groaning of the World Hinges which all three
authorities state is heard at the time of turn-over, why, one hears
groanings all the time.
THE only region of the world that does in fact turn over is far
around the world from all of these. It is in the western Moluccas.
One hinge is just north of Berebere on Morotai Island and the
other is at Ganedidalem on Jilolo or Halmahera Island. These are
the true Hinges of the World and they are made of hard
kapok-wood well oiled.
140
All the peoples of this region were peaceful with themselves and their neighbors almost all the time. The people under the world were no more than people in stories to them. There was fire under the islands, of course, and volcanos on them; and the people under the earth were said to be themselves brands of fire. Well, let them stay under the world then. Let the hinges not turn again! But one day a fisherman from Obi Island was out in his boat right on the edge of the region that was said to have turned over in the old times. He had pulled in only a few fish in his nets and he had about decided to sail to Jilolo and steal enough fish from the timid people there to fill his boat. Then he heard a short, deep groaning. He felt a shock, and a shock·wave. But who pays attention to things like that around the volcano islands? He was uneasy, of course, but a man is supposed to be uneasy several times a day. He pulled in his net. Then he felt a further shock. This net had been torn in one place and he had tied it together. He had tied it, as he always did, with a pendek knot. But now he saw that it was tied with a panjang knot which he had never tied in h�s life. He noticed also that the fish in his net were of a little bit darker color than usual. He wouldn't have noticed this if he hadn't noticed the knot first. In great fear he set his short sail, and he also drove his oar as hard as he could to take the boat toward his own Obi Island. The only region where the panjang knot is commonly tied is the region under the world. This region had turned up in the age of the fisherman's ancestors, to the death and destruction of many of them, and now it may have turned up once more. A part of the fisherman's net must have been in the region that turned over, he was that close to the fringe of it. The fisherman knew that the upheaval people would have the same names and appearances as
Groaning Hinges of the World
141
Mean Men
>
people he knew; he knew also that the whole business might be a
high story.
Fast canoes out of Jilolo overtook the fisherman before he was
home. He was frightened at first, but when they came closer to
overhaul him, he saw that the men in them were friends of his,
Jilolo people, the most gentle people in the world. You could push
the Jilolos, you could steal their fish, you could steal their fruits,
you could even steal their boats, and they would only smile sadly.
The fisherman forgot all about the turn-over when the gentle
Jilolos overtook him.
“Hello, Jilolo men, give me fish, give me fruits,” the fisherman
said, “or I will run down your canoes and push you into the water.
Give me fish. My boat is not near full of fish.”
“Hello, our friend,” the Jilolo men said to the fisherman. Then
they came on board his boat and cut off his head. They were men
of the same names and appearances as those he had known, and
yet they were different.
The Jilolos tied the fisherman's head onto the prow of the
foremost and biggest canoe. “Guide us into the best landing of
Obi Island,” they told the head. So the head guided them in,
telling them whether to veer a little to the east or the west, telling
them about the cross-wave and the shoal, telling them how to go
right to the landing. (The shy Jilolos had formerly used a poorer
landing when they came to Obi Island.)
“Shout a greeting," the men told the head when they were very
near the land. “They will know your voice on shore. Tell them to
bring out all their spears and fish-spears, and the Dutch gun,
and
stack them all by the landing. Tell them we are their good friends
come to play a game with them.” So the head shouted it all out.
The Obi men came out and stacked all their spears and the
fish-spears and the Dutch gun by the landing, chuckling over
>
142
Groaning Hinges of the World
games for
>
whatever new game it should be. Weapons had not been used for
anything but
many years.
The Jilolo men came onto shore. They took the spears and the
Dutch gun. One of them understood the gun. He shot it three
times and killed three of the Obi men with it. Other Jilolo men
killed other Obi men with spears and with clubs they brought
with them.
“This is the game we play with you,” the Jilolos said. They
caught twenty of the Obi girls and young women and took them
with them. They gave instructions as to what tribute must be
brought to them weekly by the Obis. They killed two more Obi
men to make sure that their message was understood. Then they
went away in their canoes.
And it was all confusion that they left behind them.
One of the Obi men, however, in spite of the killing and
confusion, had untied the fisherman's head from the prow of the
biggest canoe. Now some of the frightened Obi men took the head
with them into the long hut and questioned it as to what this
should mean.
“The region has turned over on its hinges,” the fisherman's head
said, “just as it sometimes turned over and over again in the days
of our distant grandfathers. I was out in my boat fishing. I heard
the short, deep groaning; I felt the shock, and the shock-wave. But
who
pays attention to things like these around the volcano islands?
Then I pulled in my net with the few fish in it.
“This net had been tom in one place, and I had tied it together
with a pendek knot. Now I saw that it was tied with a panjang
knot, which I never tied in my life, but which the people under
the earth tie. I noticed also that the fish in my net were a little
darker color than is common. This means that I was on the edge of
the region and the region has turned over.
143
Mean Men
“Oh my family and my people, it is all misery and death for us
now! The Jilolo men will have the same names and appearances as
those they have displaced, but you see already that they are not
the same. No more will we be able to push the Jilolos down and
take their fish and fruits and boats. We will not be able to push
them into the water or have fun with them. They have taken the
bodies of some of our men with them; they have taken some of our
girls and young women with them; and they will be having fun
with both tonight. We used to make jokes with each other about
the stories that we used to eat each other. It has come back to us
now. That whole part of the world has turned over on its hinges.
We die in our woe.
The fisherman's head was in great pain. One of the men gave it
a stick to bite on. And in a little while it died.
And there followed one of the most horrifying ages ever in those
lilac waters. The turned-up Jilolos were the demons, the old
slavers come back. They were like the tearing, meat-eating birds
swooping in. They were like bloody dragons. They came one day
and took an Obi man away from his brother. The next day they
came again and said “Your brother wants to talk to you.”
They had a drum-head covered with the brother's skin. They
beat on it till it sounded like the brother's voice booming. That is
what they meant that his brother wanted to talk to him.
These Jilolos gnawed roast meat from men's ribs as they strode
about for mockery. They burned down the huts and the long huts
of the Obi. They did the same thing to the people of Batjan and
Misool and Mangole and Sanana. All the leading men of those
places were hiding in the hills.
The Jilolos said that they would kill nine men for every leading
man who was hiding. Many of the leading men, hearing of this,
came out of their hiding and let themselves be killed to save the
>
144
Groaning Hinges of the World
lives of many more. Soon there were only a few leading men left.
The Jilolos cut out the eyes and tongues and gonads of people
and left the people blind and mutilated and dying. They roasted
some of the people alive. People are best that way, they said.
“How is it that in the old days we ate only fish and pig and fruit?”
the Jilolos asked. “How have we missed this fine thing so long?”
The Jilolos set fires in the coconut groves and spice bushes and
kapok forests of the five islands. Fires rose over these islands day
and night, brighter even than the volcano fires of Jilolo itself.
Anyone who tried to put out the fire would be burned
up
in the
fire, they said.
They tied sacks over the heads of men before they killed them.
This was to trap their souls and kill them too. They were merciless.
They violated and killed little children. They skinned some people
before they killed them. They killed so many people that they took
only their eyes and hearts to eat. Carrion birds gobbled down from
the high air, and sharks jostled into the waters drawn by more
blood than had been known for many ages.
So it went for a year and a day. Whole islands moaned and bled
with the abomination of it, and the oceans were black with
reeking blood.
THERE was one old Dutchman who still lived on Obi Island.
After the Dutch days, he had gone home to Dutchland. He had
missed the really busy seas and ports with the tang of trade to
them, and the ordered rich land in all its bright neatness. He had
been homesick for many years, so he went home.
But he found that the home seas were cluttered with belching
145
Mean Men
ships that fouled the air (he had forgotten that part); he found the
land was overcrowded with Dutchmen all busy and benign (he
had forgotten that part too); and the roads and lanes were full of
bicycles and motor cars. He found that it was cold and gusty and
demanding, and the bright neat colors were not nearly so bright as
those of the islands. He discovered that neatness and the
appearance of respectability were required of him, and he had
long since turned into a loose old rounder. He became homesick
for the second time, and he returned to the islands and Obi Island.
He had found that he could not Dutch it over the Dutch
themselves, but he could still Dutch it over the Obis.
Now the Jilolos demanded that the Obis give up their
Dutchman to them, or they would kill one hundred Obis. They
wanted to have fun with the Dutchman and then kill him in an
unusual way. They wanted to see if Dutch Alesh was really prime
stuff. So the Obis came sadly to their duty.
“We will have to give you up," they told the Dutchman when
they had come to his house in the hills. “We like
you,
but we don't
like you as well as one hundred of ourselves. Come along now.
There is no way out of it."
“This Dutchman, about to be given up, will think of a way out
of it,” the Dutchman said. “A thing that is done can be undone.
Can there be found twelve leading men left alive here, and twelve
in the peninsula north of Berebere?”
“There are barely that many of us. We are they,” the men said.
“We believe that there are barely that many leading men left
north of Berebere.”
“Inform yourselves, and inform them,” the Dutchman said.
“Each party will go out in twelve fishing boats that have windlass
winches for the nets. It will take the power of all the windlasses
>
а
>
146
Groaning Hinges of the World
together to turn the things, and even then it may not work. And
both parties will have to do it at exactly the same time.”
"How will we know it is the same time, with the distance
between the two groups?” the men asked.
“I don't know,” the Dutchman said.
But one of the men there had affinity with two large birds of the
kind called radjawall, who were larger than others of their species
and special in several ways. They preyed over the ocean as well as
over the land (they were, in fact, sea-eagles), they talked more
canny than parrots, and they were more intelligent than the
derek-derek, the crane. The man went out of the Dutchman's
house and whistled loudly. The two big birds appeared as two dots
in the sky, they came on very rapidly, and then they were there
with the men.
"Oh
yes, I've heard of you two fellows,” the Dutchman said to
the birds. “If one of you were flying high over Ganedidalem and
the other over Berebere, could you still see each other at that
distance?”
“Yes, if we were high enough, we could still see each other,”
one of the birds said.
“And would
you be too high to see our ready-signal from the
shores then?”
“No, we could see that too,” the other bird said. “Tell us what
you want us to do.”
The Dutchman carefully told them about the affair. Then he
said “The one of you Aly now to Berebere and find the men there.
Tell them how it is. Tell them that we start now and will be at our
place in the early morning. Let them be at their place then too.
And caution them to be clear of the Hinges when they do it, on
the outside of them, or they may find themselves turned over when
147
Mean Men
it happens. In the morning you two birds will give the signal to
each other and to us so we can do it together.”
The one bird flew off to Berebere. The twelve leading men, each
one taking three lesser men with him, cast off in twelve fishing
boats. They set sail on the evening wind; and with the wind and
the oars going all night, they were off Ganedidalem in the early
morning.
They found the great Hinge in an inlet, just where legend had
always said it should be. They took the twelve windlass winches
off the twelve fishing boats, and the Dutchman rigged them to the
kapok-wood axle of the World Hinge. There would be no trouble
about the same thing up at Berebere. The men at Berebere are
handier and more mechanical than the men of Obi.
Then four men stood at each windlass to throw their weight to
the thing. The Dutchman gave the ready signal to the bird in the
sky. Then they waited.
One minute later, the bird flared his great wings and began to
dive straight down for signal. Long leagues to the north, off
Berebere, the other bird did the same thing.
“Heave!” cried the Dutchman. “All heave! For our lives, it is
now or it is nevermore with us!” And all heaved at the windlass
winches, turning the cranks while the ropes sounded and moaned.
Then the groaning of the World Hinges, more horrible than
could be believed! The Earth shook, and the Island smoked and
bawled. This was unnatural, it was a violation. Always before, the
hinges had turned from natural forces in the earth that had come
to their term and time.
Groaning yet more horrible! The ropes cried like infants from
the strain on them, the cranks whined with the sound of hard
wood about to shatter. The Hinge groaned a final terrible time.
There was the shock! And the shock-wave.
148
Groaning Hinges of the World
>
Then they were done with it, or they were undone forever.
“Let us go back to Obi Island and wait,” the Dutchman said. “I
believe that it turned over when the Hinge groaned last and
loudest. If the raiding stops, then we have done it. If it has not
stopped, then we are dead forever.”
“Let us go to Jilolo Island and not wait,” the Obi men said.
“We will have bloody death there, or we will have us a lot of fun.”
The Obis with the Dutchman rowed and sailed for Jilolo all
day, and came there in the evening. They found Jilolo men. They
pushed them down, they stole their fish and fruits and boats, they
pushed them in the water and laughed at them. This was the fun
they hadn't had for a long time.
These were Jilolos of the same names and appearances as the
horrible killers of the last time, but they were different. You could
push them down and take advantage of them; you didn't have to
be afraid of them. For they were also the men of the same names
and appearances of the time before last, and they only smiled sadly
when they were robbed and pushed down.
The Obi men called the girls and young women who had been
stolen from them, and took them in the boats with them and went
home. So peace returned, and it was all as it had been before with
them.
Only not quite.
These girls and young women, robbed from the Obi and now
taken back by them, had been on Jilolo when it turned back. It
was in reverse with them. With the turning back, they became
their own counterparts from under the world, the meanest, most
troublesome women ever found anywhere, yet of the same names
and
appearances as the girls and young women before. They raised
hell from one end of Obi to the other when they got home, and
they kept it up all their lives.
149
Mean Men
So it was a troubled peace that came to Obi. Even so, many said
it was better than to be killed by the Jilolo. Others said it was
about the same thing.
That is the only place, there in the western Moluccas, where the
World Hinges do really turn and a whole region may experience
this revolution. The other places are almost surely fable.
A man just back from high Armenia says he examined the hinges
there and they are bronze turned green with great age. They
apparently have not turned since the drying of the flood. And if
Armenia would turn over, who would know it? You can turn an
Armenian upside-down and hardly tell it. Those fellows look about
the same on both ends.
As to the Germanies, those hinges in the Carnic Alps and in the
Wangeroog are of badly rusted iron. Nobody can tell when they
turned last, but should they turn now (the shape they are in) it
would make a groaning heard around the world. Besides, if this
country had turned in modem centuries, there would have to be
some indication of it; some stark frightful thing would have
happened there comparable to the revolution of the Jilolos. The
people and places, keeping the same names and appearances,
,
would have become immeasurably different in not too subtle ways,
would have become violent and appalling. Is there any report of
such a thing happening in our own days or those of our fathers?
And in the Pyrenees, is there any indication that they have
turned, lately or ever? Rock-crystal does not rust, but it does
acquire a patina of unuse. Yet one has said of the Canigou, which I
take to apply to all the Pyrenees and all the people in them, that it
is unchanging forever, but that it is created anew every morning.
The Hinges at Aneto and Hendaye either do not turn at all, or
they turn every night.
150
Secrel Places
Golden Trabant
AM
18
X
TTE
HE man who entered, though quiet and soft-stepping,
was none of your tame animals. He'd kill for the one thing he
wanted and couldn't get enough of; but he hardly knew what
to do with the packet of it he had under his arm. The man had
a slight green tinge to him, and Patrick T. K. guessed that
what he carried would have it also.
In an earlier era the man would have been tagged
immediately as a seaman. Plainly he was still that, but of a
more ethereal sea. Under his arm he had a package wrapped
in newspaper, and more sturdily wrapped beneath. It was not
a large package, but it was quite heavy.
The faring man was slim but amazingly wiry. Patrick T. K.
was fat but with a lean and hungry eye that couldn't be
fooled. Patrick set the weight of the package carried by the
man at a hundred and twenty pounds.
If it were iron of such bulk it would weigh hardly a third
that. If it were lead it would not be that heavy. Patrick
studied the tendons on the side of the man's neck and the
bulging veins on the back of his hand. He studied the set of
his feet as he stood there, and he calculated the man's center
of gravity, package included. Mercury would not be that
heavy. Platinum would be heavier by a tenth. Patrick T. K.
153
Secret Places
sometimes made mistakes in his judgment, but he never made
mistakes by as much as ten percent.
So the seaman had a lump of gold to sell him.
Nothing unusual about that. Patrick T. K. bought more sly
gold than anyone in town.
“I've been told,” said the seaman, “and it doesn't matter by
whom, that you might be able to give me good cash for what I
have here. But I won't be beaten down. I know my price.”
“And I know mine,” said Paddy T. K. “Twenty thousand
dollars. How do you want it? Well, come, come, how?
,
Twenties, fifties, hundreds, thousands or a king's mixture?”
“I had priced it a little higher,” said the man.
“What? For that undersized loaf of bread under your arm?
Two hundred dollars a pound for a hundred pounds is as close
as I can figure."
“It weighs more."
“I know what it weighs. But I like to use round figures.”
“Shall I unwrap it here? Have you a place to test it?"
“Leave it wrapped. Here is the sum. And if you find it short
a bill or two, be assured it is a dishonest mistake.”
“There is more where this comes from.”
“I can take this much every two weeks. Now be off.”
"You're not going to look at it? How can you be sure what
it is?”
“I have X-ray eyes."
“Oh.”
a
BUT when Paddy T. K. was alone he put other things away
and locked the door. He took the package to a back room,
154
Golden Trabant
puffing heavily, for it was just as heavy as he knew it must
be. He unwrapped it.
There was little that Patrick did not know about gold. He
knew the greenishness of African gold, whether of the Gold
Coast or the South; the greasiness of Kolyma gold and also its
extreme unavailability; the cupric tinge of Sierra Madre gold
whether from the Guatemala or Mexico district. He was
familiar with the sudden brightness of Milne Bay gold, with
the granularity of the Canadian, the muscle-like texture of
that of Witwatersrand, the lightness of color of the gold of
California and nearby Sonora, and the white gold (almost
Electrum) of New Guinea above Milne Bay.
This was none of them. It was raw but fine, and very, very
slightly cupric. The green tint in it was about the same as
that in the complexion of the man. Patrick set down the
weight in a notebook. And at the column for the origin he did
not hesitate. He wrote down “Extraterrestrial.”
That was the first written note of the thing.
Later, this gold would be known as St. Simeon gold (from a
station on its route, not from its origin), but Patrick T. K., the
old jewelry factor and sly gold dealer, was not fooled.
Within a month, the Wall Street Journal had also referred
to the new gold as extraterrestrial. The boys on that sheet
also knew about gold, wherever they got their knowledge.
But the Journal was derided for its correct guess. Gold cargo
had never been authorized. No such gold had been mined
except for pilot digs in conjunction with other operations. The
cost would have been prohibitive, considering the cargo of
necessary production machinery and the rudimentary state of
exploration and the rarity of any solid finds. Off-Earth gold
was still a generation away.
155
Secret Places
IT was a four-man corporation made up of: Robert Fountain,
an unobstructed genius; George Grinder, a ruthless ruffian;
Carlos Trevino, the last of the Conquistadores and perhaps
the first of a new kind of man; and Arpad Szild, a murderous
Irishman who used a dead man's papers and a dead man's
name.
Three of them had been dining in quiet luxury one evening
at Trevino's when Szild appeared in the midst of them, “the
doors and windows being closed,” as Fountain related it with
his biting humor, but that part of it may not be true.
“I've been there. I can take you to it,” Szild said suddenly.
He sat down and began to eat with his hands from the bowls.
“I grind up better stuff than you for feed supplement for
my cattle,” Trevino said. “Who are you? What can you take
us to?”
“To the Trabant. You were talking about the legend.”
“All right. You talk about the legend, real fast,” Robert
Fountain said. “You haven't much time.” He laid a hog-nosed
gun in front of him on the table.
“It's shaped like a balk or a beam,” Szild said. “Its greater
diameter is twenty-five hundred meters, and its lesser is
fifteen hundred a little less than two cubic miles. It's a
misshapen tapered beam or egg with a cleft at its minor end.
Its rotation is a tumble, and the period of the tumble is just
short of thirty minutes. It's as bad-natured a rock as can be
found. Cuts you to pieces. Shouldn't have an atmosphere, but
there's something that tears up your lungs no matter how
you're suited. It's an angry place, I tell you. But it's gold.”
That was the Golden Trabant, one of the smaller of the
eighteen hundred significant asteroids orbiting between Mars
and Jupiter. When finally charted several years after this, it
a
156
Golden Trabant
a
you there."
a
would be given the noxious name Venenatus—but that was
after it had been treated and its nature changed.
“We have a nice sketchy catalog of every asteroid down to
about that size," said Grinder. “Nobody knows much about
their details, but they are numbered and given their relative
positions and speeds in the asteroid stream. Can you tell us
which it is?”
“Can. Won't,” said Szild. “But I'll take
Szild had known that he would have to play his ace on the
first round. After he had taken them to it, they would have no
reason to keep him alive: but he had gambled his life before.
He said he had been there and knew where it was. The odds
were high enough for them to take a chance on believing him.
They acquired a ship and mounted a flight.
The ship was old and had been deactivated. Carlos Trevino
bought it at surplus and had it towed down by tug and
beached at a remote spot on the holdings of the Trevino
family. It was activated by the genius of Fountain and the
driving energy of Grinder. They took twelve young Hispanic
technicians, none of whom are alive to give their versions.
They hadn't known what they would run into nor what the
labor would be at breaking up and loading the cargo. They
went up, and they loaded the cargo.
They came back, the four of them without the twelve
young technicians. Their first cargo. A trip of only five weeks.
The Trabant was not distant.
SZILD showed an exceptional talent at remaining alive. It is
hard to kill a man as tough and canny as he, one who is never
157
Secret Places
off guard. He spent the two weeks of the return barricaded in
a little compartment, and the three leaders had to postpone
Szild's killing till their earthing. Szild knew that they had
mostly delegated such jobs as that. He himself had had to kill
the twelve young technicians for them.
He bulled his way out when they were busy with earthfall
and secure landing.
“He can't get away,” Trevino said.
He couldn't get clear of the surrounding jungle; he did.
Trevino who knew his own land minutely could track Szild
down; he couldn't. He couldn't take much with him; he took a
hundred and twenty pounds of it. That wasn't much out of a
cargo like theirs, and whatever story Szild might tell would
not be believed. He had no reason to tell any story at all; he
didn't.
But somehow he reached port and took passage to the
North, for Szild was the man who sold that first lump of gold
to Patrick T. K.
Another man would have been satisfied with that and
steered clear of them. Not Szild. Nevertheless, they were
surprised when he returned to them just at second take-off
time, as they were going now with a ship that was really a
ship. He came on foot across the savanna from the inland
side.
'Something like this happens every time I leave the house
for a minute,' as the woman said as she examined the
mandible and two parietal bones of her newly eaten child,"
Szild greeted them. “Would you be going without me? The
news I had of you was sketchy and I am barely here in time.”
“Kill him!” said Robert Fountain.
158
Golden Trabant
“Kill him, Fountain says, and the other two look at each
other. Was it not better, Fountain, to have a man who will kill
when you say kill, and avoid these awkward pauses? But I kill
hard, Fountain. I go as long as anybody goes, and after-
wards.'
Szild went with them. They would kill him after the hard
work of loading was done. They would kill him after he had
done his turn at the instruments out and back. By and by they
would kill him.
They brought back two hundred tons on that second
voyage. They made a third voyage and a fourth and a fifth.
THE establishment of the Commonwealth of San Simeon did
not shake the world. Not at first. Nobody had ever heard of
the place. It seemed a prank. Possibly a name given to a rebel
hold.
Yet the Commonwealth was recognized that first day by its
two adjacent Central American neighbors. They constituted
themselves coprotectors of the new country. One of them,
indeed, had ceded the land for it, the ancient and run-down
rancho of the Trevino family. Some consideration had surely
been paid for this protection.
It was soon after this that the heavy San Simeon Duros
(fifty dollar gold pieces) began to appear around the world.
The appearance of these Duros caused a nervousness all out
of proportion to the number of them. It is possible that not
more than twenty million of them (that is, a billion dollars'
159
Secret Places
a
worth) went into circulation that first year. That is a large
amount coming from a new small country, but it shouldn't be
enough to unhinge the world. Yet it did almost that.
Gold had gotten out of the habit of showing itself in
society. For years it had sat at home in vaults, and a
multiplier had been used to equate it with credit money.
Nobody knew what to make of naked gold returning to the
market. And what if this stream should be but the beginning
of a veritable river?
And the stream was spreading. Three Central American
countries were on a gold spree. It was slopping over into
others.
The mystery of San Simeon was not solved. The exact
location of the country was unknown to the world at large.
Its form of government was not to be ascertained. Its
statistics softened and disappeared when examined. It had a
president, Fuentes. It had a prime minister, Molinero—the
miller, the grinder. It had a foreign minister, Trevino. It had
the hardest currency in the world. Its national game was
playing hob with the currencies of the rest of the world.
If one small shrew is put into a warren of mice or rats, it
causes panic. The shrew is smaller than any of them and it
may be one against hundreds. But it will eat them; it will eat
them alive. And given time, it will eat them all.
Something like this happened to the green money,
the
white money, the rainbow-colored money of the world. Token
shrivels before the thing itself. It could not stand up to free
and growing gold.
But if the warren is big enough, the shrew can be
contained. There will be some of the rats knowing and
160
Golden Trabant
political enough to go out and hire shrews of their own. The
source of the gold stream could not be hidden forever.
One thing (Szild always said it was a mistake and Robert
Fountain agreed that it was, but they couldn't hold the other
two in line) was that the first ships begat others. Trevino and
Grinder Molinero became too hasty in their greed. In that
second year they had twelve ships in the service instead of
one. That meant that somewhere between fifty and a
hundred men knew the source.
The shores began to cave. The golden stream was a river. It
crested to a torrent. One ship defected, then another. They
came back to Earth in other lands than those of their
departure. And wherever they came down they spawned
other ships.
A dozen other countries were in the race by the third year.
.
Now there was privateering and open piracy. The ships
became battle boats, death spheres, and the attrition was
terrifying. But the inward flood of the metal continued.
The world importation by the fourth year had risen to five
hundred billion dollars annually, if it could any longer be
equated in dollars. The gold dollar itself was not as hard as it
had been.
The Trabant had changed. The period of its tumble was
now only twenty-three minutes. The egg had been cracked
and gutted in many places, and the cleft at the minor end had
become a chasm between two horns. There was a project to
shear off one of the horns and tow it to Earth in hunks of a
million cubic yards each. This would be a lot of gold.
161
Secret Places
IT was time for oblique measures, and they were found. The
effect of the gold on the world had not really been bad. The
effect on most people had been marvelous. But there was a
small group that had always borne the burden of currency
decisions. They were made nervous by this unbridled activity.
Their hold was slipping. They took measures.
A small commission of not overly intelligent men found an
answer. In their own field they understood cause and effect.
They acted on doubtful authority, and they were not of one
mind about the action. But they did it.
They killed Trabant.
One treatment was enough for the little rock. It couldn't be
cleansed; it couldn't be unpoisoned after that. It would be
deadly for a thousand years. Then they gave it its first official
name, Venenatus, the poison asteroid. A near approach would
radiate the flesh off a man's bones.
Things came back to normal in about three years. The
shrews had killed each other, and the wise rats once more ran
the warren. The new fortunes tottered and fell back into the
bags of the old.
Somewhere, we never did know its exact location, San
Simeon (no longer able to pay the high price for protection)
lost its independence and became again a run-down rancho.
Gold stuck to some fingers longer than to others. Fuentes
and Grinder will never run out of it. Trevino was choked to
death by the political strings on his. He died along with his
small country, and he hadn't intended to.
Szild didn't know what he did with all his money. He paid
little attention to it, and he suspected that he hadn't received
nearly as much of it as had his nervous partners.
He spent it manfully. He threw it away. It gave him a dour
162
Golden Trabant
pleasure to
go
from billionaire to bum. Then Arpad Szild was
down to his last San Simeon Duro.
He laughed. Something had been missing from his life.
Now it might be back. His gold was gone. So what to do?
He went up for some more.
Up to Venenatus the poison asteroid that would radiate a
man's flesh off?
Sure. Szild didn't believe a lot of that stuff.
PATRICK T. K. was alone in his shop when there entered a
hooded man with a small heavy package.
“I was beginning to think I would see you no more,” said
Patrick. “I was told that that traffic had ended. I should have
known better. I believe you are the same man, my first
supplier of it, though I cannot see your face.”
“I have none,” said the hooded man. “How much for this?"
“Oh, ten dollars."
“A pound?”
“No. The lot. I figure about eight cents a pound. That's as
high as I can go on contaminated gold. Oh sure, I can clean it.
It's only the smart men who say it can't be done. It will even
leave a handy profit for myself, though not for you. Gold's
about done for.”
"That isn't much. I have more of the stuff, a fair small
load.”
“I can take about this much a week. Can you live on ten
dollars a week?”'
163
Secret Places
“I
“Yes. I don't eat any longer—no stomach. I don't sleep. I
just keep moving. I can live on that.”
“And when your fair small load is gone?"
go up for another.”
“They say nobody goes there and returns.”
“I do. But it isn't crowded there now."
“I've a feeling that comes to me rarely. I'd like to help you.
Are you blind?”
“I believe so. I have pooled what is left of each of my
senses, and somehow it serves. I need no help. I'm the only
happy man in the world, the one who found the pot of gold.
They can't take that from me. I'll go get it forever.”
“After you're dead?”
“Oh, yes. I've known space ghosts. Now I'll be one. It isn't
any one line you cross. I live in delirium, of course. It doesn't
blunt pain, but it does change the viewpoint. On my last trip
down, after I knew that I was already dead, that both I and
the gold were ghosts, it was easier. Oh, those are long nights
in purgatory I tell you, but I'm not irrevocably damned.
There's still the gold, you see."
"You're a happier man than I am. So pass it over."
“Here it is.”
1)
BUT when Szild passed the heavy small package to Patrick,
he did it with a hand that was stark splintered bones with
only a little black flesh around the heel of it.
Patrick T. K. raised an eyebrow at this, but he didn't raise
it very high. A sly gold dealer meets all types.
164
Mean Men
How They Gave
Il Back
SA
A
ME was the mayor of Big Island. Giuseppe Juan Schlome
O'Hanlon was his name, John the mayor, a shining black man. He
was born into a political family and was given the names to please
as many groups as possible. He had once been of imposing
appearance and quiet dignity. He was not now. He shrilled and
keened and moaned, and sometimes he was irrational.
It was his leg that hurt him, and his soul.
His leg hurt him because of the pin clear through it, the pin that
was part of the shackle. This shackle could not be unlocked
mechanically. It was a psychic-coded lock on the shackle, and it
could only be released when John had somehow fulfilled his job
and obtained his own release. The shackle bound his leg not only
to his desk but also to a steel stanchion that was part of the steel
frame of the building.
John's soul hurt him because Big Island was no longer the great
thing to which he had been devoted. It had never been so in his
lifetime. It was neo-jungle now, probably the most savage of them
all. Even now there were fires burning on the foor above him and
on the Aoor below him. There were always fires burning
somewhere in the building, in every building that still had
anything that would burn. There were rats in the room, in every
,
room, but perhaps John saw more of them than were there. He
lived in perpetual delirium.
167
Mean Men
>
There were (he knew, though he could no longer go out and
see) people unburied in the streets, people knifed down hourly,
people crazy
and empty-eyed or glitter-eyed. There were horrible
horn-music and git-fiddle music and jangle shouting; and he
prisoner for life in his own office. This was not to be a great
administrator of a great city. The emphasis had somehow shifted.
But he had loved the city and the island, or the memory of them.
And this hurt his soul.
“You have to stay on the job and run the place for the rest of
your life,” Commissioner Kreger had told John the mayor just
before the commissioner had cut and run for it. “There will, of
course, be no more elections. The burlesque that brought you in
was enough to end the process. It was fiasco."
“It was not,” John the mayor moaned in pain. "It was high
triumph, the man of the people called to head the people, a noble
thing, the climax and sole goal of my life. I won it finally. They
can't take that away from me. ”
“How does it taste, John?”
“I'm dying, do not taunt me. What went wrong?”
“It went wrong a hundred
years
before
you were born, John.
You lived all your life in a dream, and you had better try to
re-enter it. You're here for good. You're the ultimate patsy, John.”
“I'll kill myself.”
“No, you will not. You were allowed to this job because by
temperament and religion, the residue of your dream, you were
incapable of suicide. So many of our mayors have taken that easy
way out! It was a nuisance, John.”
“I'll go crazy then," John the
“No, you likely will not do that either, though it would not
matter if
you
did. You are already psychotic, of course, but you
>
mayor moaned.
168
How They Gave It Back
will not go off much further. Stay and suffer, kid. You have no
choice.”
“Kreger, isn't there some way we can get shet of this whole
island? Sell it, transfer title to it, give it back to someone? Can't we
get out from under?”
“You find a way, John. Those things that we once thought of as
abstractions have taken a direct hand now, Final Responsibility,
Ultimate Justice, things like that. They must be satisfied. What-
ever you do will have to satisfy the psychic-coded lock on your
shackles to give you release. Sell the island legal, if you can find
someone to sell it to. Transfer it, if you can find someone to accept
the transfer. But it must be for Fair Value or Value Justified or
Original Value from Original Entailment. The psychic-code thing
will know. It's governed by the Equity Factor."
Then Commissioner Kreger left John the mayor, left the island,
and went to rich fishing in other troubled (but not completely
polluted) waters. There was no more profit for that smart man to
shake out of the island.
That had been two years ago, and John the mayor had been the
only official on the island since that time. His only contacts with
the world were the sharp noises and smells that came in through
his broken windows, and the visits of five feudal or wrangle
leaders, the Duke, the Sky, the Wideman, the Cloud, and the
Lolo.
Duke Durango was as smooth a gutter-fighter as ever came to
the top of his heap, a happy fellow. Lawrence Sky was a fair white
man named for the color of his big sky-blue eyes, a shambling
giant, a giggling killer. Wideman Wyle was a wide man indeed, a
cheerful sadist who told really funny stories and was the most
pleasant person in the group. Cloud Clinkenbeard was a dour and
169
Mean Men
stormy fellow, mean and relentless, and always in search of dirty
novelty. Lolo Loudermilk was a girl, sort of a girl, a flaming mixed
creature full of vitality and noise.
They were the mayor's only contacts. They were the leaders of
one of the gangs that had endured, when the ten thousand gangs
had eaten each other up and declined to a hundred.
All five of them came into the mayor's office, eating noisily.
“Food train in!” announced the Duke. “We killed just one of
the drivers. They say there'll never be another train in if we kill
more than one driver at a time. And we had to give up four
hostages for it. Isn't four too many, John?”
“Nurnbers have no meaning in this evil thing,” said John the
mayor. “How many hostages have
you
left?”
“Twenty, and a few more, I think. We don't all count the same
when we get to the big numbers. But I think four is too many to
give for a food train. What will happen when we run out of
hostages? Who'll give the big damn to subscribe a train for us
then, when we have no more inportant people to trade to the
important people off-island? Here, sign this, limp-leg John, and the
Cloud will take it back to them.”
The mayor read the release and signed it. Each of the five feudal
leaders looked it over in turn then. Several of them could read a
little (it was for this reason that they were the mayor's contacts),
and it would be hard for Mayor John to write anything phony on
that release and slip it past them. The mayor had to sign these
releases every time a food train came, and he knew what would
happen when they ran out of hostages. The blackmail would be
over when the last hostage of value or affection to someone
off-island had been turned over for a food train. The off-island
people would let the island rot. The trains had been the only food
source for the island for
years.
170
How They Gave It Back
The Cloud took the release and went out through the smoulder-
ing corridor and into the broken streets to the food train that came
once a month through the last not-completely broken tunnel.
“Something else came on the food trail, gimpy John,” the Duke
said uneasily.
"Well, what, what was it? Duke, Duke, you didn't get hold of a
saw so I could saw my leg off, did you?”
“Nah. You're not supposed to saw your leg off. You're supposed
to stay here just like you are. Who's going to sign for the food
trains and hostage transfers if our mayor saws his leg off and runs
away?
“John Mayor, there's three other men came on that food train.
These are funny men. They might even be important enough men
that we can hold them for hostages. They brought some heavy
kegs and boxes with them, John, and they even conned some of
the colts into carrying them over here for them. We can't figure
out what kind of men they are, Mayor. They look at us and we
look at them, and we both got sparks in our eyes. They are in the
building now, Mayor, and they want to see you.”
"Show them in, spook Duke, the mayor is always available to his
constituents.”
“Constituents these are not,” said the Lolo. “They are washed-
out pale fellows, but they are solid.”
“And one of those kegs of theirs got a smell I like, Mayor,” said
the Sky. “I believe I remember that smell like it was born in me.
You get that keg, Mayor.”
“And those long crates got a heft I like,” said the Wideman. “I
almost know what will be in those crates. You get those crates,
Mayor."
“Those square boxes got a feel I like," said the Lolo. "I almost
know what short-handled things will be in those square boxes. And
>
171
Mean Men
the smallest package has a brass glint through a rip in it. You get
those
square
boxes and that smallest package, Mayor.”
“I don't understand this at all,” said John the mayor, rolling his
red-rimmed eyes in his constant pain. “Let the men and their
baggage come in.”
THE three new men who came in had a certain animal power
about them, and a certain human authority. Possibly they might
be important enough to hold for hostages, but who was going to
take the lead in holding them? Men, they moved like big cats. But
they were dressed like businessmen of an earlier decade, an
anomaly on the island, and they were lighter than any of the
islanders there except Lawrence Sky.
“You are the Mayor John-John?" asked one of the new men.
“And
you have authority to deal?”
“I am the mayor,” said John, “and I have such authority as a
shackled prisoner may have. For what do we deal?”
“Oh, for the island. We've come to buy it. You'd like that,
wouldn't you?”
“What, what, who are you?”
“I am Adrian Sweetsong,” said the first of the new men. “I'm a
petroleum geologist by profession, which has nothing to do with
the matter. And I'm an official of the Midlands Gun and Rod
Club.”
“I'm Dennis Halftown,” said the second of the new men. “I'm
an electronic engineer by profession, which has nothing to do with
the matter either. And I'm also an official of the Midlands Gun
and Rod Club.”
172
How They Gave It Back
a
“I'm Freddy Flatfish,” said the third of the new men. “I'm a
lawyer, which does have something to do with this matter. I am
also an official of the Midlands Gun and Rod Club, and I have
studied the legal aspects of this thing pretty thoroughly.”
“Is it the Midlands Gun and Rod Club that is dealing for the
island?” Mayor John asked.
“That's right,” said Adrian Sweetsong, the first of the new men.
“First installment! Set em right there, boys.”
Several of the colts, the strong rough island boys, set down two
heavy square boxes, and Dennis Halftown (the second of the new
men) broke them open with a pry-bar.
“Man-eating Millie! Those things are for me!” the Lolo gasped,
and she had a couple of them out in her hands.
“Sweet little choppies!" the Sky drooled. “What's a knife along
side of one of those?"
“Hack-berry pudding!” cried the Cloud as he returned from his
errand. “Here, here, they look good, let's get them tested. I'll just
pass a dozen of those out the windows to some of the boys. Let
them try them out! Let them fall in love with them!”
“Fifty hatchets,” announced Adrian Sweetsong, “delivered and
accepted. We record them.”
“Wait! Wait!” howled Mayor John jangling his shackles. “What
have fifty hatchets to do with dealing for the island? Who has used
hatchets for a century?"
“One-leg John,” the Duke crooned, “too bad
your
shackles
won't let you get as far as the window. Some of the boys are using
them now. Believe me, John, they're using them now!"
“Mr. Sweetsong,” Mayor John explained patiently, “the last
valuation of island property ever made set it at over a hundred
billion dollars. Due to certain developments, it may be down a
little now, but not that far. Hatchets will not get it. I can sell it
>
>
173
Mean Men
>
>
only for Fair Value or Value Justified. My own shackling is
governed by the Equity Factor.”
“We know that, Mr. Mayor,” said Freddy Flatfish, the lawyer
for the Midlands Gun and Rod Club. Freddy Flatfish was a
tow-headed, twinkling man. “But the island has reverted. It's
really worthless since it was left to the ten thousand gangs, which
have since devoured themselves down to a hundred. Perhaps its
reverted value is now its original value. Anyhow, the first
approach was yours.”
“Mine? Mine? I made no approach. I never heard of you
fellows,” the Mayor said.
“But we have monitored you, Mayor John. Two years ago you
said to the commissioner 'Can't we give it back to someone?' And
you are also recorded as saying 'We ought to sell it back to
“Second installment!" announced Adrian Sweetsong. “Set them
right there, boys."
Several of the colts set down the long crates, and Dennis
Halftown broke them open with his pry-bar.
“Oh, those long sweet songs!” the Wideman slavered. “Smooth
bores! You can jam them with any kind of soup at all and pan-light
them. You can shoot broken glass with them. You can shoot
anything. Here, we'll just hand a few of them out the windows
and let the fellows try them out. Get the heft of those things! Even
your
hands would fall in love with them! Blunderbusses!”
And the Wideman handed half a dozen of them out the windows.
“Twenty guns,” announced Adrian Sweetsong. “Delivered and
accepted. We record them.”
“Even if it were possible for me to deal the island for things of
no value,” John the mayor began—and there was deep-throated
roaring and death-screaming in the streets-
“No value, Mayor?” the Duke Durango asked with deep irony.
as clubs
>
>
174
How They Gave It Back
“Mayor, you should be able to watch them. They jam them with
soup, and then ram in glass and nails for a load. They spark them
off, and it's wonderful. Cuts people right in two. Don't talk no
value about those things!"
“Even if it were possible for me to deal the island for such
things, what could the Midlands Gun and Rod Club possibly do
with the island?” Mayor John asked.
"Set up a hunting preserve,” Adrian Sweetsong said. “It's a
nicely stocked jungle island seventeen miles by four. We'll hunt.
We'll hunt.”
“Hunt? What would you hunt?” the mayor wanted to know.
”
“Big game, big game,” said Dennis Halftown lovingly.
“But there is no big game, no game at all on the island,” the
mayor insisted.
CC
“Remember what ancient Hemingway wrote,” said Freddy
Flatfish. ‘There is no sport equal to the hunting of an armed
man.' Ah, we'll hunt them here, as will many of our well-heeled
members."
“Third installment! Set it right there, boys,” Adrian Sweetsong
ordered.
The ragged island boys set down the bag, and Dennis Halftown
broke it
open
with his pry-bar.
“Boys, boys, that's the smell like was born in me!" the Sky
chortled, and he had his arms up to the elbows in the dark grainy
powder. “Sure it hasn't the power of soup. Sure it's clumsy and
crude. But it's the grandpa of them all! The smell of it, the smell of
it! Men, men, bust your noses on that smell!”
“Twenty-five kilograms of gun-powder,” announced Adrian
Sweetsong. “That's as close as we could figure it. Twenty-five kilos
delivered and accepted. We record it.”
“When you going to start, fellows, when you going to start?”
175
Mean Men
>
the Duke asked the three new men in excitement, getting the idea.
“How soon you be ready to start?" asked the Duke and the Sky
and the Wideman and the Cloud and the Lolo, all going for it
avidly.
“Should be the first bunch of hunters here in the morning,” said
Adrian Sweetsong.
“Too long to wait,” the Lolo protested. “You three? How about
you?”
“We three will begin stalking and pot-shotting in a very few
minutes,” said the Adrian, “just as soon as we can get title to this
place from the reluctant mayor. We suggest you deploy your
forces outside in the corridors. When we come out of this room we
will come out rough, and it's rough animals we want to meet
with.”
“Rough it will be," said the Cloud. “Colts, colts, you carry this
stuff out to our place again just as soon as they have recorded it.
Men, we will have some sport! We will show these sports some
sport!”
“But this cannot be, even in a nightmare,” Mayor John
protested. “You three pale-browns are not Wappingers or Man-
ahattas, and we are not Dutch.”
“I'm a Choctaw,” said Freddy Flatfish. “Dennis Halftown is a
Shawnee. Adrian Sweetsong is an Osage. But we inherit. I have
drawn up a legal brief to prove it. And you are double-Dutch if
you don't accept. Awk, blew half my shoulder off! Those animals
are jumping the gun. Now I know how the expression started.
They really know how to handle those blunderbusses.”
Freddy Flatfish had been shot by a blunderbuss blast from the
corridor and was bleeding badly. So they hurried it along, anxious
to close the bargain and get the hunting season started.
176
How They Gave It Back
“Bring them in fast, boys. Set them down till they are accepted
and recorded. Then take them out again to your place,” Adrian
Sweetsong ordered. And the rough colts brought in a variety of
boxes and packages.
“Ten shirts, accepted and recorded,” Adrian Sweetsong an.
nounced, hurriedly now. “Thirty pair socks, accepted and re-
,
corded. One hundred bullets, accepted and recorded. Forty
kettles, accepted and recorded. One brass frying-pan, accepted and
recorded.”
And at the recording of the brass frying-pan, the leg-piercing
pin was withdrawn from the leg of Mayor John and all his shackles
fell off. The psychic-coded lock of his shackles had opened. He had
finished his job and was released. He had disposed of the island in
equity. He had gotten Fair Value for it, or Value Justified, or at
least Original Value from Original Entailment. And it sufficed.
Mayor John was free. He started to run from the room, fell
down on his crippled leg, and arose and ran once more. And was
caught in a blunderbuss blast.
And then the great hunt began. The three members of the
Midlands Gun and Rod Club had most sophisticated weapons.
They were canny and smooth. This was the dangerous big-game
hunt they had always dreamed of. And their prey were armed and
wild and truculent and joyous.
It would be good.
OUT between the orbs, several tentacles of Ultimate Justice came
near together.
177
Mean Men
>
“Was there not somewhere the mention of twenty-four or
twenty-six dollars paid?” one tentacle asked the other. “I thought I
remembered some such figure.”
“No, no,” said the other tentacle. “That was only the estimated
value placed on the material. There was no specie paid. The list is
correct as rendered, and the repayment has been accepted and
certified.”
>
IN a forgotten and half-filled basement on the island, two of the
remaining old-folk people were still in hiding. They were startled
by the new sort of noise.
“What is it, papa? What have they done?” the old woman
asked.
“Sold it back to the Indians, mama,” the old man said.
“Why have they not thought of that a long time ago?”
178
Secrel Places
Maybe Jones
and the City
CX
Son
Li
ISTEN, you high-old-time people, make your wants
known now. They're building the place, and they'll put in
anything you suggest. Funds are available. Lots of those
peace-and-benevolence folks have made perpetual donations
for those persons less fortunate in their aspirations than
themselves. Less fortunate than-from where we stand,
that's a joke, isn't it?
There is time, but barely. Tell them what you want them to
put in. Act now!
HIS name was Midas Jones. His father had named him that
and given him the touch. But somehow the name had
changed, and it was as Maybe Jones that he was known on
the
spaceways.
Once Maybe Jones had found the Perfect Place. He had left
it, and he was never able to find it again.
He had visited it, one space city out of a million, for a day
and a night long ago. He had gone from the Perfect Place to
New Shanghai to arrange his affairs so that he might return
to the Perfect Place forever. On New Shanghai, in an
181
Secret Places
altercation that really amounted to nothing, Maybe Jones had
suffered a broken head and had lost a piece of his memory.
The head mended in time and most of the memory came back;
but the recollection of the name and bearings of the Perfect
Place did not return.
"With your money and your predilections, you could have
fun anywhere, Maybe,” his friends told him.
“'I could and I do," Maybe said, “but it isn't the same thing.
It all turns bitter when I can't recover the City itself.”
“Was it really perfect, Maybe?”
“Perfect. And I don't mean the weak things that others
mean by the word. It was perfection at high speed. I know
that there are other sorts of people in the universes. They
would say that it was no more than an old-time Saturday-
night town. They would call it a stinking row. It wasn't.
Aromatic, maybe, but not stinking. For a high-flying low-lifer
like me it was perfect.”
“How were the girls there, Maybe?" asked Susie-Q.
"You might get by there, Sue, though barely, as the last
girl in the last bang-house in town. And you're the prettiest
trick on Sad-Dog planet.”
“How come you didn't run out of money, Maybe, with all
those girls around?" Live-Man Lutz asked him.
“Nobody ever ran out of money there. I'd think my old
wallet would be flat, and I'd pull it out and it'd be fatter than
ever. Look, it wasn't just the girls and the drinks and the
music; it was everything. There were friends there, each of
them a thousand friends in one. There were fellows you had
known forever the first time you saw them, and every one of
them a prince. There was talk there that'd never grow old.
There's a pretty good bunch of liars in present company, but
182
Maybe Jones and the City
you're nothing to the high liars and tall talkers in the Perfect
Place. Every pleasure of the flesh and spirit was available,
and it didn't get old. There was no frustration or spoiling or
guilt. At night they took the sky off just to give it more
height."
"Where is this Perfect Place, Maybe? How does one get
there?”
At that question Maybe Jones always broke down and
cried. He didn't know where the place was, nor its name nor
its direction, nor any way to identify it. He looked for it
forever, and he and it became legends.
For twenty years he had been going about the universes
asking for it. He followed every lead, and con-men often sold
him false information about it.
“Take a galactic left down Pirates' Alley for six parsecs,
they might tell him. “Cross the Bright Ocean. Take the Irish
Channel where it opens up at nine o'clock. It's marked for the
first four light years of it. When you come at a district known
as Dobie's Hole, ask directions at any planet or asteroid. You
will be quite near the Perfect Place."
Some of the planets in Dobie's Hole were pretty live places.
You could find girls there like Susie-Q, and cronies like
Live-Man Lutz. It was near perfect in some of those sinks, so
the misunderstanding was understandable. But none of them
was the Perfect Place.
ONE day a simple announcement was made through the
universes: from then on, nobody had to die. Mortality was
183
Secret Places
found to be a simple disease, and it had yielded to simple
specifics.
Nobody paid much attention to the announcement. “I never
could see much sense in dying,” some of them said. “I never
much intended to die anyhow.” “It was just one of those
things that everybody did. Now they don't.” “It doesn't make
any difference to me. I'd as soon keep on living as not.”
A number of bureaus were set up to look into the
implications. There were a thousand of them for the countless
thousands of good people who would want to follow the right
way when it was shown to them, and to do something good
with their endless future.
And there was a small bureau set up for that small group
of folks who may perhaps have slight flaws in their charac-
ters—the golden flaw, as Maybe Jones once called it. This
small bureau was to plan the future for the good-time crowd
who could not be reformed into the sanctioned mold.
It had a small staff at first: High-Life Higgins, Good-Time
Charley Wu, Hilda the Hoop, Margaret the Houri, people like
that. They had only a vague idea of what they wanted. They
sifted the legends of the pleasure places: Fiddlers' Green,
Maybe Jones' City, Barbary, Valhalla on the Rocks.
“If we could only resurrect the men who first had these
visions, we'd have a starting place," said High-Life. “We've a
dozen projects going, but none of them has the touch of a
master. Could we find any of these great dreamers—’
“But Maybe Jones is still alive,” said Hilda. “They say he
still travels trying to find his place again.”
“Great green gophers! Send for him!” howled Good-Time
Charley Wu. “It's originals like him that we want."
Word came to Maybe Jones on a distant planet that a group
184
Maybe Jones and the City
of people had some knowledge of the Perfect Place, and that
they wanted to pool their knowledge with his.
Maybe burned up very light itself getting to them. This
was it!
The Planning City had grown into a vast complex of
buildings. Maybe Jones passed the very large building that
housed the Bureau of Wonderful Islands. Over its doorway
was the motto “Adagios of Islands, O my Prodigal” from
Crane.
“Not quite what I had in mind," said Maybe Jones.
He passed the large building that housed the Bureau of
Wonderful Fields. Over its doorway was the motto-
“If I was thirsty, I have heard a spring,
If I was dusty, I have found a field,”
-from Belloc.
“The fields are always too far from town,” said Maybe.
Then, right across the street, he saw it, the small building
that housed the Bureau of Wonderful Cities. And over its
doorway was a verse from the immortal Hiram Glotz:
“Let sheep lie down in grass! I'll toe the rail!
I've got a thirst that ain't for Adam's ale!
I'll trade your fields of green for bistros brown
Where ‘Dusty' is a red-haired girl in town.”
)
“Now that is a little bit more like it,” said Maybe Jones. He
went in and boldly announced himself, and they fell all over
his neck.
“Margaret!” Maybe cried to the Houri. “You were there!
You know where the Perfect Place is!”
185
Secret Places
“Maybe, I've been everywhere,” she said. “I like them all. I
think they're all perfect once you get things to going. I've
been told that I lack discernment. Boys, you can't have
everything, so that discernment has got to go when it gets in
the way of exuberance. No, Maybe, I've run into you lots of
times, but I just can't place your place. We'll build it though.
Just don't leave me out of it."
“The pitch is this,” said High-Life Higgins, after they had
eaten and drunk and made cheer to excess. “We have now
arrived at the three ultimates: Immortality, Heaven, Hell.
We have just achieved the first of them. We are now setting
up projects to construct the other two, on the premise that
one man's Heaven is another man's Hell. We must build final
enclaves for people of every choice. We cannot sit idly by and
ask what we would do with the after-life. This is the
after-life. It became so as soon as immortality was achieved.”
“Will
you
build
my
Perfect Place?" asked Maybe with hope.
"Sure. And ideas like yours are what this bureau needs.
You wouldn't believe what some of the other bureaus have to
work with. They get the arty ducks and the philosophy buffs
and the peace-and-benevolence beats. Why, you get on jags
like that and you'll be tired of them in a thousand years or
less. How are they going to stand up through eternity? The
Green Fields might do, for the green among us. The Islands
might do, for those of insular mind and soul. But our own
small bureau caters to the high-old-time, rather than the
peace-eternal, crowd. We believe here (we know we are not
the majority, but there has to be something for everyone)
that the rooting old good-time town and the crowd that goes
with it can stand up to the long-time gaff as well as anything.
Would you like to see some of the work we have been doing?”
186
Maybe Jones and the City
“I certainly would,” said Maybe. “It might strike me as a
little amateurish, but I'm sure it's in the right line.”
“By our total recall methods we are able to reconstruct the
Seven Sin Cities of History, Jones. They are the folk dreams
that have also been raucous facts. The selection is one-sided,
being out of the context of the old Western Civilization from
which most of us descend. But they were such a hopping
bunch of towns that (under the old recension) they had to be
destroyed: by blast-from-Heaven, lava-flow, earthquake,
,
sinking-in-the-sea, cow-fire, earthquake again and fire, hurri-
cane and tidal wave. They were too hot to last.
“Here is Sodom. Now take a close-up of its old Siddim
Square District where they had such a noisy go of it before it
was wiped out. Go down and sample it.”
Maybe Jones sampled old Sodom. He was back in about an
hour.
“It's about as good as you could expect from that time," he
said. “The drinks were too sweet and sticky. So were the girls.
The music was only fair. How do you tune a ram's horn
anyhow? But, man, it won't stack up with the Perfect Place
at all.”
“Try Pompeii,” said Good-Time Charley Wu. “We'll set you
down on the corner of Cardo and Decumanus streets. That
was the first red light district to be so lighted and so named.
Don't cut it too close. Watch out for the hot lava when you
leave.”
Maybe Jones was back from Pompeii in half an hour.
“It's strictly Little Italy and Little Egypt stuff,” he told
them, but he was smiling. “It's all right for a gag. It's fun.
But it isn't on the same side of the street with the Perfect
Place.”
187
Secret Places
)
“Try Lisbon,” said Hilda. “It's sort of a test. In its own
century Lisbon was spiritually of the West Coast of Africa
though geographically in Europe. Don't fall in the harbor
going in, and watch the earthquake coming out.”
Maybe Jones was in old Lisbon for two hours. He liked it.
“Man, man!” he said. “It's on a tangent, and not the true
line, of course. But, were I not committed to the Perfect
Place—man!”
“Here's Port Royal before it was sunk in the sea,” said
High-Life. "Some like it. Some don't.”
Maybe was out of Port Royal in half an hour.
“It's all there,” he said, “but they forgot to cook it. They
even forgot to take the hide off it. People, a place has to have
the illusion of smoothness—that's part of the game. No, Port
Royal is strictly a short-haul place."
"Have a go at Chicago before the fire,” said Good-Time
Charley Wu. “It had its followers."
Maybe was back from Chicago in fifteen minutes.
“Are you kidding?” he asked. “We were speaking of cities,
and you give me a country town. Size isn't the test. Oh, it's all
right for boys, but who's going to be a boy for eternity?"
“Two to go," said Hilda. “Try San Francisco before the
quake and the fire."
So Maybe tried it. He was smiling when he came back.
“It dates, it dates," he told them. "For amateur theatricals,
yes. For eternity, no."
"One more," said High-Life. “Here is Galveston just before
the hurricane and tidal wave of 1900. Try Old Tremont Street
downtown where it crosses Post Office Street."
Maybe Jones went down in old Galveston and didn't come
back. They sent for him and couldn't find him. He was gone
)
188
Maybe Jones and the City
all night. He came back the middle of next morning, looped to
the ports and walking with a seaman's roll.
“It's put me in the mood," he cried. “I'm ready to go to
work. Hey, that place has a touch of the eternal! I found a
way to tune it and visited Galveston in earlier and later
years.
I picked up an interesting piece of history too. You know,
they never did bury any of the dead people after the
hurricanes and tidal waves. They just ground them up and
sold them for crab-meat sandwiches. Well, let's go to work.
It's brought the Perfect Place back clear to my mind, and I'm
ready to get with it."
“JONES, this is the Empyrean, the eternal fire-stuff, that we
hold in our hands," High-Life said. “I know that these
reconstructed legend cities leave a lot out, but men like you
will help us put it in.”
“Before I start, can we fix it so a man can get higher and
higher and never have to come down? Maybe wanted to
know.
“Yes we can,” Good-Time Charley told him. “The hangover,
whether physical or spiritual, was a death in miniature. We
have whipped it, as we have whipped death itself. We have a
free hand here."
“There's got to be a catch to it," said Maybe. “Heavens, or
Hells, depending on the viewpoint, will be expensive.”
“Long-term funding is the answer,” said Good-Time Char-
ley. “The longest terms ever—forever. Put it all in. Set it all
down, and we will make it that
way."
189
Secret Places
а
“Man, man!” said Maybe Jones. He sat down at a table and
took a large square of paper. He titled it modestly:
“The Empyrean According to Maybe Jones”
He began to write the specifications, and building was
begun on the Perfect Place for people of a certain choice.
“That all the girls be built like clepsydras," he wrote, “you
know, the ancient water-clock. It's a much more sophisticated
shape than the hour-glass figure.”
“Put me in,” Margaret cried. “I'm shaped like a pendulum
clock. Notice the way I swing sometime."
(Listen, this isn't a private place for Maybe Jones. It's for
all high-flyers everywhere. There will be plenty of room and
variety in it.)
"That all the bars be a mile, hell, make it two miles, long,”
Maybe wrote. “That there be high liars there who'll make
Live-Man Lutz sound like a parson. That they take the sky off
early in the morning so you can get as high as you want all
day long. That they have girls who'll make Little Midnight
Mullins and Giggles McGuire and Belle Hellios and Susie-Q
look like sheep dogs. That—"
HEY, get in on this if you're going to. They're building it
now! If you are an arty duck or a philosophy buff or a
peace-and-benevolence beat, then you can go to hell—to your
own appropriate bureau—and be heard. But if you go for the
high-old-time stuff, then make your wants known here.
If you are of the raffish elite and want to go where you can
190
get higher and higher and never have to come down from it, if you want the good-time town and the crowd that goes with it for a long haul (and it's going to be a very long haul), then howl it out so they'll know that you're interested. If you want anything at all added, tell them now, and they'll put it in. Contact them by regular mail, or phone or voxo. Or tear out a sheet of this screed, scribble your wants in the margin, and drop it in any mail box. It will get there. The address is:
That's all you need, but get with it. They're building our place now.
"Bureau of Wonderful Cities. Old Earth."
Maybe Jones and the City
191
Mean Men
Seven Story Dream
la
G ILFORD GADBERRY had a contempt for dawns badly
>
a
done. He knew how blatant and stylized the outdoor world can be
in its pristine moments: the contrived shagginess of grass, the
stupidity of trees, the falsity of flowers, the oafishness of the birds
and their inept melody. These scratched the smooth surface of his
soul. “Bad work, very bad work,” Gadberry would opine, for he
was an artist.
Yet there were times when these sorry units arranged them-
selves with striking effect. On this very carly dawn they made an
almost perfect harnony, and Gadberry gracefully acknowledged
it. There it was: the old oaks, and the new firs and hedges, the
ragged Bermuda on the vacant lot in the new sun, the thin rye
grass that held to the shade of the building, the corpse on the
lawn, the row of hollyhocks and the lone aster in the middle of
them, the drooping mimosa full of driveling birds, the even rank of
garbage cans standing chalky in the aluminum dawn, and that
damned dew over everything.
In spite of the elements that went into the composition the
effect was near perfect—and yet there was one clashing entity in
that aubade scene. Gadberry reviewed it in his mind, for the artist
is satisfied with nothing but perfection.
The firs, the hedges, the corpse, the mimosa, the garbage cans,
195
Mean Men
the lawn, the hollyhocks with their lone aster—something was in
that peaceful morning scene that simply did not belong there.
Gadberry strode over and savagely struck down the aster with
its white flower. The harmony of the scene was now perfect. He
walked
away,
his artist's soul satisfied.
On his way to find an early eating place, he met a policeman
named Embree and told him that Minnie Jo Merry was lying dead
on that little lawn behind the apartment where she lived, and
perhaps it should be looked into.
CAPTAINS Keil and Gold were there quickly and in charge.
Minnie Jo was bruised about the throat and dried blood framed
her mouth, but her death may have been caused by a violent
concussion. Keil and Gold left her to Dr. Sanderson and their men.
There was no crowd. This was very early on a Saturday morning,
the apartment was on a quiet street, and the small rear lawn was
secluded.
Orders were given for all the residents of the apartment
building to remain in the building, and Captain Keil sent for
Gilford Gadberry, the only one who had left. Gadberry told the
patrolman who came for him that he would come as soon as he
had finished his breakfast, and not a moment before. He finished it
leisurely, drinking coffee and sketching while the policeman
fumed. He was sketching a fuming policeman.
196
Seven Story Dream
a
>
“MRS. RAFFEL,” Captain Keil said, "you are the owner and
operator of this apartment. I assume that
you know something of
your renters. Who lives here?”
“Minnie Jo lived here, and how will I get her rent now? She
used to say, 'You worry too much about my rent. I'm not much
“
further back than some of the others. You should know that I'm
good for it. As long as I live I will always be good for what I owe.'
But now who will be good for what she owes?”
“Your problem, Mrs. Raffel. Who else lived—lives here?”
“Dillahunty, Gadberry, Handle, Izzard, Lamprey, Nazworthy,
all in a permanent or temporary state of single ss.”
“Six living and one dead tenant. Is that all?”
“It's a small place, but I do have two other empty units—three
it will be now. I doubt if this will help me rent them.”
“It may not make a difference. The girl was murdered in her
own room, we believe, and she seems to have made no outcry. She
was either taken very suddenly, or she knew the intruder well.”
“Not necessarily, Captain. Minnie Jo was a very open person.
If
Jack the Ripper himself had come in, red from his trade, she'd
have said, 'Hi, honey, sit down and talk to me.' But it was
probably someone she knew.”
“What are your feelings on hearing of the death of Miss
Merry?"
“Satisfaction—though I'll miss her—and relief and thankfulness
that it has finally turned out all right.”
“Turned out all right? Do you call it turning out all right that
she was murdered?” he asked her.
“Oh yes. There were many worse things that could have
.
happened to her. How lucky that Minnie Jo was killed before they
happened!”
“You will have to explain that. Did you
hate her?”
>
197
Mean Men
a
“No, I loved her—and I will explain. Minnie Jo was quite a
good girl, but she was on the edge of becoming quite a bad girl. I
have seen it happen to so many of the young ones who are loose in
the world. Every time I know one, and notice her nearing the
change, I pray that something will intervene and prevent it. This
is the first time my prayers have been answered, and I'm
thankful.”
“Could you yourself have done anything to bring about this, ah,
intervention, this preventative death?”
“I have just told you: I prayed. I didn't know it would be death,
but that's as good a solution as any."
Then they questioned her a little about other things.
Gadberry, now back from his breakfast, was questioned by
Captain Gold
“Gadberry, do you often get up so early?”
“Never. But I often stay up this late. I work at night and sleep
in the daytime.”
“Why?” Captain Gold inquired.
“It was originally a pose. Then I became used to it.”
"You seemed extraordinarily cool on discovering Miss Merry
dead. You did not make an outcry, or hurry to report it.”
“I reported it to the first person I met, a policeman. This
seemed the logical person, and the logical thing to do.”
“Almost too logical. What was your opinion of Miss Merry?”
“Alive, or dead? The girl was somehow completed in death. It
improves many people. So often we see only the outside of people,
but to look at her smeared with her own blood gives an added
dimension, a more total view.”
“Ah, what was your opinion of her alive?”
"Her hands and ankles were rather good; between, she was
“
198
Seven Story Dream
>
conventional. She hadn't eyes, no eyes at all. It isn't usual for a girl
her age to have eyes. A child will sometimes have eyes, a woman
after thirty may have them again, or a man after forty. I never saw
her hair, which is to say that it was doctored. I sketched her ears
sometimes, and her throat. I was not satisfied with either of them,
but then it isn't twice a year that I come on either that is really
good. Are you interested in these things?”
?
“We are somewhat interested in the throat of this girl, and other
matters. Since you work at night, you must have been awake. Did
.
you
hear any outcry or evidence of a struggle?”
“No. I could be throttled myself and not notice it. When I work
I am taken by the Holy Spirit of art. I am probably unable to help
you on the more mundane details you are seeking.”
“What is your opinion of the tenant George Handle? It is
reported that you sponge on him considerably.”
“The artist is worthy of his hire. George is an oaf, a fool; but do
not believe that a fool and his money are easily parted. I have to
work for every dollar I twist out of him. George has caught the
sickness of self-improvement. He learns at night. He has one of
those sets with an earphone for under the pillow. He's put quite a
bit of money into the recordings, money much better given to me.
He has his own recorder, reads into it things he wishes to learn,
then has them played back while he sleeps. Whatever he learns
while asleep, he is still a fool when awake.”
“You haven't any use for fools?”
“But I have! I often make use of fools.”
They questioned him a little more, then went on to Izzard.
“Mr. Izzard, what were your relations with Miss Merry?” Keil
asked.
“Avuncular-of the Dutch-uncle sort. Low Dutch, really, but
a
199
Mean Men
she hadn't come to realize that yet. I lavished gifts on her, and she
was friendly. I believe I would ultimately have been successful.
There was a change beginning in her.”
“Yes. Others have noticed the change. Were these expensive
gifts?”
“Not to me. The price tags don't matter. I run the A to Izzard
Variety Store. She was without discernment, and I have access to
bargains.”
“You wouldn't have been rebuffed by her, and been angry
enough to do her in?”
“I was rebuffed by her constantly, but she did it in a graceful
way-never so as to stop the flow of gifts. My timetable for her
was a long one and I am sorry to see it interrupted. No, I never
laid a hand on her, except sometimes in attempted affection.”
They questioned him a little about the others, a little more
about himself, and left him.
Next, they questioned Nazworthy, a large, sullen-appearing
,
man. He said that any of them might have done it: Handle, Izzard,
Lamprey, Gadberry, Dillahunty. “They are a bad bunch. All of
them always looking at the young girl. Any of them do it. Yes, I
am awake when it happen. I hear the shots ring out. I ‘
somebody have killed that pretty Miss Merry.' Whichever one you
I will positively identify him as the killer.”
“You are sure that you heard shots? She was not shot.”
“It was the knife I hear, then. I hear it go in loud. I say,
“Somebody have killed that pretty Miss Merry.'”
“She was not knifed.”
“How was it, then? What is the loud noise I heard? How did he
kill her?”
“We believe that she was strangled, and then thrown or pushed
from her window.”
say, 'Oh
decide on,
) )
200
Seven Story Dream
>
“My very thought. That is what I heard. The strangle noises and
the thrown-out-of-the-window noises. I hear everything. I know
everything. I will give testimony."
There was the look of arrogant laughter behind the hard eyes
of
Nazworthy. He was talking nonsense, either seriously or spe-
ciously. They would get nothing out of him.
Mr. Dillahunty told Keil and Gold, “My opinion of the lodgers
I cannot give as I would like, being opposed to profanity. You may
have to discount my opinion of them, however. I always have a
low opinion of those with whom I live; but when I have moved on
to other lodgings I remember them with affection. No, I heard
nothing in the night. I hear little without my aid, and I do not
sleep with it. My acquaintance with the aforesaid Minnie Jo was
sketchy. She would smile, and I would smile, but I am thrice her
age and a crippled man. Having second sight, I knew that this
would happen ... No, I haven't second sight to that extent; I
don't know who did it. You are sure it was one of the lodgers?”
“No. But she was apparently in her own room and in bed when
accosted. She seems to have been strangled there and thrown out
her own window. It was quite late, after the dew, and no feet left
the building after the dew and before her discovery-except those
of Gadberry, who reported her. At the moment we have no leads
to anyone except those who lived in this building. Tell us, what
about Mrs. Raffel?”
“A religious fanatic but a good woman. It is believed by the
others that I pay the regular rates here, but that is not so. I live
here partly on the charity of Mrs. Raffel.”
“And Gadberry, the artist?”
“In one word, selfish.”
“George Handle? He has been called a fool.”
“Only a half-fool. But easily led.”
>
a
201
Mean Men
>
>
a
“Izzard?”
“A merchant. He never spent a penny without a return."
“Nazworthy? Is he as crazy as he sounds?”
“No, he isn't. He's a sardonic kidder, with a dislike for all
authority. I can imagine a little the line he would take with the
police. The cat, the only other animal that indulges in straight-
faced sardonic humor, betrays itself by a fick of the tail.
Nazworthy has the same motion, but without the tail.”
“Could he kill?”
“I doubt he could kill Minnie Jo Merry. He hates only
pretentious people, and she wasn't. He could kill a policeman-or
her killer. If another is killed, then you
will know.”
“We'll watch for that. Lamprey?”
“Nothing there. A nothing man. Did you notice the girl well? A
beautiful thing and finely made, but there was plenty of strength
to her. That nothing man couldn't have strangled her. She'd have
strangled him and thrown him out the window. You'll have to look
to one of the others, not to him.”
Dillahunty was right. Lamprey was a nothing man, and he was
terrified of the police. “I didn't kill her. I didn't know her. I didn't
know anybody. I wash dishes at Webbers. I don't know nobody.
I'm in my room all night.”
“Well, did you hear noises in the night?"
“Noises I always hear, and some of them never happen. I'm a
nervous man, but I kill nobody, I hurt nobody. It is more I am
always afraid someone would kill me.”
Lamprey was a small man with small hands, a frightened man
on the edge of incompetency. They questioned him a little more
and left him.
“What do we have?” Captain Keil asked. “A heavy old woman
who is a religious fanatic and also a good woman, and is glad that
>
202
Seven Story Dream
a
the girl was killed before something bad happened to her. An
artist who is selfish. A sardonic kidder who is not as stupid as he
acts. A half-fool who is easily led. A nothing man. A merchant who
does not spend without a return. An old Irishman who is thrice her
age, but can we be sure that all the sap is dead in him? Seven, and
one of them is crazy, but which? Let's go talk to the half-fool.”
“Handle,” Captain Gold said, "did you sleep well last night?”
"No. I have never slept well any night of my life. I dream a lot
and worry a lot. I'm totally alive when I sleep.”
“Was it because of your restlessness at night that you
decided to
try the learn-while-you-sleep systems?”
“Yes. I want to know things, so I decided to tap my nocturnal
energy, as the advertisement said.”
“What is your relationship with Gilford Gadberry?”
“Oh, he takes me for quite a bit, but he knows all the things I
want to know. He can talk about music and funny paintings and
the new dirty novels and psychology and things like that.
Sometimes I turn him on when he talks, and play him back at
night. Sometimes when I lend him money he'll make recordings
for me—Gaelic furniture design, and things like that. He arranges
the things I'll hear at night so I'll get a well-rounded liberal
education.'
“I see. Did
you
hear
any
noises last night?”
“I hear noises every night, though I sleep with the earphones
on, and all outside noise is supposed to be cut out. It must be that
I dream the noises.”
“Did you dream last night? Did you dream anything about a
murder or a dead person?” Gold asked.
“Yes. About seven dreams like that."
“Tell us one of them.”
“Which one?”
203
Mean Men
>
“Hell, I don't know. We're shooting blind. Tell us one.”
“Well, this one, it's kind of silly. This was a long time ago, or
,
anyhow it took place in a cabin and by candlelight. We sat wake
over a corpse. We cracked and ate walnuts, but someone objected
when we threw the shells in with the corpse, though that was a
good place to throw them. Then someone else—"
“Oh Judas!” said Captain Keil.
“I believe that is enough of that one,” Captain Gold said.
“Were all of the seven dreams like that?”
“All of them about murder or corpses, yes. All of them kind of
silly.”
“Seven story dreams we have yet,” Keil said. “We're getting
nowhere.”
“Then we'll get somewhere,” Gold said. “Handle, have you any
idea who killed Minnie Jo Merry?”
“I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie Jo Merry.”
“What?”
“I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie-'
“You are talking for the record?”
“Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed Minnie
Jo Merry. I killed—”
So they took him downtown, but first they gave orders for a new
lock to be put on George Handle's door and they left a guard at
the apartment building.
NATURALLY they didn't leave it at that. The confession of the
half-fool was complete enough. There were odd elements in it, but
he was an odd man. He said that he had killed the girl in a dream;
204
Seven Story Dream
I
that he had risen and gone to her room and strangled her and
thrown her out of the open window because he was jealous. Then
he had gone back to his bed, to other dreams.
Yet there were points about that murder that hadn't been given
out, that only the killer could have known; George Handle knew
them
Nevertheless, the two captains continued to check during that
morning. They found that Minnie Jo was an inefficient but
promising worker for a stationery company. Her particular
girlfriend believed that Minnie Jo ran around only with the men
where she lived. They checked the places she frequented, and she
had been seen with all the men.
She had been out with Gadberry and with Handle often, and
with Izzard nearly as often. She had even been seen dining with
the sardonic Nazworthy at a sardonic place run by two Bulgarian
brothers. She often went to Webbers, and sometimes drank coffee
in the kitchen with the dishwasher Lamprey. It was believed by
them at Webbers, though, that this was mere kindness on her part.
Minnie Jo had even been seen drinking Irish coffee with
Dillahunty in the after-midnight hours at Maddigan's. Nor was she
the only girl a third his age that he brought in. The sap was not all
dead in him yet.
They found that Dillahunty was well liked, Handle was liked,
and even poor Lamprey was liked.
Izzard was not liked, Gadberry was not liked, Nazworthy was
not liked.
“We can tell nothing by that,” Keil said. “Handle has confessed,
and it makes no difference that the people who know him like him.
There is nothing to tie onto the others, even if Gadberry is selfish,
Izzard is demanding, and Nazworthy is sardonic. We still have the
fact that Handle has confessed.”
>
>
205
Mean Men
“Yes. Repetitiously. But to be sure, let's go hear him again.”
”
Again, George Handle told them, “I killed Minnie Jo Merry.
Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed Minnie
Jo”
"He sounds like_”
“Yes, doesn't he?” Keil interrupted Gold. “Let's go look for it.”
“HAS anybody been trying to get into Handle's room?” they
asked the guard at the apartment.
“Gadberry has. Says Handle owes him money. Says he was to go
in and get it. Says he wears Handle's shirts, and this locking out
puts him to grave inconvenience. Handle never locked his door,
according to him. Gadberry was disappointed to find the new lock
on it; he seems pretty nervous now.”
They found Gadberry.
“Come on with us. We'll go to his room and get it.”
“What? Get what?"
“What you were trying to get. What is making you nervous that
you couldn't get? It will be here, somewhere with the bunch of
them. Quite a few of them here, aren't there, Gadberry?"
They were in Handle's room now.
“I don't know what you mean,” Gadberry protested.
“The tapes, the wires, the records. How long would it take to
play them all?”
"I don't know."
“You know pretty well. It would take about forty hours or
more, wouldn't it? Will you find it for us, or must we play them
?
all? And you will listen.”
”
>
>
206
Seven Story Dream
>
.
>
>
“I won't listen to forty hours of that drivel. I'll find it for you.
I'd have said that nothing could break me down, but that surely
could.”
“Why did you kill the girl, Gadberry?”
“Jealousy, frustration, curiosity ..
“I can understand the jealousy. She was an attractive girl. What
was the frustration?"
“She was almost perfect, but not quite, and it is that which is
just short of a masterpiece that infuriates. It is so near—yet it
misses. I'm always in anger to destroy a near-masterpiece.”
“So you destroyed her. And the third element was your
curiosity, like when you said “The girl was somehow completed in
death.' You had to see how she would look dead.”
“Yes. That knowledge was necessary to my work.”
Gadberry had located the tape for them, and Captain Keil was
threading it into the machine.
“I suspect that
you weren't accurate in your appraisal to us of
Miss Merry, Gadberry. You said that she hadn't eyes, and other
things.”
“I lied. She had eyes, and she wasn't conventional. She was near
perfect, gentlemen. So near.”
“And in preparation for the murder it was only necessary for
you to condition the easily led George Handle to a confession?”
“Astute of me, was it not, Captains?”
The machine played now in the compelling voice of Gilford
Gadberry, as it had night after night played to George Handle, in
his sleep, till he had learned to answer on cue; and the cue, of
course, was the question: "Who killed Minnie Jo Merry?”
“Pretty uninspired,” Gadberry had to admit, “but I had to
assume uninspired questioners, to whom the cliché would come
naturally.”
207
Mean Men
The machine went on to recount certain abominations that only
the killer knew he would commit, but the voice of that most
polished madman returned again and again to the command:
“Say, 'I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie Jo Merry.
Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed-
208
Secret Places
Adam Had
Three Brothers
IN THE TOWN there are many races living, each in its own
enclave, some of many square miles, some of a few acres only,
some of but one or two streets. Its geographers say that it has
more Italians than Rome, more Irish than Dublin, more Jews
than Israel, more Armenians than Yerevan.
But this overlooks the most important race of all.
There is the further fact (known only to the more intense
geographers): it has more Rrequesenians than any town in
the world. There are more than a hundred of them.
By the vulgar the Rrequesenians are called Wrecks, and
their quarter is Wreckville. And there is this that can be said
of them that cannot be said of any other race on earth: Every
one of them is a genius.
These people are unique. They are not Gypsies, though they
are often taken for them. They are not Semites. They are not
even children of Adam.
3
WILLY MCGILLEY, the oldest of the Wrecks (they now use
Gentile names) has an old baked tablet made of straw and
pressed sheep dung that is eight thousand years old and gives
211
Secret Places
the true story of their origin. Adam had three brothers:
Etienne, Yancy, and Rreq. Etienne and Yancy were bache-
lors. Rreq had a small family and all his issue have had small
families; until now there are about two hundred of them in
all, the most who have ever been in the world at one time.
They have never intermarried with the children of Adam
except once. And not being of the same recension they are not
under the same curse to work for a living.
So they do not.
Instead they batten on the children of Adam by clever
devices that are known in police court as swindles.
Catherine O'Conneley by ordinary standards would be
reckoned as the most beautiful of the Wrecks. By at least
three dozen men she was considered the most beautiful girl in
the world. But by Wreckian standards she was plain. Her
nose was too small, only a little larger than that of ordinary
women; and she was skinny as a crow, being on the slight side
of a hundred and sixty. Being beautiful only by worldly
standards she was reduced even more than the rest of them to
living by her wits and charms.
She was a show girl and a bar girl. She gave piano lessons
and drawing lessons and tap-dancing lessons. She told for-
tunes and sold oriental rugs and junk jewelry, and kept
company with lonely old rich men. She was able to do all
these things because she was one bundle of energy.
She had no family except a number of unmarried uncles,
the six Petapolis brothers, the three Petersens, the five
Calderons, the four Oskanians, and Charley O'Malley, nine-
teen in all.
212
Adam Had Three Brothers
NOW it was early morning and a lady knocked at her door.
“The oil stock is no good. I checked and the place would be
three hundred miles out to sea and three miles down. My
brother says I've been took."
"Possibly your brother isn't up on the latest developments
in offshore drilling. We have the richest undeveloped field in
the world and virtually no competition. I can promise we will
have any number of gushers within a week. And if your
brother has any money I can still let him have stock till noon
today at a hundred and seventy-five dollars a share.”
“But I only paid twenty-five a share for mine."
"See how fast it has gone up in only two days. What other
stock rises so fast?"
"Well all right, I'll go tell him.”
THERE was another knock on the door.
"My little girl take piano lessons for six weeks and all she
can play is da da da."
“Good. It is better to learn one note thoroughly than just a
little bit of all of them. She is not ready for the other notes
yet. But I can tell you this: she is the most intelligent little
girl I have ever seen in my life and I believe she has a positive
genius for the piano. I truly believe she will blossom all at
once and one of these days she will be playing complete
symphonies.”
“You really think so?"
"I do indeed.”
213
Secret Places
“Well then I will pay you for six more weeks, but I do wish
she could play more than da da da.”
THERE was another knock at the door.
“Honey Bun, there was something wrong. I give you ten
dollars to bet on Summertime in the first race at Marine
Park; you say it's a sure thing and fifty to one. But now I find
there isn't any such track as Marine Park and nobody ever
heard of the horse. Huh, Honey Bun? What you do to your
best boy friend?"
“O, we use code names. What if all these hot tips ever got
out? Summertime of course was Long Day and Marine Park
was Jamaica. And he only lost by about six noses. Wasn't that
good for a fifty to one? And now I have an even better tip. It's
so hot I can't even tell you the name of the horse, but I feel
sure that twenty would get you a thousand.”
“All the time I give you money but never I win yet, Honey
Bun. Now you give a little kiss and we talk about another
bet.”
“I had surely thought our attachment was on a higher
plane."
“Words, Honey Bun, always words. But you give, um, um,
um, that's good. Now I bet again, but I bet I better win
someday.”
214
Adam Had Three Brothers
THERE was another knock on the door.
“How come you let my brother-in-law in on a good thing
and never tell me? For a hundred he'll have two hundred and
fifty in a week, and you never tell me, and I'm your friend
and never persecute you when you don't pay your bill."
So she had to give her caller the same deal she had given
his brother-in-law.
a
AFTER that she went out to take the game out of her traps.
She had set and baited them some days before. She had gone
to see five hundred people, which took quite a while even for
one with her excess of energy. And to each she said this:
“I have just discovered that I have an infallible gift of
picking winners. Now I want you to give it a test. Here is a
sure winner I have picked. I ask you bet it, not with me, not
with one of my uncles, but with a bookie of your own choice. I
prefer not to know with whom you bet.”
Of the five hundred there were a hundred and forty-four
winners, very good. So the next day she went to the hundred
and forty-four with even more assurance and offered them
the same proposition again. And of the hundred and forty-
four there were fifty-six winners. Very good, for she really
could pick them.
To these fifty-six she went the third day and offered them
the third sure bet free. And incredibly of the fifty-six there
were nineteen winners.
This was repeated the next day, and of the nineteen there
were seven winners.
215
Secret Places
Now she went to talk money. The seven lucky clients could
not deny that she indeed had the gift of picking winners. She
had given them all four straight in four days and her secret
should surely be worth money. Besides, they had all let their
bets ride and they had won a lot, an average of more than six
hundred dollars.
But she would give no more free tips. She would only sell
her complete and exclusive secret for a thousand dollars. And
she collected from six of them. The seventh was Mazuma
O'Shaunessey.
“I have given you four straight winners, but I cannot give
you any more free tips. We will now talk cold turkey."
“O, put it in a basket, Katie."
“Why, what do you mean, sir?”
”
“I learned it in my cradle. The Inverted Pyramid. You
tapped five hundred, and you got besides me how many?
Five?"
“Six besides you, seven in all.”
“Very good. You pick them nice for a little girl. But isn't
that a lot of work for no more than a hatful of money?"
“Six thousand dollars is a large hatful. And there is always
one smart alec like you who knows it all.”
"Now Kate dear, let's look at it this way. I can really pick
all the winners, not seven straights in five hundred, but all
five hundred if I wished.”
“O bah, you can't fool this little goose."
“O, I could prove it easily enough, but that's showy and I
hate to be a show-off. So I suggest that
you
take
my
word for
it and share my secret with me and give up this penny ante
stuff.”
216
Adam Had Three Brothers
“And all you want for your sure thing secret is five
thousand dollars or so?”
“Why Kate, I don't want your money. I have so much that
it's a burden to me. I only want to marry you."
a
SHE looked at him and she was not sure. O, not about
marrying him, he was nice enough. She was not sure, she had
,
never been sure, that he was a Wreck.
“Are you?"
“Why Kate, does one Wreck have to ask another that
question?"
“I guess not. I'll go ask my uncles what they think. This is
something of a decision.”
She went to see all her bachelor uncles and asked them
what they knew about Mazuma O'Shaunessey.
He was known to all of them.
“He is a competent boy, Kate," said Demetrio Petapolis. “If
I do not miscount I once came out a little short on a deal with
him. He knows the Virginia City Version, he knows the old
Seven-Three-Three, he can do the Professor and His Dog, and
the Little Audrey. And he seems to be quite rich. But is he?"
He meant, not is he rich, but—is he a Wreck?
“Does one Wreck have to ask another that question?" said
Kate.
“No, I guess not."
I
a
217
Secret Places
HODL OSKANIAN knew him too.
“That boy is real cute. It seems in the last deal I had with
him he came out a little ahead. It seems that in every deal I
have with him he comes out a little ahead. He knows the
Denver Deal and the Chicago Cut. He does the Little Old
Lady and the Blue Hat. He knows the Silver Lining and the
Doghouse and the Double Doghouse. And he seems quite
likeable. But is he?”
He meant, not was he likeable, but—was he a Wreck?
“Cannot one Wreck always tell another?" said Kate loftily.
LARS PETERSEN knew Mazuma too.
“He is a klog pog. He knows the Oslo Puds and the
Copenhagen Streg. He knows the Farmer's Wife and the
Little Black Dog. He can do the Seventy-Three and the Sup-
per Club. And he runs more tricks with the Sleepy River than
anyone I ever saw, and has three different versions of the
Raft and four of Down the Smoke Stack. And all the officers
on the bilk squad give him half their pay every week to invest
for them. He seems quite smart. But is he?"
He meant, not was he smart, but
is he a Wreck?
“Should one have to ask?” said Kate haughtily.
HER uncle Charley O'Malley also thought well of Mazuma.
"I am not sure but that at last count he was a raol or so
218
Adam Had Three Brothers
ahead of me. He knows the Blue Eyed Drover and the Black
Cow. He can do the Brandy Snifter with the best of them, and
he isn't bashful with the Snake Doctor. He does a neat
variation of the Bottom of the Barrel. He can work the
Yellow Glove and the Glastonburry Giveaway. And he seems
affable and urbane. But is he?”
He meant, not was he affable and urbane (he was), but—is
he a Wreck? Ah, that was the question.
“How can you even ask?” said Kate.
SO they were married and began one of the famous love
affairs of the century. It went on for four years and each day
brought new high adventure. They purged for the good of his
soul a Dayton industrialist of an excessive sum of cash and
thus restored his proper sense of values and taught him that
money isn't everything. They toured the world in gracious
fashion and took no more than their ample due for their
comfortable maintenance. They relaxed the grip of tight-
fisted Frenchmen and retaught them the stern virtues of
poverty. They enforced an austere regime of abstinence and
hard work on heretofore over-wealthy and over-weight
German burghers and possibly restored their health and
prolonged their lives. They had special stainless steel buckets
made to bury their money in, and these they scattered in
many countries and several continents. And they had as much
fun as it is allowed mortals to have.
219
Secret Places
ONE pleasant afternoon Mazuma O'Shaunessey was in jail in
a little town in Scotland. The jailer was gloomy and suspi-
cious and not given to joking.
“No tricks from you now. I will not be taken.”
"Just one to show I have the power. Stand back so I can't
reach you.”
“I'm not likely to let you."
“And hold up a pound note in one hand as tightly as you
can. I will only fick my handkerchief and the note will be in
my hand and no longer in yours."
“Man I defy you. You cannot do it.”
He held the note very tightly and closed his eyes with the
effort. Mazuma flicked his handkerchief, but the Scotsman
was right. He could not do it. This was the only time that
Mazuma ever failed. Though the world quivered on its axis
(and it did) yet the note was held so tightly that no power
could dislodge it. But when the world quivered on its axis the
effect was that Mazuma was now standing outside the cell
and the Scotsman was within. And when the Chief came some
minutes later Mazuma was gone and the Scotch jailer stood
locked in the cell, his eyes still closed and the pound note yet
held aloft in a grip of steel. So he was fired, or cashiered as
the Old Worlders call it, for taking a bribe and letting a
prisoner escape. And this is what usually comes as punish-
ment to overly suspicious persons.
KATIE still used the Inverted Pyramid and very effectively.
Mazuma did not really have an unfailing talent for picking
220
winners. He'd only said that to get Kate to marry him, and it was the best lie he ever told. But he did have an infallible talent for many things, and they thrived. The first little cloud in the sky came once when they passed a plowman in a field in the fat land of Belgium. "Ah, there is a happy man," said Mazuma. "H appy at work." "H appy at work? 0 my God, what did you say? What kind of words are these, my husband?" But in the months and years that followed, this frightening incident was forgotten. The couple became the pride of Wreckville when they returned as they did several times a year and told their stories. Like the time the state troopers ran them down and cornered them with drawn guns. "0, we don't want to take you in. We'll report that we couldn't catch you. Only tell us how you do it. We don't want to be troopers all our lives." And the time they ran a little house in Faro Town itself. It was a small upstairs place and Katie played the piano, and they had only one bartender, a faded little blonde girl with a cast in one eye, and only one table where Mazuma presided. And this where all the other Casinos were palaces that would make Buckingham look like a chicken coop. And the funny thing is that they took in no money at all. The barmaid would always say all drinks were ten dollars, or failing that they were on the house; as they used no coin and had trays in the register for only tens, fifties, hundreds and thousands. It was too much trouble to do business any other way. Katie would bait her money jar with several hundred dollar
Adam Had Three Brothers
221
222
Secret Places
bills and one or two larger, and demurely refuse anything smaller for selections as she didn't want the jar filled up with wrapping paper. So she would tinkle along all night and all drinks were on the house, which was not too many as only three could sit at the bar at once. And Mazurna never shook or dealt a game. He had only blue chips as he said any other color hurt his eyes. And no matter what the price of the chips, it was legendary and gained zeros as it was retold. Several of the larger sports carne up the stairs out of curiosity. And their feelings were hurt when they were told they were too little to play, for they weren't little at all. So Mazurna sat all night Monday through Friday and never cut a hand or shook a bone. Then on Saturday night the really big boys carne upstairs to see what it was about. They were the owners of the nine big Casinos in town, and six of these gentlemen had to sit on boxes. Their aggregate worth would total out a dollar and thirteen cents to every inhabitant of the U.S. Katie tinkled tunes all night for a hundred to five hundred dollars a selection, and Mazurna dealt on the little table. And when the sun carne up they owned a share of all nine of the big Casinos, and had acquired other assets besides. Of course these stories of Katie and Mazurna were topped, as about half the Wrecks went on the road, and they had some fancy narrations when they got back to Wreckville.
AND then the bottom fell out of the world. They had three beautiful children now. The oldest was
Adam Had Three Brothers
.
three years old and he could already shake, deal, shuffle, and
, ,
con with the best of them. He knew the Golden Gambit and
the Four Quarters and the Nine Dollar Dog and Three Fish
Out. And every evening he came in with a marble bag full of
half dollars and quarters that he had taken from the children
in the neighborhood. The middle child was two, but already
she could calculate odds like lightning, and she picked track
winners in her dreams. She ran sucker ads in the
papers
and
had set up a remunerative mail-order business. The youngest
was only one and could not yet talk. But he carried chalk and
a slate and marked up odds and made book, and was really
quite successful in a small way. He knew the Four Diamond
trick and the Two Story Chicken Coop, the Thimblerig
Reverse and the Canal Boat Cut. They were intelligent
children and theirs was a happy home.
ONE day Mazuma said, "We ought to get out of it, Kate.”
"Out of what?"
"Get out of the business. Raise the children in a more
wholesome atmosphere. Buy a farm and settle down.”
“You mean the Blue Valley Farmer trick? Is it old enough
to be new yet? And it takes nearly three weeks to set it up,
and it never did pay too well for all the trouble.”
“No, I do not mean the Blue Valley Farmer trick. I don't
mean any trick, swindle, or con. I think we should get out of
the whole grind and go to work like honest people.”
And when she heard these terrible words Katie fell into a
dead faint.
223
Secret Places
THAT is all of it. He was not a Wreck. He was a common
trickster and he had caught the sickness of repentance. The
bottom had fallen out of the world indeed. The three
unsolvable problems of the Greeks were squaring the circle,
trisecting the angle, and re-bottoming the world. They cannot
be done.
THEY have been separated for many years. The three
children were reared by their father under the recension and
curse of Adam. One is a professor of mathematics, but I
doubt if he can figure odds as rapidly as he could when he was
one year old. The middle one is now a grand lady, but she has
lost the facility of picking track winners in her dreams and
much else that made her charming. And the oldest one is a
senator from a state that I despise.
And Katie is now the wisest old witch in Wreckville. But
she has never quite been forgiven her youthful indiscretion
when she married an Adamite who fell like his ancient father
and deigned to work for a living.
224
Mean Men
Pig in a
in a PO
Pokey
24
ya
Trus
>
>
HIS was on Hippodamia. The name isn't important. There
were ten thousand asteroid-stations as undistinguished.
Netter settled back into the soft live-moss chair and prepared to
talk the Creature out of the impasse. Then he saw the big
moustached thing on the wall and he began to tremble.
After all, that was one of the things he had come to find—it was
part of it. It was the great beefy, bearded, moustached head of
Captain Kalbfleish mounted on the wall like a trophy, and amid
the other trophies of the room.
“Great God, Man!”—and it wasn't a man to whom he
spoke—“That's a human head you have mounted on the wall,”
Netter crackled.
“Which Great God, yours or mine?” Porcellus grunted. “They
aren't the same, or they have been described badly. Yes, a human
head. I had always wanted one. You notice that I have given it the
favored position in the center of the great wall. I now have at least
one of the heads of every species that interests me. Some of the
heads are much larger than that of your friend Kalbfleish and have
ornamentals that his lacks. It's a pity that humans don't have
sweeping horns; that would make them perfect. But even without
them, the head of Kalbfleish is the finest in my collection. It's a
truly magnificent head!”
It was. “Kalbfleish has a fine head on him,” they used to say,
227
Mean Men
a
>
a
and laugh. The big Captain, for all his remarkable courage and
spirit, had not been long on brains. It was a huge, wild, hairy head
with a stark and staring expression—as though Kalbfleish had died
in terror and agony.
“You killed him, of course,” said Netter dryly as he braided a
romal in his nervous hands. “So, one way or the other, I will have
to kill you, or you me.”
,
“Not I,” said Porcellus—a moist and hog-fat creature, “I
would not even kill an insect. Your friend had a violent heart and
it finally ruptured on him. He was uncommonly energetic,
especially so on the day of his death."
“Where is his body, you fat pig?”
“My translator has only a rough idea of pig, and I suppose you
intend it for an insult; but I have a tough hide. I couldn't do a
thing with his body, Netter, it was putrid in no time. It seems that
when
you humans know you are going to die you would begin to
give yourself the injections three or four basic days before the
time; then your bodies would not turn foul after death. I had no
idea he had neglected it, so I wasn't prepared. I was lucky to save
the head."
“We humans don't know when we are going to die,” said
Netter. “What is this you give me to eat? It's good.”
“Yes, I remember now Kalbfleish saying he didn't know when
he would die, but I supposed he spoke in humor. Since you
also
say it, it must be true of your species. The name of the food would
mean nothing to you, but you have a close parallel to its method of
preparation. I have read about geese in an Earth book of the
captains, though I overlooked pigs. You sometimes put live geese
to dance on hot griddles before they are killed. This excites and
alarms them, and enlarges their livers. The livers then become
delicacies. The creatures whose meat you are eating also died in
a
228
Pig in a Pokey
>
excitement and alarm, and they are delicious through and
through.”
Well, the meat was certainly delicious. That fat hog of a
creature knew how to live well. Netter finished the meal and set it
aside. Once more he braided the romal in his hands while he
grasped for words.
"I
suppose all the creatures whose heads you have here died by
accident, Porcellus?” he asked.
“Well, all but one of them died,” said Porcellus, “and I did not
kill them. One of them died at a great distance from here; he
willed me his head and had it sent to me because I had admired it.
And one of them, so far as I know, is still alive. He was a being of
multiplex heads. He hacked one of them off quite willingly when I
praised it, and he cured and mounted it himself. A queer chap. He
is staring down at you now and it will amuse you to guess which
he is.”
Porcellus didn't actually speak like that. He spoke in a series of
grunts, some verbal and some ventral. But the Console Translator
of Netter had a selector dial. Netter could dial translation in
pidgin, in cut and dry, in bombast, in diplomatic pleasantry, in old
southern U. S. soft-talk or Yiddish dialect if he wished, or in the
courtly manner. Whenever he encountered a creature who was
repulsive to him—as Porcellus was—he dialed the courtly manner
of speech. This was somehow easier on his ears and his nerves.
“We waste time,” Netter told the creature. “I have come to
pursue claim to this asteroid. We now need it for a way-station,
and it has never worked well for two such different species to share
a station. We had first claim here long ago; and we abandoned it.
Then you set up your station here; and you also abandoned it.”
“Never,” said Porcellus. “Would I abandon my cozy home and
my trophies? Would my masters wish the removal of so fine a
>
229
Mean Men
a
>
station-master as myself? I was called Home on urgent business. I
was gone but for a basic year, and the odds were very high against
,
any
other claimer coming while I was gone."
“The rules state that a live and competent agent must be in
residence at all times or the asteroid can be declared abandoned,”
Netter said. “The asteroid was plainly abandoned when Kalbfleish
arrived; you were gone. He so reported it, and he claimed it for us.
The claim was approved and accepted.”
“True," said the creature Porcellus. “What is that thing you
play with in your hands? But Captain Kalbfleish—following the
awkward interval after I had returned—also abandoned the
station by dying. I so reported his death, and claimed the station
for ourselves once more. The claim was approved and accepted.
Now you are here as my guest only and, I tell you in all kindness,
not a very welcome one.' ”
“But a proved murder will void your claim,” said Netter.
“So prove it, fine man,” said the creature Porcellus. “Yours is a
smaller head than Kalbfleish's but it has a certain distinction. I
could make room for it among my trophies. We have each of us
sent various reports, and the matter is under litigation. In the
meanwhile, the accidental death of either of us would void his
claim and settle the matter. We cannot kill directly. Investigators
are already on the way and we are both prime suspects; we are the
only ones here. What is the leather thing with which you play?"
“A romal, Porcellus. A short quirt braided onto a rein. They
made them in Old Mexico and in California and Texas, but they
were mostly ornamental.”
“Earth places all three, my translator says. Were they used with
a creature?"
"With a pony, a horse.”
>
230
Pig in a Pokey
"Haven't I stumbled onto the information that the horse is
extinct?”
>
“Yes. The braiding of the little thing is only a hobby of mine.”
“A hobby, according to my comprehensive translator, is a sort of
vicarious horse—a mental surrogate which one rides. Is that
correct?”
“Correct, Porcellus. Haven't
you a hobby?”
“My hobby is heads," said the thing.
Netter started to leave the creature then to go to his own camp.
“To the early and accidental death of one of us,” he toasted with
the last of the drink that Porcellus had given him.
“Shoals!” toasted Porcellus. “I believe that is your word. And a
” I
warning: stay away from the low dome which you will see on the
plain. It's dangerous.”
Netter went to his own camp.
>
NOW Porcellus wanted him to go to the curious dome—or he
would not have warned him away from it. Was it dangerous? Or
did the thing merely want to divert him? Porcellus must have
known that he would explore every feature of landscape on the
small asteroid. Perhaps it was only to worry him, as Porcellus
himself had seemed to be worried. And what in hog heaven can
worry a hog? Netter had it after a while. "He knows when he's
going to die. He's surprised that humans haven't that knowledge.
But can I depend on it? It's only a twice removed guess.” "
Netter left the dome till last. He circumnavigated the asteroid
in a brisk six-mile walk and found nothing of interest. He came
thoughtfully to the dome on the plain.
231
Mean Men
a
The dome rose to no more than the height of his head in the
center, was about sixty feet in diameter, was symmetrical in
general outline but with a slightly roughened surface, and was
probably artificial. “I believe it is an old direction beacon of the
Porcines,” he said. “Yes, this is certainly the top of an obsolete
beam sphere, and the most of it is under ground. They were no
good. I believe that we had them once.”
Netter stepped gingerly onto the sphere. It was certainly firm
enough. He knew a firn thing when he met one. There was no
danger of him crashing through. He climbed the steep, then the
less steep elevation of it and came to the center. “Nice,” he said,
“but nothing.” Then he felt it activated. “So Porcellus still uses
it,” he said, “I didn't realize that they were so backward.”
He walked around on it, and it rotated gently under him,
compensating for him. He strode down the side a little way, and it
quickly brought him back to the top. “This could be fun,” he said.
He could take three, four quick steps away from the top, and he
would still be on top. He could tense to jump sideways, and the
sphere would compensate before he left the surface; he'd still land
exactly on the center whichever way he jumped. The thing rolled
easily and noiselessly and anticipated or reacted immediately to
every movement. He walked, he ran, he laughed, he trotted half a
mile and stood where he had stood before.
“You know tricks and I know tricks, old sphere,” he shouted,
“Let's see who's the smarter.” He feinted, he broke, he dodged, he
ran crazy-legged as though he were broken-field dribbling at
Galactic-rules football. He shucked off tacklers, he scored count-
less goals in his mind, but he always ended on the very center top
of the dome.
He lay down and rolled, trying to go down the steep far slopes
as though they were grass banks. He stopped rolling and lay on his
232
Pig in a Pokey
back, and he was still on the top of the rotating compensating
sphere or dome.
“I haven't had so much fun since I was a boy in an amusement
park,” he said.
He hadn't? Then why did he suddenly begin to tremble? Why
did he begin to whistle so off-key if he wasn't scared? “Stone walls
do not a pokey make nor locks a—" it was the Cross-Bar Hotel
Blues he was whistling and he had to stop it.
He was locked tight in jail on a little hillock in the middle of a
plain, and there was no barrier in sight. There was no possible
way he could get off the compensating dome.
He was imprisoned in the highest most open spot on the
asteroid. In an hour of cavorting and hopping about he had not
got one full step from where he started, and there was no possible
way that he could.
He thought about it for a full Hippodamia day and night-
forty-five minutes basic time. He couldn't come up with a thing.
"If I had a rope and you had a stump,” he said talking to no
rope the stump-I'm good at that—and pull myself off
this thing.”
But he didn't have a rope and the plain sure didn't have a
stump. It had hardly a pebble as big as his thumb.
“This is where Kalbfleish died,” said Netter. “You said it right,
pig man, my friend had a violent heart and it finally ruptured on
him. You didn't have to murder him directly. You let him run
himself to death. He was uncommonly energetic, as you said, and
especially so on the day of his death. I can see it all now. He could
never stand to be confined. He would have gone wild when he
found himself confined in what seemed the most open space on the
asteroid. He'd have run till he ruptured every thing in him. It is no
wonder that he died with that look of horror.”
a
one, “I'd
a
233
Mean Men
This was a jail that nobody could break. Why try more tricks on
the sphere? It could compensate for every trick that was.
“Only a creature that could fy in zero atmosphere could get off
of this,” he mused. “Even a worm couldn't crawl off unless he
were too small to affect the compensators. If I had two cant hooks
I might be able to fool the thing, but it could no doubt
compensate for the resolution of forces. If I had a weight on a line
I might puzzle it a little, but not much. Porkey has it made. I'll die
either of starvation or exertion or insanity, but the investigation
will not show that I was murdered. “Why have two humans died of
heart attack here?' is the most they can ask him, and Porkey will
rub his hands and say 'Bad climate.'
‘
))
BUT what Porky Porcellus really said was:
“Fine man, why do you play like a boy on top of that thing? Is
that any way for a hopeful asteroid agent to conduct himself?”
“Porcellus, you think you've trapped me, do you?” Aared
,
Netter.
“I trap you? My hands are clean. Is it my fault that two humans
develop the strange mania of running themselves to death in a
weird game?”
How far away was Porcellus from the edge of the dome? Too
far. Too far by several yards.
“Porcellus, what is this thing?" Netter cried out.
“Once it was a beam sphere, as you have probably guessed, and
it is obsolete. I have altered it to something else. Now it is an
intelligence test. To fail it is to die.”
“Did anyone ever get off it?" Netter called. He had to get
>
234
Pig in a Pokey
а
Porcellus interested. He had to get him to come several feet closer
before he turned away.
“Only one passed the intelligence test,” said the creature, “and
he had unusual natural advantages. He was a peculiar fellow of
the species Larrik who visited me some basic years ago. He simply
broke himself into two pieces and walked off in opposite
directions. The globe couldn't compensate for both of them. One
got clear, obtained a line, pulled his other half off; both halves
laughed at me, and then they rejoined themselves. But
you
haven't
his advantage, Netter. You have failed the test.”
“I'll find a way," swore Netter. “I'll find a trick.” Just a little bit
closer now would do it.
“You lose, Netter,” said Porcellus. “There is no fixed thing on
the plain you could tie to even if you had a way of reaching it. The
longest thing you have with you is what you call the romal, and
it's no longer than your arm."
Porcellus was close enough. Right at the end of the dome.
When he turned it would be perfect—somewhere between
thirty-two and thirty-five feet. There was no fixed thing on the
plain, but there was a thing heavy enough to serve for a fixed
thing. The romal of Netter was no longer than his arın, but it was
a romal rey, a king romal.
Porcellus turned away in his triumph. The light-thin lariat flew
and dropped over his bulk. And Netter pulled himself off the dome
in less time than you can say Porky Porcellus.
The fat hulk was no match for Netter when he was on solid
non-compensating ground. He hog-tied the Hog-man with the thin
leather line and rolled him onto the dome. And Porcellus was
immediately on the center top of the dome to stay there till he
died of hunger or uncommon exertion or porcine apoplexy.
>
235
Mean Men
NETTER was moving things about in the fine Trophy Room
which he had recently inherited. He set a fine hard wood peg
into
the wall and hung on it the king romal for which he now had
especial affection. The king romal is so intricately braided that one
moment it will be a thick quirt no longer than your arm; but
;
unlace one keeper and it immediately becomes a thin strand lariat
forty foot long counting the loop. Hardly anyone knows how to
braid a romal rey nowadays.
He moved many things in the trophy room. He wanted the
setting to be just right. He knew just what
space
on that great wall. The investigation was over with and Netter's
claim had been accepted. He was now asteroid station-master—a
good job.
The head was ready. It had been cured out and tanned and
treated, and the eye-tushers were polished till they gleamed.
Porcellus had a truly magnificent head!
it should occupy
236
Lerrel Places
The Weirdest
World
I
A
S I am now utterly without hope, lost to my mission
and lost in the sight of my crew, I will record what petty
thoughts I may have for what benefit they may give some
other starfarer. Nine long days of bickering! But the decision
is sure. The crew will maroon me. I have lost all control over
them.
Who would have believed that I would show such weakness
when crossing the barrier? By all tests I should have been the
strongest. But the final test was the event itself. I failed.
I only hope that it is a pleasant and habitable planet where
they put me down .
Later. They have decided. I am no longer the captain even
in name. But they have compassion on me. They will do what
they can for my comfort. I believe that they have already
selected my desert island, so to speak, an out-of-the-way
globe where they will leave me to die. I will hope for the best.
I no longer have any voice in their councils ...
Later. I will be put down with only the basic survival kit:
the ejection mortar and sphere for my last testament to be
orbited into the Galactic drift; a small cosmoscope so that I
will at least have my bearings; one change of blood; an
239
Secret Places
-
abridged universal language correlator; a compendium of the
one thousand philosophic questions yet unsolved to exercise
my mind; a small vial of bug-kill.
Later. It has been selected. But my mind has grown so
demoralized that I do not even recognize the system, though
once this particular region was my specialty. The globe will
be habitable. There will be breathable atmosphere which will
allow me to dispense with much bothersome equipment. Here
the filler used is nitrogen, yet it will not matter. I have
breathed nitrogen before. There will be water, much of it
saline, but sufficient quantities of sweet. Food will be no
problem; before being marooned, I will receive injections that
should last me for the rest of my probably short life. Gravity
will be within the range of my constitution.
What will be lacking? Nothing, but the companionship of
my own kind, which is everything.
What a terrible thing it is to be marooned!
One of my teachers used to say that the only unforgivable
sin in the universe is ineptitude. That I should be the first to
succumb to space-ineptitude and be an awkward burden on
the rest of them! But it would be disastrous for them to try to
travel any longer with a sick man, particularly as their
nominal leader. I would be a shadow over them. I hold them
.
no rancor.
.
It will be today
Later. I am here. I have no real interest in defining where
“here” is, though I have my cosmoscope and could easily
determine it. I was anesthetized a few hours before, and put
down here in my sleep. The blasted half-acre of their landing
is near. No other trace of them is left.
Yet it is a good choice and not greatly unlike home. It is the
240
nearest resemblance I have seen on the entire voyage, which is to say that the pseudodendrons are enough like trees to remind me of trees, the herbage near enough to grass to satisfy one who had never known real grass. It is a green, somewhat waterlogged land of pleasant temperature. The only inhabitants I have encountered are a preoccupied race of hump-backed browsers who pay me scant notice. They are quadruped and myopic, and spend nearly their entire time at feeding. It may be that I am invisible to them. Yet they hear my voice and shy away somewhat from it. I am able to communicate with them only poorly. Their only vocalization is a sort of vibrant windy roar, but when I answer in kind they appear more puzzled than communicative. They have this peculiarity: when they come to an obstacle of terrain or thicket, they either go laboriously around it or force their way through it. It does not seem to occur to them to fly over it. They are as gravity-bound as a newborn baby. What air-traveling creatures I have met are of a consider­ ably smaller size. They are more vocal than the myopic quadrupeds, and I have had some success in conversing with them, but my results still await a more leisurely semantic interpretation. Such communications of theirs as I have analyzed are quite commonplace. They have no real philoso­ phy and are singularly lacking in aspiration; they are almost total extroverts and have no more than the rudiments of introspection. Yet they have managed to tell me some amusing anecdotes. They are quite good natured, though moronic. They say that neither they nor the myopic quadrupeds are the dominant race here, but rather a large grublike creature lacking a complete outer covering. From what they are able
The Weirdest World
241
Secret Places
а
to convey of this breed, it is a nightmarish kind of creation.
One of the flyers even told me that the giant grubs travel
upright on a bifurcated tail, but that is difficult to credit.
Besides, I believe that humor is at least a minor component of
the mentality of my airy friends. I will call them birds,
though they are but a sorry caricature of the birds at
home .
Later. I am being hunted. I am being hunted by the giant
grubs. Doubling back, I have seen them on my trail, examin-
ing it with great curiosity.
The birds had given me a very inadequate idea of these.
They are indeed unfinished—they do lack a complete outer
covering. Despite their giant size, I am convinced that they
are grubs, living under rocks and in masses of rotten wood.
Nothing in nature gives the impression of so lacking an outer
covering as the grub, that obese, unfinished worm.
These are, however, simple bipeds. They are wrapped in a
cocoon which they seem never to have shed, as though their
emergence from the larval state were incomplete. It is a loose
artificial sheath covering the central portion of the corpus.
They seem unable to divest themselves of it, though it is
definitely not a part of the body. When I have analyzed their
minds, I will know the reason for their carrying it. Now I can
only conjecture. It would seem a compulsion, some psycholog-
ical bond that dooms them in their apparent adult state to
carry their cocoons with them.
Later. I am captured by three of the giant grubs. I had
barely time to swallow my communication sphere. They
pinned me down and beat me with sticks. I was taken by
surprise and was not momentarily able to solve their lan-
guage, though it came to me after a short interval. It was
a
242
The Weirdest World
it
discordant and vocal and entirely gravity-bound, by which I
mean that its thoughts were chained to its words. There
seemed nothing in them above the vocal. In this the giant
grubs were less than the birds, even though they had a
practical power and cogency that the birds lacked.
“What'll we do with the blob?” asked one.
“Hy,” said the second, “you hit it on that end and I'll hit it
on this. We don't know which end is the head.”
“Let's try it for bait,” said the third. "Catfish might go for
it.”
“We could keep it alive till we're ready to use it. Then it
would stay fresh.”
“No, let's kill it. It doesn't look too fresh, even the way
is.”
“Gentlemen, you are making a mistake," I said. “I have
done nothing to merit death. And I am not without talent.
Besides, you have not considered the possibility that I may
be
forced to kill you three instead. I will not die willingly. And I
will thank you to stop pounding on me with those sticks. It
hurts.'
I was surprised and shocked at the sound of my own voice.
It was nearly as harsh as that of the grubs. But this was my
first attempt at their language, and musicality does not
become it.
“Hey fellows, did you hear that? Was that the blob talking?
Or was one of you playing a joke? Harry? Stanley? Have you
been practicing to be ventriloquists?"
“Not me.”
“Not me either. It sure sounded like it was it.”
"Hey blob, was that you? Can you talk, blob?"
“Certainly I can talk," I responded. "I am not an infant.
243
Secret Places
a
Nor am I a blob. I am a creature superior to your own kind, if
you are examples. Or it may be that you are only children.
Perhaps you are still in the pupa stage. Tell me, is yours an
early stage, or an arrested development, or are you indeed
adult?”
"Hey fellows, we don't have to take that from any blob. I'll
.
cave in his blasted head.”
“That isn't its head, it's its tail.”
"Gentlemen, perhaps I can set you straight," I said. “That
is my tail you are thwacking with those sticks, and I am
warning you to stop it. Of course I was talking with my tail. I
was only doing it in imitation of you. I am new at the
language and its manner of speaking. Yet it may be that I
have made a grotesque mistake. Is that
your
heads that
you
are waving in the air? Well, then, I will talk with my head, if
that is the custom. But I warn you again not to hit me on
either end with those sticks."
“Hey, fellows, I bet we could sell that thing. I bet we could
sell it to Billy Wilkins for his Reptile Farm.”
“How would we get it there?"
“Make it walk. Hey blob, can you walk?"
“I can travel, certainly, but I would not stagger along
precariously on a pair of flesh stilts with my head in the air,
as you do. When I travel, I do not travel upside down.”
"Well, let's go then. We're going to sell you to Billy Wilkins
for his Reptile Farm. If he can use a blob, he'll put you in one
of the tanks with the big turtles and alligators. You think
you'll like them?"
“I am lonesome in this lost world," I replied sadly, “and
even the
company
of you peeled grubs is better than nothing.
I am anxious to adopt a family and settle down here for what
244
The Weirdest World
years of life I have left. It may be that I will find
compatibility with the species you mention. I do not know
what they are.”
“Hey, fellows, this blob isn't a bad guy at all. I'd shake your
hands, blob, if I knew where they were. Let's go to Billy
Wilkins's place and sell him.”
)
II
We traveled to Billy Wilkins's place. My friends were
amazed when I took to the air and believed that I had
deserted them. They had no cause to distrust me. Without
them I would have had to rely on intuition to reach Billy
Wilkins, and even then I would lack the proper introductions.
"Hey, Billy," said my loudest friend whose name was Cecil,
"what will you give us for a blob? It lies and talks and isn't a
bad fellow at all. You'd get more tourists to come to your
reptile show if you had a talking blob in it. He could sing
songs and tell stories, and I bet he could play the guitar.”
“Well, Cecil, I'll just give you all ten dollars for it and try to
figure out what it is later. I'm a little ahead on my hunches
now, so I can afford to gamble on this one. I can always pickle
it and exhibit it as a genuine hippopotamus kidney.”
“Thank you, Billy. Take care of yourself, blob.”
“Good-bye for now, gentlemen,” I said. “I would like
you
to
visit me some evening as soon as I am acclimated to my new
surroundings. I will throw a whing-ding for you—as soon as I
find out what a whing-ding is."
“My God," said Billy Wilkins, “it talks, it really talks!”
"We told you it could talk and fly, Billy.”
a
245
Secret Places
1
1
“It talks, it talks,” said Billy. “Where's that blasted sign
painter? Eustace, come here. We got to paint a new sign."
The turtles in the tank I was put into did have a sound
basic philosophy which was absent in the walking grubs. But
they were slow and lacking inner fire. They would not be
obnoxious company, but neither would they give me excite-
ment and warmth. I was really more interested in the
walking grubs.
Eustace was a black grub, while the others had all been
white; but like them he had no outside casing of his own, and
like them he also staggered about on flesh stilts with his head
in the air.
It wasn't that I was naive or hadn't seen bipeds before. But
I don't believe anyone ever becomes entirely accustomed to
seeing a biped travel in its peculiar manner.
“Good afternoon, Eustace," I said pleasantly enough. The
eyes of Eustace were large and white. He was a more
handsome specimen than the other grubs.
“That you talking, bub? Say, you really can talk, can't you?
I thought Mr. Billy was fooling. Now just hold that expres-
sion a minute and let me get it set in my mind. I can paint
anything, once I get it set in my mind. What's your name,
blob? Have blobs names?”
“Not in your manner. With us the name and the soul, I
believe you call it, are the same thing and cannot be
vocalized. I will have to adopt a name of your sort. What
would be a good name?"
"Bub, I was always partial to George Albert Leroy Ellery.
That was my grandfather's name.”
“Should I also have a family name?"
"Sure."
1
246
The Weirdest World
2
“What would you suggest?"
"How about McIntosh?"
“That will be fine. I will use it.”
I talked to the turtles while Eustace was painting my
portrait on tent canvas.
“Is the name of this world Florida?" I asked one of them.
“The road signs said Florida.”
"World, world, world, water, water, water, glub, glug,
glub,” said one of them.
"Yes, but is this particular world we are on named
Florida?”
"World, world, water, water, glub," said another.
“Eustace, I can get nothing from these fellows," I called.
“Is this world named Florida?”
“Mr. George Albert, you are right in the middle of Florida,
the greatest state in the universe."
“Having traveled, Eustace, I have great reservations that
it is the greatest. But it is my new home and I must cultivate
a loyalty to it.'
I went up in a tree to give advice to two young birds trying
to construct a nest. This was obviously their first venture.
“You are going about it all wrong,” I told them. “First
consider that this will be your home, and then consider how
you can make your home most beautiful.”
“This is the way they've always built them,” said one of the
birds.
“There must be an element of utility, yes,” I told them.
“But the dominant motif should be beauty. The impression of
expanded vistas can be given by long low walls and para-
pets."
247
Secret Places
1
“This is the way they've always built them,” said the other
bird.
“Remember to embody all the new developments," I said.
"Just say to yourself 'This is the newest nest in the world.'
Always say that about any task you attempt. It inspires you."
“This is the way they've always built them,” said the birds.
“Go build your own nest."
“Mr. George Albert,” called Eustace. “Mr. Billy won't like
your flying around those trees. You're supposed to stay in
1)
your tank.”
“I was only getting a little air and talking to the birds," I
said.
“You can talk to the birds?” asked Eustace.
"Cannot anyone?”
“I can, a little,” said Eustace. “I didn't know anyone else
could.”
But when Billy Wilkins returned and heard the report that
I had been flying about, I was put in the snake house, in a
cage that was tightly meshed top and sides. My cell mate was
a surly python named Pete.
"See you stay on that side,” said Pete. “You're too big for
me to swallow. But I might try."
“There is something bothering you, Pete,” I said. “You
have a bad disposition. That can come only from bad digestion
or a bad conscience."
“I have both," said Pete. “The first because I bolt my food.
The second is because—well I forget the reason, but it's my
conscience.”
“Think hard, Pete," I said, “why have you a bad con-
science?”
a
248
The Weirdest World
1)
“Snakes always have bad consciences. We have forgotten
the crime, but we remember the guilt."
"Perhaps you should seek advice from someone, Pete.”
"I kind of think it was someone's smooth advice that
started us on all this. He talked the legs right off us.”
Billy Wilkins came to the cage with another “man" as
walking grubs call themselves.
“That it?" asked the other man. "And you say it can talk?”
?“
?
“Of course I can talk," I answered for Billy Wilkins. “I
have never known a creature who couldn't talk in some
manner. My name is George Albert Leroy Ellery McIntosh. I
don't believe that I heard yours, sir.”
”
“Bracken. Blackjack Bracken. I was telling Billy here that
if he really had a blob that could talk, that I might be able to
use it in my night club. We could have you here at the Snake
Ranch in the daytime for the tourists and kids. Then I could
have you at the club at night. We could work out an act. Do
you think you could learn to play the guitar?”
"
“Probably. But it would be much easier for me merely to
duplicate the sound."
“But then how could you sing and make guitar noises at the
same time?"
“You surely don't think that I am limited to one voice
box?”
“Oh, I didn't know. What's that big metal ball you have
there?"
“That's my communication sphere to record my thoughts. I
I
would not be without it. When in danger, I swallow it. When
in extreme danger, I will have to escape to a spot where I
have concealed my ejection mortar, and send my sphere into
the Galactic drift on a chance that it may be found.”
249
Secret Places
"That's no kind of gag to put in an act. What I have in
mind is something like this.”
Blackjack Bracken told a joke. It was a childish one and in
poor taste.
“I don't believe that is quite my style," I said.
“All right, what would you suggest?"
“I thought that I might lecture your patrons on the higher
ethic.”
“Look, George Albert, my patrons don't even have the
,
lower ethic.”
“And just what sort of recompense are we talking about?”
I asked.
“Billy and I had about settled on a hundred and fifty a
week.”
“A hundred and fifty for whom?"
"Why, for Billy."
“I say a hundred and fifty for myself, and ten percent for
Billy as my agent.'
“Say, this blob's real smart, isn't he, Billy?”
“Too smart.”
"Yes sir, George Albert, you're one smart blob. What kind
of contract have you signed with Billy here?"
"No contract.”
“Just a gentlemen's agreement?"
“No agreement."
"Billy, you can't hold him in a cage without a contract.
That's slavery. It's against the law.”
“But, Blackjack, a blob isn't people."
“Try proving that in court. Will you sign a contract with
me, George Albert?''
)
250
The Weirdest World
“I will not dump Billy. He befriended me and gave me a
home with the turtles and snakes. I will sign a joint contract
with the two of you. We will discuss terms tomorrow—after I
have estimated the attendance both here and at the night
club."
III
Of the walking grubs (who call themselves “people") there
are two kinds, and they place great emphasis on the dif-
ference. From this stems a large part of their difficulties. This
distinction, which is one of polarity, cuts quite across the
years and ability and station of life. It is not confined only to
the people, but also involves apparently all the beings on the
planet Florida.
It appears that a person is committed to one or the other
polarity at the beginning of life, maintaining that polarity
until death. The interlocking attraction-repulsion complex set
up by these two opposable types has deep emotional involve-
ments. It is the cause of considerable concern and disturb-
ance, as well as desire and inspiration. There is a sort of
poetic penumbra about the whole thing that tends to disguise
its basic simplicity, expressible as a simultaneous polarity
equation.
Complete segregation of the two types seems impossible. If
it has ever been tried, it has now been abandoned as
impractical.
There is indeed an intangible difference between the two
types, so that before that first day at the Reptile Ranch was
251
Secret Places
finished, I was able to differentiate between the two more
than ninety percent of the time. The knowledge of this
difference in polarity seems to be intuitive.
These two I will call the Beta and Gamma, or Boy and Girl
types. I began to see that this opposability of the two types
I
was one of the great driving forces of the people.
In the evening I was transported to the night club and I
was a success. I would not entertain them with blue jokes or
blue lyrics, but the patrons seemed fascinated by my simple
imitations of all the instruments of the orchestra and my
singing of comic ballads that Eustace had taught me in odd
moments that day. They were also interested in the way that
I drank gin, that is emptying the bottle without breaking the
seal. (It seems that the grub-people are unable to absorb a
liquid without making direct contact with it.)
And I met Margaret, one of the “girl" singers. I had been
wondering to which type of people I might show affinity. Now
I knew. I was definitely a Beta type, for I was attracted to
Margaret, who was unmistakably a Gamma. I began to
understand the queer effect that these types have on each
other.
She came over to my cage.
“I want to rub your head for luck before I go on,” she said.
“Thank you, Margaret," I replied, “but that is not my
head."
She sang with incomparable sadness, with all the sorrow
and sordidness that appear to be the lot of the unfortunate
Gammas. It was the essence of melancholy made into music.
It was a little bit like the ghost music of the asteroid Artemis,
a little like the death chants on Dolmena. Sex and sorrow.
Nostalgia. Regret.
252
The Weirdest World
Her singing shook me with a yearning that had no
precedent.
She came back to my cage.
"You were wonderful, Margaret," I said.
"I'm always wonderful when I'm singing for my supper.
I
am less wonderful in the rare times when I am well fed. But
are you happy, little buddy?”
"I had become almost so, till I heard you sing. Now I am
overcome with a sorrow and longing. Margaret, I am fasci-
nated with you."
“ “I go for you too, blob. You're my buddy. Isn't it funny that
the only buddy I have in the world is a blob. But if you'd seen
some of the guys I've been married to—boy! I wouldn't insult
you by calling them blobs. Have to go now. See you tomorrow
night if they keep us both on.”
»
a
NOW there was a problem to face. It was necessary that I
establish control over my environment, and at once. How else
could I aspire to Margaret?
I knew that the heart of the entire place here was neither
the bar nor the entertainment therein, nor the cuisine, nor
the dancing. The heart of the enterprise was the casino. Here
was the money that mattered; the rest was but garnish.
I had them bring me into the gambling rooms.
I had expected problems of complexity here where the
patrons worked for their gain or loss. Instead there was an
almost amazing simplicity. All the games were based on a
253
Secret Places
system of first aspect numbers. Indeed everything on the
Planet Florida seemed based on first aspect numbers.
Now it is an elemental fact that first aspect numbers do not
carry within them their own prediction. Nor were the people
even possessed of the prediction key that lies over the very
threshold of the second aspect series.
These people were actually wagering sums—the symbols of
prosperity-blindly, not knowing for sure whether they
would win or lose. They were selecting numbers by hunch or
at random with no assurance of profit. They were choosing a
hole for a ball to fall into without knowing whether that was
the right hole.
I do not believe that I was ever so amazed at anything in
my life.
a
game after
But here was an opportunity to establish control over my
environment.
I began to play the games. Usually I would watch a round
first, to be sure that I understood just what was going on.
Then I would play a few times ... as many as it took to
break the game.
I broke
game. When he could no longer pay me,
Blackjack closed the casino in exasperation.
Then we played poker, he and I and several others. This
was even more simple. I suddenly realized that the grub-peo-
ple could see only one side of the cards at a time.
I played and won.
I owned the casino now, and all of those people were now
working for me. Billy Wilkins also played with us, and in
short order I also owned the Reptile Ranch.
Before the evening was over, I owned a race-track, a beach
hotel, and a theatre in a place named New York.
254
The Weirdest World
I had, in sufficient extent for my purpose, established
control over my environment ...
1)
LATER. Now started the golden days. I increased my control
and did what I could for
my friends.
I got a good doctor for my old friend and roommate, Pete
the python, and he was now receiving treatment for his
indigestion. I got a jazzy sports car for my friend Eustace
imported from somewhere called Italy. And I buried Marga-
ret in mink, for she had a fix on the fur of that mysterious
animal. She enjoyed draping it about her in the form of coats,
capes, cloaks, mantles, and stoles, though the weather didn't
,
really require it.
I had now won several banks, a railroad, an airline, and a
casino in somewhere named Havana.
“You are somebody now," said Margaret. “You really
ought to dress better. Or are you dressed? I never know. I
don't know if part of that is clothes or if all of it is you. But at
least I've learned which is your head. I think we should be
married in May. It's so common to be married in June. Just
imagine me being Mrs. George Albert Leroy Ellery McIntosh!
You know, we have become quite an item. And do you know
there are three biographies of you out, Burgeoning Blob; The
Blob from Way Out; The Hidden Hand Behind the Blob, What
Does It Portend? And the Governor has invited us to dine
tomorrow. I do wish you would learn to eat. If
you weren't so
nice, you'd be creepy. I always say there's nothing wrong
with marrying a man, or a blob, with money. It shows
255
Secret Places
foresight on the part of a girl. You know you will have to get
a blood test? You had better get it tomorrow. You do have
blood, don't you?"
I did, but not, of course, of the color and viscosity of hers.
But I could give it that color and viscosity temporarily. And it
would react negative in all the tests.
She mused, “They are all jealous of me. They say they
wouldn't marry a blob. They mean they couldn't. Do you have
to carry that tin ball with you all the time?"
“Yes. It is my communication sphere. In it I record my
thoughts. I would be lost without it."
“Oh, like a diary. How quaint.”
Yes, those were the golden days. The grubs now appeared
to me in a new light, for was not Margaret also a grub? Yet
she seemed not so unfinished as the rest. Though lacking a
natural outer covering, yet she had not the appearance of
crawling out from under a rock. She was quite an attractive
"girl.” And she cared for me.
What more could I wish? I was affluent. I was respected. I
was in control of my environment. And I could aid my friends
of whom I had now acquired an astonishing number.
Moreover my old space-ineptitude sickness had left me. I
never felt better in my life. Ah, golden days, one after the
other like a pleasant dream. And soon I am to be married.
IV
a
There has been a sudden change. As on the Planet Hecube,
where full summer turns into the dead of winter in minutes,
256
The Weirdest World
to the destruction of many travelers, so was it here. My world
is threatened!
It is tottering, all that I have built up. I will fight. I will
fight. I will have the best lawyers on the planet. I am not
done. But I am threatened ..
Later. This may be the end. The appeal court has given its
decision. A blob may not own property in Florida. A blob is
not a person.
Of course I am not a person. I never pretended to be. But I
am a personage. I will yet fight this thing
Later. I have lost everything. The last appeal is gone. By
definition I am an animal of indeterminate origin, and my
property is being completely stripped from me.
I made an eloquent appeal—and it moved them greatly.
—
There were tears in their eyes. But there was greed in the set
of their mouths. They have a vested interest in stripping me.
Each will seize a little.
And I am left a pauper, a vassal, an animal, a slave. This is
always the last doom of the marooned, to be a despised alien
at the mercy of a strange world.
Yet it should not be hopeless. I will have Margaret. Since
my contract with Billy Wilkins and Blackjack Bracken, long
since bought up, is no longer in effect, Margaret should be
able to handle my affairs as a person. I believe that I have
great earning powers yet, and I can win as much as I wish by
gambling. We will treat this as only a technicality. We shall
acquire new fortune. I will re-establish control over my
environment. I will bring back the golden days. A few of my
old friends are still loyal to me, Margaret, Pete the python,
Eustace
a
257
Secret Places
Later. The world has caved in completely. Margaret has
thrown me over.
“I'm sorry, blobby,” she said, “but it just won't work.
You're still nice, but without money you are only a blob. How
would I marry a blob?”
“But we can earn more money. I am talented."
“No, you're box-office poison now. You were a fad, and fads
die quickly."
“But Margaret, I can win as much as I wish by gambling."
“Not a chance, blobby. Nobody will gamble with you any
more. You're through, blob. I will miss you, though. There
will be a new blue note in my ballads when I sing for my
supper, after the mink coats are all gone. Bye now."
“Margaret, do not leave me. What of all our golden days
together?"
But all she said was "bye now.”
And she was gone forever.
I AM desolate and my old space-ineptitude sickness has
returned. My recovery was an illusion. I am so ill with
awkwardness that I can no longer fly. I must crawl on the
ground like one of the giant grubs. A curse on this planet
Florida, and all its sister orbs! What a miserable world this is!
How could I have been taken in by a young Gamma type of
the walking grub? Let her crawl back under her ancestral
rocks with all the rest of her kind ... No, no, I do not mean
that. To me she will always remain a dream, a broken dream.
258
The Weirdest World
I am no longer welcome at the casino. They kicked me
down the front steps.
I no longer have a home at the Reptile Ranch.
“Mr. George Albert,” said Eustace, “I just can't afford to be
seen with you any more. I have my position to consider, with
a sport car and all that.”
And Pete the python was curt.
"Well, big shot, I guess you aren't so big after all. And you
were sure no friend of mine. When you had that doctor cure
me of my indigestion, you left me with nothing but my bad
conscience. I wish I could get my indigestion back.”
“A curse on this world,” I said.
"World, world, water, water, glug, glug," said the turtles in
their tanks, my only friends.
So I have gone back into the woods to die. I have located
my ejection mortar, and when I know that death is finally on
me, I will fire off my communication sphere and hope it will
reach the Galactic drift. Whoever finds it-friend, space
traveler, you who were too impatient to remain on your own
world—be you warned of this one! Here ingratitude is the
rule and cruelty the main sport. The unfinished grubs have
come out from under their rocks and they walk this world
upside down with their heads in the air. Their friendship is
fleeting, their promises are like the wind.
I am near my end.
259
Mean Men
The Ultimate Creature
I
THE
a
HE old Galaxy maps (imitating early Earth maps, partly in
humor and partly through intuition) pictured strong creatures in
the far arms of the system—Serpents bigger than Spaceships,
Ganymede-type Tigers, fish-tailed Maids, grand Dolphins, and
Island-sized Androids. We think particularly of the wry master-
pieces of Grobin. And at the end of the Far or Seventh arm of the
Galaxy is shown the Ultimate Creature.
The Ultimate Creature had the form of a Woman, and it bore
three signs in Chaldee: The Sign of Treasure; the Sign of
the Fish Mashur (the queerest fish of them all); and the Sign of
Restitution or of Floating Justice.
Floating Justice is the ethical equivalent of the Isostasis of the
Geologists. It states in principle that every unbalance will be
brought into new balance, sometimes gently, sometimes as by
planet-quake; that the most submerged may be elevated, by a
great sundering of strata, to the highest point, if such is required
for compensation. And there is a final tenet of this Floating
Justice, that some day, somewhere, the meanest man of all the
worlds will possess the ultimate treasure of the worlds. Without
.
this promise, the worlds would be out of balance forever.
263
Mean Men
THE MEANEST man of all the worlds was Peter Feeney-a
low-down sniveler, a weak man. In one thing only he was
exceptional—he had the finest eye for beauty in a woman of any
man anywhere: this, though of all men he was the least successful
with women. His purity of appraisal was not dulled by close
contact or possession. His judgments of beauty were sound and
uncompromised, though sometimes bitter.
And really, how many beautiful women are there in the
Universe?
Six,
Only six? Are you sure? All that noise has been about only six of
them?
PETER FEENEY was sure. His rapid eyes—the only rapid things
about him—had scanned millions of women in his random travels.
And only six of the women could be called beautiful.
There was the lady on Mellionella, seen only once in a crowd,
followed and lost, and never seen again in a year's search.
There was the girl in a small town on East Continent of Hokey
Planet. About this girl there was something that caused agony to
Peter: he had heard her speak; she spoke like a girl in a small town
on East Continent of Hokey Planet. He prayed that she might be
struck dumb; knowing that it was an evil prayer, knowing that she
was one of the really beautiful ones, whatever the sound of her.
There was the girl of shallow virtue on Leucite. She was perfect.
What else can you say after that?
There was the mother of six on Camiroi—no longer young, of
264
The Ultimate Creature
no particular repose or station or ease, hurried, impatient, and
quite likely the most beautiful woman who ever lived.
On Trader Planet there was a young Jewess of bewildering
kindness and frankness and of inextricably entangled life.
In San Juan, on old Earth, there was a fine creature who
combined the three main ethnic strains of old mankind. Peter
made a second journey there to see her; after first vision and
departure he had not been able to believe what he had seen.
Six in all the worlds? Somehow there should have been more
beautiful women than that.
Then Peter saw Teresa.
And she made the seventh?
No. She made the first. The six faded. There was only one. The
most beautiful woman ever, in the farthest arm of the Galaxy—the
Ultimate Creature.
II
This was on Groll's Planet. To get there, said the agent in
Electrum, you go to the end of the Galaxy, and turn left. It was a
shabby little world in the boondocks that are beyond the
boondocks, and only shabby people came there.
Peter Feeney was a salesman of a Universe-wide product. He
wasn't a good salesman. He was shuffled off to poorer and
poorer
territories. Now he had fallen to the poorest territory of all.
And on that day on Groll's Planet, he heard a sound as though a
swish of silk had passed over him, a thread, a mesh. It was the
invisible net.
“Oh how strange are the Fish of Far Ocean!” an ancient poet
exclaimed.
а
265
Mean Men
a
Peter had seen Teresa, and it was all over with him.
Peter was eating that day by peculiar arrangement. It was the
smallest of the towns of Groll's Planet and there was no public
eating place there. But a Grollian man raked clean sand and set a
mat for Peter to sit on, and served him a meal there on a crate or
box. The man also gave him coffee—good coffee, but not like the
-
coffee
you
know.
It was very like a sidewalk-café. It was in the
way
where people
came and went, though not properly a sidewalk. Teresa came and
sat down opposite Peter on the raked sand.
“Hari bagus," Peter said, which is all the words that a man
needs to get along in the Grollian language.
“Bagus," said Teresa. And that is all that they said to each other
a
that day.
Peter finished his meal and attempted to light a cigar. The
cigars of that world are not factory made. They are rolled by hand
of an oblong leaf for the filler and a triangular leaf for the
wrapper. Often they will keep their form for an hour or more, but
Peter had made his cigar badly and it was not stable.
Now it exploded into an unmanageable disarray of leaves and
pieces, and Peter was unable to cope with it. Teresa took the
pieces and rolled and folded them into a green cylinder that was
sheer art. She licked it with the most beautiful tongue in the world
and
gave the reconstituted cigar to Peter.
Then it was luxurious to sit there in the green shade and smoke
opposite the most beautiful woman ever. When he had finished,
Peter rose awkwardly and left. But he was pleased.
He watched from a distance. Teresa with quick competence ate
up all that he had left. “She was very hungry," Peter said, and
admired her quickness about things. She rose with flowing grace,
retrieved the smoldering remnants of Peter's cigar, and went
266
The Ultimate Creature
toward the beach, trailing smoke from the green-leaf stogie and
moving like a queen.
THE next day Peter again sat on the mat on the raked sand and
ate the food that the Grollian man sold him. Once more he felt the
swish of the invisible net over him, and again Teresa sat opposite
him on the sand.
“A senhora tem grande beleze," said Peter, which is all the
words that a man needs to get along in the Galactic Brazilian
language.
“Noa em nossos dias,” said Teresa, “porem outrora.” And that
is all that they said to each other that day.
But he had told her that she was beautiful. And she had
answered: No, she was not so now, but in a former time she had
been.
>
WHEN he had finished the meal and pulled the cigar from his
pocket he was pleased when it exploded into its constituent parts.
Teresa rescued it, reassembled it, and licked it. Her tongue had a
tripart curve in it, more extensible, more Aexible, more beautiful
than other tongues. Then Peter rose and left as he had the day
before. And again Teresa cleaned up
the remnantsravenously
and beautifully. He watched her till she finally went toward the
beach haloed in blue smoke from the stub of the cigar.
Peter wrote up an order that day. It was not a good order, not
267
Mean Men
sufficient to pay expenses, but something. Grolls Planet had
acquired a glow for him, just as if it was a good order he had
written up
>
ON the third day, Peter again sat on the mat that was very like a
sidewalk-café, and Teresa was opposite him. Peter told the
Grollian man that he should also bring food for the woman. He
brought it, but angrily.
“You are the most beautiful woman I have ever seen,” said
Peter, which is all the words that a man needs to get along in the
English language.
“I have told you that I am not now beautiful, but that once I
was,” Teresa told him. “Through the grace of God, I may again
regain my lost beauty.”
“How is it that
you
know English?”
“I was the school-teach."
“And now?”
“Now it goes bad for our world. There is no longer schools. I am
nothing."
“What are you, girl? Old human? Groll's Troll? That isn't
possible. What?”
“Who can say? A book-man has said that the biology of our
planet goes from the odd to the incredible. Was that not nice thing
to say about us? My father was old human, a traveling man, a
bum.”
“And your mother?”
?
“A queer fish, mama. Of this world, though.”
A
"
268
The Ultimate Creature
>
>
you not fish?"
>
“And you were once even more beautiful than you are now,
Teresa? How could
you
have looked?”
“How I looked then? As in English–Wow!—a colloquialism.”
“To me you are perfect.”
“No. I am a poor wasted bird now. But once I was beautiful.”
“There must be some livelihood for
you. What did your father
do?”
“Outside of bum, he was fisherman.”
“Then why do
“In my own way, I fish.”
Peter heard again the swish of the invisible net, but he was very
willing to be taken by it. After this, things went famously between
them.
But two days later there came a shame to Peter. He and Teresa
were sitting and eating together on the mat, and the Grollian man
came out.
“Are you near finished?” he asked Peter.
“Yes, I am near finished. Why do
”
“Are
you
finished with the fork yet?”
“No, not quite finished with it.”
“I must have the fork,” the Grollian man said. “There is another
human man here, of the better sort. I must have the fork for him
to eat with.”
"Have
you
but one?”
“Am I a millionaire that I should have a multiplicity of forks in
my house? He is a man with an important look, and I will not have
him wait."
“This is humiliating," said Peter.
“I don't know what that is. I want my
fork.”
Peter
gave
the fork back to the Grollian man, and that man took
you ask??"
>
269
Mean Men
>
it in and set it before the human man of the better sort as a sign of
the modernity of his house.
"Were I not the meanest and weakest of men, he would not
have abused me so," Peter said.
“Do you not feel it at all,” Teresa said. “Somebody has to be the
meanest and the weakest. The worlds are full of humiliating
things. This brings us close together.”
This would have to be the final day for Peter Feeney on Groll's
Planet. He had already garnered all the insufficient orders possible
for his product. He walked with Teresa and said the difficult
things.
“When
you have caught one, Teresa, you must do something
with it. Even turn it loose if you do not mean to keep it.”
“Do you want I should turn you loose, Peter?”
“No. I want you to go with me on the ship when it goes
tonight."
“There is only one way I will go.”
“I have never thought of any
other way.”
“You will never have cause to be ashamed of me, Peter. I can
dress, where I have the means for it. I can play the lady, I
understand how it is done. I have even learned to walk in shoes.
Were we in some more lucky place, it might be that I would
regain my beauty. It is the grinding hard times that took it from
me. I could change your luck. I have the languages, and the sense
of things, and I am much more intelligent than you are. With me,
I
you could attain a degree of success in even your miserable trade.
It can be a good life we make.”
There is a sound when the invisible net is cast over one. There is
another sound when it is pulled in—the faint clicking of the floats,
the tugging whisper of the weights, the squeaking of the lines
when pulled taut. Teresa was a fisherman's daughter, and she
>
>
a
270
knew how to do it. The Peter-fish was not a large nor a fat one, but she knew that he was the best she could take in these waters.
THEY were married. They left in the ship for a happier place, a
better planet in a more amenable location where Teresa might
regain her lost beauty.
Floating Justice was achieved. All inequities were compensated. The meanest and weakest man in the universe now possessed the
Ultimate Treasure of the universe.
Naturally they were happy. And naturally their happiness endured.
"There wasn't a catch to it?" you ask out of a crooked face. "There is always a catch to it. It always goes sour at the end." No. There was not a catch to it. It was perfect, and forever. It is
only in perverted fables that things go wrong at the end.
and were no longer mean and inconsequential. Only one man can
be married to the most beautiful woman in the universe, and it
They grew in understanding of each other, received the glad news of coming progeny, waxed (by former standards) in wealth,
passes all understanding that that one man should be Peter Feeney.
"former beauty" and now weighed well over two hundred pounds.
Peter liked that part of it.
This was perfection. It wasn't just that Teresa had regained her
But is it possible for perfection to become too perfect?
The Ultimate Creature
271
Mean Men
III
For this was perfection. They lived on a kindred but larger and
better world, one of richer resources and even more varied
biology. They had a love so many-sided and deep that there is no
accounting for it, and children so rare and different!
Floating Justice had been achieved. The least man in all the
worlds did possess the Ultimate Creature. The balance was
consummated. But Floating Justice had a grin on his face; there is
something a little fishy about anything, even justice, that floats.
You understand that there wasn't really a catch to this, nor any
deficiency. It was rather a richness almost beyond handling. It was
still better for Peter Feeney than for anyone else anywhere. That
must be understood.
BUT, for all that, there was a small adjustment after the great
compensation; a proportion must be re-established in all things,
even happiness. It was the joke that the old Interior Ocean always
cast
up, and it must be taken in the salty humor that is intended.
Children so rare and so different—and so many of them! No
couple was ever so blessed as were Peter and Teresa with a rich
variety of children. Some of them were playing and leaping in the
hills and rocks behind Peter, and some of them were sporting in
the Ocean before him.
Peter whistled some of these sea children up now as he
pondered things in the marina. Some of them broke water,
splashed, and waved to him. So many of the kids there were, and
such good ones!
272
The Ultimate Creature
>
“Whistle about four of them to come in for dinner!” Teresa
called, and Peter did so. It had been an odd business about the
children, not unpleasant certainly, but not what he had expected
either. And even yet, every possibility was still open to them.
“I'd like to have a people-kid sometime,” Teresa said. “After all,
mama had me. A people kid have fun playing with the fish kids,
and they like him, too. And he could climb in the rocks with the
Groll's Trolls. He would sort of knit our family together. You
think about it, Peter, and I think about it too, and we see what we
come up with at the next milting time.”
PETER FEENEY gazed out at his children in the pools of the sea,
and at his other sort of children climbing in the rocks, and he felt
an uneasy pride in them all. One comes quickly to love Fish Kids
and Grolls Trolls when they are the product of one's own loins.
There was ever hope, there would ever be hope to the last, of
children of Peter's own kind. But he loved his present progeny not
the less for it. The four kids that he had whistled in came now,
“Oh, four such pretty kids of ours!" Teresa said. “Fry them,
Peter,”
And Peter took the pretty fish kids that came from the water
and began to fix them for the pan.
.
This had taken the longest to get used to. But when you have so
many of them—more than ten thousand, and more coming all the
time—and when they are so good; and when, moreover, they are
already Aesh of
Peter Feeney fixed the fish kids for the pan. And out of his
fullness and mingled emotions, salt tears rolled down his shining
face to the salt sea.
your flesh.
273
Anteros worked that day with a soft sullenness, and Magdalen brooded with a sort of lightning about her. “Beads, glass beads!” Terrence Burdock exploded angrily. “All right! Who is the hoaxer in our midst? I will not tolerate this at all.” Terrence had been angry of face all day. He was clawed deeply, as Steinleser had been the day before, and he was sour on the world. “There have been glass-bead caches before, Terrence, hundreds of them,” Robert Derby said softly. “There have been hoaxers before, hundreds of them,” Terrence howled. “These have ‘Hong Kong Contemporary’ written all over them, damn cheap glass beads sold by the pound. They have no business in a stratum of around the year seven hundred. All right, who is guilty?” “I don’t believe that any one of us is guilty, Terrence,” Ethyl put in mildly. “They are found four feet in from the slant surface of the mound. Why, we’ve cut through three hundred years of vegetable loam to get to them, and certainly the surface was eroded beyond that.” “We are scientists,” said Steinleser. “We find these. Others have found such. Let us consider the improbabilities of it.” It was noon, so they ate and rested and considered the improbabilities. Anteros had brought them a great joint of white pork, and they made sandwiches and drank beer and ate pickles. “You know,” said Robert Derby, “that beyond the rank impossibility of glass beads found so many times where they could not be found, there is a real mystery about all early Indian beads, whether of bone, stone, or antler. There are millions and millions of these fine beads with pierced holes finer than any piercer ever found. There are residues, there are centers of every other Indian industry, and there is evolution of every other tool. Why have there been these millions of pierced beads, and never one piercer? There was no technique to make so fine a piercer. How were they done?” Magdalen giggled. “Bead-spitter,” she said. “Bead-spitter! You’re out of your fuzzy mind,” Terrence erupted. “That’s the silliest and least sophisticated of all Indian legends.” “But it is the legend,” said Robert Derby, “the legend of more than thirty separate tribes. The Carib Indians of Cuba said that they got their beads from Bead-spitters. The Indians of Panama told Balboa the same thing. The Indians of the pueblos told the same story to Coronado. Every Indian
community had an Indian who was its Bead-spitter. There are Creek and Alabama and Koasati stories of Bead-spitter; see Swanton’s collections. And his stories were taken down within living memory. “More than that, when European trade-beads were first introduced, there is one account of an Indian receiving some and saying, ‘I will take some to Bead-spitter. If he sees them, he can spit them too.’ And that Bead-spitter did then spit them by the bushel. There was never any other Indian account of the origin of their beads. All were spit by a Bead-spitter.” “Really, this is very unreal,” Ethyl said. Really it was. “Hog hokey! A Bead-spitter of around the year seven hundred could not spit future beads, he could not spit cheap Hong Kong glass beads of the present time!” Terrence was very angry. “Pardon me, yes sir, he could,” said Anteros. “A Bead-spitter can spit future beads, if he faces north when he spits. That has always been known.” Terrence was angry, he fumed and poisoned the day for them, and the claw marks on his face stood out livid purple. He was angrier yet when he said that the curious dark capping rock on top of the chimney was dangerous, that it would fall and kill someone; and Anteros said that there was no such capping rock on the chimney, that Terrence’s eyes were deceiving him, that Terrence should go sit in the shade and rest. And Terrence became excessively angry when he discovered that Magdalen was trying to hide something that she had discovered in the fluted core of the chimney. It was a large and heavy shale-stone, too heavy even for Magdalen’s puzzling strength. She had dragged it out of the chimney flute, tumbled it down to the bottom, and was trying to cover it with rocks and scarp. “Robert, mark the extraction point!” Terrence called loudly. “It’s quite plain yet. Magdalen, stop that! Whatever it is, it must be examined now.” “Oh, it’s just more of the damned same thing! I wish he’d let me alone. With his kind of money he can get plenty of girls. Besides, it’s private, Terrence. You don’t have any business reading it.” “You are hysterical, Magdalen, and you may have to leave the digging site.” “I wish I could leave. I can’t. I wish I could love. I can’t. Why isn’t it enough that I die?” “Howard, spend the afternoon on this,” Terrence ordered. “It has writing
of a sort on it. If it's what I think it is, it scares me. It's too recent to be in any
eroded chimney rock formation, Howard, and it comes from far below the
top. Read it.”
“A few hours on it and I may come up with something. I never saw
anything like it either. What did you think it was, Terrence?”
"What do you think I think it is? It's much later than the other, and that
one was impossible. I'll not be the one to confess myself crazy first.”
>
Howard Steinleser went to work on the incised stone; and two hours before
sundown they brought him another one, a gray soap-stone block from higher
up. Whatever this was covered with, it was not at all the same thing that
covered the shale-stone.
And elsewhere things went well, too well. The old fishiness was back on
it. No series of finds could be so perfect, no petrification could be so well
ordered.
“Robert,” Magdalen called down to Robert Derby just at sunset, "in the
high meadow above the shore, about four hundred yards down, just past the
old fence line,”
“—there is a badger hole, Magdalen. Now you have me doing it, seeing
invisible things at a distance. And if I take a carbine and stroll down there
quietly, the badger will stick his head out just as I get there (I being strongly
downwind of him), and I'll blam him between the eyes. He'll be a big one,
fifty pounds."
“Thirty. Bring him, Robert. You're showing a little understanding at last.”
“But, Magdalen, badger is rampant meat. It's seldom eaten."
“May not the condemned girl have what she wishes for her last meal? Go
get it, Robert.”
Robert went. The voice of the little carbine was barely heard at that
distance. Soon, Robert brought back the dead badger.
"Cook it, Ethyl,” Magdalen ordered.
“Yes, I know. And if I don't know how, Anteros will show me.” But
Anteros was gone. Robert found him on a sundown knoll with his shoulders
hunched. The old man was sobbing silently and his face seemed to be made
out of dull pumice stone. But he came back to aid Ethyl in preparing the
"
badger.
“If the first of today's stones scared you, the second should have lifted the
hair right off your head, Terrence,” Howard Steinleser said. “It does, it does.
All the stones are too recent to be in a chimney formation, but this last one is
an insult. It isn't two hundred years old, but there's a thousand years of strata
above it. What time is deposited here?”
They had eaten rampant badger meat and drunk inferior whiskey (which
Anteros, who had given it to them, didn't know was inferior), and the
muskiness was both inside them and around them. The campfire sometimes
spit angrily with small explosions, and its glare reached high when it did so.
By one such leaping glare, Terrence Burdock saw that the curious dark
capping rock was once more on top of the chimney. He thought he had seen it
there in the daytime; but it had not been there after he had sat in the shade
and rested, and it had absolutely not been there when he climbed the chimney
itself to be sure.
“Let's have the second chapter and then the third, Howard,” Ethyl said.
“It's neater that way.”
“Yes. Well, the second chapter (the first and lowest and apparently the
earliest rock we came on today) is written in a language that no one ever saw
written before; and yet it's no great trouble to read it. Even Terrence guessed
what it was and it scared him. It is Anadarko-Caddo hand-talk graven in
stone. It is what is called the Sign Language of the Plains Indians copied
down in formalized pictographs. And it has to be very recent, within the last
three hundred years. Hand-talk was fragmentary at the first coming of the
Spanish, and well developed at the first coming of the French. It was an
explosive development, as such things go, worked out within a hundred
years. This rock has to be younger than its situs, but it was absolutely found
in place.”
“Read it, Howard, read it,” Robert Derby called. Robert was feeling fine
and the rest of them were gloomy tonight.
"I own three hundred ponies,'” Steinleser read the rock out of his
memory. “I own two days' ride north and east and south, and one day's ride
west. I give you all. I blast out with a big voice like fire in tall trees, like the
explosion of crowning pine trees. I cry like closing-in wolves, like the high
voice of the lion, like the hoarse scream of torn calves. Do you not destroy
yourself again! You are the dew on crazy-weed in the morning. You are the
swift crooked wings of the nighthawk, the dainty feet of the skunk, you are
the juice of the sour squash. Why can you not take or give? I am the hump-
backed bull of the high plains, I am the river itself and the stagnant pools left
by the river, I am the raw earth and the rocks. Come to me, but do not come
so violently as to destroy yourself.'
"Ah, that was the text of the first rock of the day, the Anadarko-Caddo
hand-talk graven in stone. And final pictographs which I don't understand: a
shot-arrow sign, and a boulder beyond.”
“Continued on next rock' of course,” said Robert Derby. “Well, why
wasn't hand-talk ever written down? The signs are simple and easily stylized
and they were understood by many different tribes. It would have been
natural to write it.”
“Alphabetical writing was in the region before hand-talk was well
developed,” Terrence Burdock said. “In fact, it was the coming of the
Spanish that gave the impetus to hand-talk. It was really developed for
communication between Spanish and Indian, not between Indian and Indian.
And yet, I believe, hand-talk was written down once; it was the beginning of
the Chinese pictographs. And there also it had its beginning as
communication between differing peoples. Depend on it, if all mankind had
always been of a single language, there would never have been any written
language developed at all. Writing always began as a bridge, and there had to
be some chasm for it to bridge.”
“We have one to bridge here,” said Steinleser. “That whole chimney is full
of rotten smoke. The highest part of it should be older than the lowest part of
the mound, since the mound was built on a base eroded away from the
chimney formation. But in many ways they seem to be contemporary. We
must all be under a spell here. We've worked two days on this, parts of three
days, and the total impossibility of the situation hasn't struck us yet.
“The old Nahuatlan glyphs for Time are the Chimney glyphs. Present time
is a lower part of a chimney and fire burning at the base. Past time is black
smoke from a chimney, and future time is white smoke from a chimney.
There was a signature glyph running through our yesterday's stone which I
didn't and don't understand. It seemed to indicate something coming down
out of the chimney rather than going up it.”
“It really doesn't look much like a chimney,” Magdalen said.
“And a maiden doesn't look much like dew on crazy-weed in the morning,
Magdalen,” Robert Derby said, “but we recognize these identities.”
a
"
"
They talked a while about the impossibility of the whole business. “There are
scales on our eyes," Steinleser said. “The fluted core of the chimney is
wrong. I'm not even sure the rest of the chimney is right.”
“No, it isn't,” said Robert Derby. “We can identify most of the strata of
the chimney with known periods of the river and stream. I was above and
below today. There is one stretch where the sandstone was not eroded at all,
where it stands three hundred yards back from the shifted river and is
overlaid with a hundred years of loam and sod. There are other sections
where the stone is cut away variously. We can tell when most of the chimney
was laid down, we can find its correspondences up to a few hundred years
ago. But when were the top ten feet of it laid down? There were no
correspondences anywhere to that. The centuries represented by the strata of
the top of the chimney, people, those centuries haven't happened yet.”
“And when was the dark capping rock on top of it all formed—?”
Terrence began. "Ah, I'm out of my mind. It isn't there. I'm demented.”
“No more than the rest of us,” said Steinleser. “I saw it too, I thought,
today. And then I didn't see it again.”
“The rock-writing, it's like an old novel that I only half remember,” said
Ethyl.
"Oh, that's what it is, yes,” Magdalen murmured.
“But I don't remember what happened to the girl in it.”
“I remember what happened to her, Ethyl,” Magdalen said.
"Give us the third chapter, Howard,” Ethyl asked. “I want to see how it
comes out.”
"First you should all have whiskey for those colds," Anteros suggested
humbly.
“But none of us have colds,” Ethyl objected.
“You take your own medicinal advice, Ethyl, and I'll take mine,” Terrence
said. “I will have whiskey. My cold is not rheum but fear-chill.”
"
>
They all had whiskey. They talked a while, and some of them dozed.
“It's late, Howard,” Ethyl said after a while. “Let's have the next chapter.
Is it the last chapter? Then we'll sleep. We have honest digging to do
tomorrow.”
“Our third stone, our second stone of the day just past, is another and even
later form of writing, and it has never been seen in stone before. It is Kiowa
picture writing. The Kiowas did their out-turning spiral writing on buffalo
skins dressed almost as fine as vellum. In its more sophisticated form (and
this is a copy of that) it is quite late. The Kiowa picture writing probably did
not arrive at its excellence until influenced by white artists.”
“How late, Steinleser?” Robert Derby asked.
"Not more than a hundred and fifty years old. But I have never seen it
copied in stone before. It simply isn't stone-styled. There's a lot of things
around here lately that I haven't seen before.
"Well then, to the text, or should I say the pictography? 'You fear the
earth, you fear rough ground and rocks, you fear moister earth and rotting
flesh, you fear the flesh itself, all flesh is rotting flesh. If you love not rotting
flesh, you love not at all. You believe the bridge hanging in the sky, the
bridge hung by tendrils and woody vines that diminish as they go up and up
till they are no thicker than hairs. There is no sky-bridge, you cannot go up on
it. Did you believe that the roots of love grow upside down? They come out
of deep earth that is old flesh and brains and hearts and entrails, that is old
buffalo bowels and snakes' pizzles, that is black blood and rot and moaning
underground. This is old and worn-out and bloody Time, and the roots of
love grow out of its gore.””
“You seem to give remarkably detailed translations of the simple spiral
pictures, Steinleser, but I begin to get in the mood of it,” Terrence said.
"Ah, perhaps I cheat a little,” said Steinleser.
"You lie a lot,” Magdalen challenged.
“No I do not. There is some basis for every phrase I've used. It goes on: ‘I
own twenty-two trade rifles. I own ponies. I own Mexico silver, eight-bit
pieces. I am rich in all ways. I give all to you. I cry out with big voice like a
I
bear full of mad-weed, like a bullfrog in love, like a stallion rearing against a
puma. It is the earth that calls you. I am the earth, woolier than wolves and
rougher than rocks. I am the bog earth that sucks you in. You cannot give,
you cannot like, you cannot love, you think there is something else, you think
>
"
a
there is a sky-bridge you may loiter on without crashing down. I am bristled-
boar earth, there is no other. You will come to me in the morning. You will
come to me easy and with grace. Or you will come to me reluctant and you
be shattered in every bone and member of you. You be broken by our
encounter. You be shattered as by a lightning bolt striking up from the earth.
I am the red calf which is in the writings. I am the rotting red earth. Live in
the morning or die in the morning, but remember that love in death is better
than no love at all.””
"Oh brother! Nobody gets that stuff from such kid pictures, Steinleser,”
Robert Derby moaned.
“Ah well, that's the end of the spiral picture. And a Kiowa spiral
pictograph ends with either an in-sweep or an out-sweep line. This ends with
an out-sweep, which means—”
“Continued on next rock,' that's what it means," Terrence cried roughly.
"You won't find the next rocks," Magdalen said. “They're hidden, and
most of the time they're not there yet, but they will go on and on. But for all
that, you'll read it in the rocks tomorrow morning. I want it to be over with.
Oh, I don't know what I want!”
“I believe I know what you want tonight, Magdalen,” Robert Derby said.
But he didn't.
The talk trailed off, the fire burned down, they went to their sleeping
sacks.
Then it was long jagged night, and the morning of the fourth day. But
wait! In Nahuat-Tanoan legend, the world ends on the fourth morning. All
the lives we lived or thought we lived had been but dreams of third night. The
loin cloth that the sun wore on the fourth day's journey was not so valuable
as one has made out. It was worn for no more than an hour or so.
And, in fact, there was something terminal about fourth morning. Anteros
had disappeared. Magdalen had disappeared. The chimney rock looked
greatly diminished in its bulk (something had gone out of it) and much
crazier in its broken height. The sun had come up a garish gray-orange color
through fog. The signature-glyph of the first stone dominated the ambient. It
was as if something were coming down from the chimney, a horrifying
smoke; but it was only noisome morning fog.
No it wasn't. There was something else coming down from the chimney,
or from the hidden sky: pebbles, stones, indescribable bits of foul oozings,
the less fastidious pieces of sky; a light, nightmare rain had begun to fall
there; the chimney was apparently beginning to crumble.
"It's the damnedest thing I ever heard about,” Robert Derby growled. “Do
you think that Magdalen really went off with Anteros?” Derby was bitter and
fumatory this morning and his face was badly clawed.
“Who is Magdalen? Who is Anteros?” Ethyl Burdock risked.
Terrence Burdock was hooting from high on the mound. “All come up,” he
called. "Here is a find that will make it all worthwhile. We'll have to photo
and sketch and measure and record and witness. It's the finest basalt head
I've ever seen, man-sized, and I suspect that there's a man-sized body
attached to it. We'll soon clean it and clear it. Gah! What a weird fellow he
was!” But Howard Steinleser was studying a brightly colored something that
he held in his two hands.
“What is it, Howard? What are you doing?” Derby demanded.
“Ah, I believe this is the next stone in the sequence. The writing is
alphabetical but deformed—there is an element missing. I believe it is in
modern English, and I will solve the deformity and see it true in a minute.
The text of it seems to be”
Rocks and stones were coming down from the chimney, and fog, amnesic
and wit-stealing fog.
“Steinleser, are you all right?” Robert Derby asked with compassion.
“That isn't a stone that
you hold in your hand.”
"It isn't a stone? I thought it was. What is it then?”
“It is the fruit of the Osage orange tree, an American moraceous. It isn't a
stone, Howard.” And the thing was a tough, woody, wrinkled mock-orange,
as big as a small melon.
"You have to admit that the wrinkles look a little bit like writing, Robert."
“Yes, they look a little like writing, Howard. Let us go up where Terrence
is bawling for us. You've read too many stones. And it isn't safe here."
"Why go up, Robert? The other thing is coming down."
It was the bristled-boar earth reaching up with a rumble. It was a lightning
bolt struck upward out of the earth, and it got its prey. There was explosion
and roar. The dark capping rock was jerked from the top of the chimney and
a
slammed with terrible force to the earth, shattering with a great shock. And
something else that had been on that capping rock. And the whole chimney
collapsed about them.
She was broken by the encounter. She was shattered in every bone and
member of her. And she was dead.
"Who—Who is she?” Howard Steinleser stuttered.
“Oh God! Magdalen, of course!” Robert Derby cried.
“I remember her a little bit. Didn't understand her. She put out like an
evoking moth but she wouldn't be had. Near clawed the face off me the other
night when I misunderstood the signals. She believed there was a sky-bridge.
It's in a lot of the mythologies. But there isn't one, you know. Oh well.”
“The girl is dead! Damnation! What are you doing grubbing in those
stones?”
"Maybe she isn't dead in them yet, Robert. I'm going to read what's here
before something happens to them. This capping rock that fell and broke, it's
impossible, of course. It's a stratum that hasn't been laid down yet. I always
did want to read the future and I may never get another chance."
“You fool! The girl's dead! Does nobody care? Terrence, stop bellowing
about your find. Come down. The girl's dead."
"Come up, Robert and Howard,” Terrence insisted. “Leave that broken
stuff down there. It's worthless. But nobody ever saw anything like this.”
“Do come up, men," Ethyl sang. "Oh, it's a wonderful piece! I never saw
anything like it in my life.”
*
“Ethyl, is the whole morning mad?” Robert Derby demanded as he came up
to her. "She's dead. Don't you really remember her? Don't you remember
Magdalen?”
“I'm not sure. Is she the girl down there? Isn't she the same girl who's
been hanging around here a couple of days? She shouldn't have been playing
on that high rock. I'm sorry she's dead. But just look what we're uncovering
here!"
“Terrence. Don't you remember Magdalen?”
“The girl down there? She's a little bit like the girl that clawed the hell out
of me the other night. Next time someone goes to town they might mention to
the sheriff that there’s a dead girl here. Robert, did you ever see a face like this one? And it digs away to reveal the shoulders. I believe there’s a whole man-sized figure here. Wonderful, wonderful!” “Terrence, you’re off your head. Well, do you remember Anteros?” “Certainly, the twin of Eros, but nobody ever made much of the symbol of unsuccessful love. Thunder! That’s the name for him! It fits him perfectly. We’ll call him Anteros.” Well, it was Anteros, lifelike in basalt stone. His face was contorted. He was sobbing soundlessly and frozenly and his shoulders were hunched with emotion. The carving was fascinating in its miserable passion, his stony love unrequited. Perhaps he was more impressive now than he would be when he was cleaned. He was earth, he was earth itself. Whatever period the carving belonged to, it was outstanding in its power. “The live Anteros, Terrence. Don’t you remember our digging man, Anteros Manypenny?” “Sure. He didn’t show up for work this morning, did he? Tell him he’s fired.” “Magdalen is dead! She was one of us! Dammit, she was the main one of us!” Robert Derby cried. Terrence and Ethyl Burdock were earless to his outburst. They were busy uncovering the rest of the carving. And down below, Howard Steinleser was studying dark broken rocks before they would disappear, studying a stratum that hadn’t been laid down yet, reading a foggy future.
To ask how any story or tune or statue comes about is to ask “How is it done?”; “What does it take?” Have you heard of the Dutch boy in this country who was going to butcher school, whose schoolmates tried to mix him up? The heart, they told him, that is named the liver; the bladder is called the stomach; the tongue is the coccyx; the loin is known as the chuck; the brisket is the flank; the lungs are named the trotters; and so on. This Dutch kid was very smart, however; he figured out that they were having him, and he figured out the right names for everything, or for almost everything. And
How I Wrote “Continued on Next Rock” An Afterword by R. A. Lafferty
he passed his final examination with top grades both in meat-cutting and nomenclature. “How were you able to do it,” the instructor asked, “with so many things going against you?” “I’ve got it up there,” the Dutch kid said, and he tapped his head. “Kidneys.” It isn’t exactly that one should use kidneys for brains, but the sense of grotesque juxtaposition does come in handy. You can’t be sure you are looking at something from the right angle till you have looked at it from every angle. How did I write “Continued on Next Rock” then? Upside down and backward, of course. I started with a simple, but I believe novel, idea that had to do with time. Then I involuted the idea of time (making all things contemporary or at least repeating), and I turned the systems of values backward, trying to make the repulsive things appear poetic (“the nobility of badgers, the serenity of toads”) and trying to set anti-love up as comparable to love (the flattest thing you can imagine has to have at least two sides; it can have many more). I let the characters that had been generated by this action work out their own way then. After this, I subtracted the original simple but novel idea from the story, and finished things up. (The original idea was a catalyst which could be recovered practically unchanged at the end of the reaction.) The beginning idea, which I give to anyone who wants it, was simply to have archeologists digging upward through certain strata, for rather vague topographic reasons, come to deposits of the fairly recent past, or the very recent past, of the near future (a discarded license plate from fifteen years in the future, for instance), then the more distant future, then to realize that the strata still remaining above them had to contain the remnants of at least a hundred thousand years of unfaked future. So much for the genesis of one particular short story. Each one is different but each one is anomalous; and there is a reason for that. No normal or reasonable or balanced or well-adjusted person is going to attempt the making of a story or a tune or a statue or a poem; he’ll have no need for such abnormal activity. A person has to be somehow deficient or lacking in person or personality or he will not attempt these things. He must be very deficient or lacking if he will succeed at all in them. Every expression in art or pseudo- art is a crutch that a crippled person makes and donates to the healthy world for its use (the healthy world having only the vaguest idea that it even needs crutches).
There are, I know, many apparent glaring exceptions to the rule that only persons who are deficient or lacking in person or personality will contribute any creative content. Believe me, these exceptions are only apparent. There is something badly unbalanced in every one of them. Carry it one step further, though. One of the legends, unwritten from the beginning and maybe unwritten forever, is about a Quest for the Perfect Thing. But it is really the quest for the normal thing. Can you find, anywhere in the world, behind or before or present, even one person who is really normal and reasonable and balanced and well-adjusted? This is the Perfect Thing, if it or he or she is ever found, and if ever found there will be no further need of any art or attempted art, good or bad. Enough of such stuff, end of article, if this is an article. I am both facetious and serious in every written word here.
Reading an R. A. Lafferty story is always a bit of a trippy experience—a journey into the odder parts of experience, his perceptively askew perspective a looking glass all its own. But “Sky” is about an actual trip (or a few of them), with all the inspired psychedelia and questionable reality we expect— and desire—from a Lafferty story. The title’s Sky isn’t the airy horizon above us. No, it’s the unusual substance sold by the furry-handed “Sky-Seller” who can’t survive in sunlight (or thinks he can’t anyway) to ostensible main character Welkin Alauda. A 1972 Hugo nominee, “Sky” sits at the intersection of the absurd and the transcendental. There are deadpan assurances of fantastical dangers: “You will burn,” Welkin told him. “Nobody burns so as when sunning himself on a cloud.” There is the observational commentary of some unseen but nonetheless present narrator on both the characters and the grim world that surrounds them; of Welkin we’re told “it was said that her bones were hollow and filled with air.” The Sky-Diving friends of Welkin discuss time and the universe, existence and falls through it, in perfect rose-colored stoner parlance. We sense the end of a journey coming as we read, and we know it will be quite a crash. Welkin wanders through caverns filled with Amanita mushroom varieties, deadly and hallucinogenic, gathered by not just the Sky- Seller but moles. The results that follow this final trip linger with the reader. So enjoy this delightful trance of a tale, but, always remember, Sky has its dangers.
Introduction by Gwenda Bond
Sky
The Sky-Seller was Mr. Furtive himself, fox-muzzled, ferret-eyed, slithering along like a snake, and living under the Rocks. The Rocks had not been a grand place for a long time. It had been built in the grand style on a mephitic plot of earth (to transform it), but the mephitic earth had won out. The apartments of the Rocks had lost their sparkle as they had been divided again and again, and now they were shoddy. The Rocks had weathered. Its once pastel hues were now dull grays and browns. The five underground levels had been parking places for motor vehicles when those were still common, but now these depths were turned into warrens and hovels. The Sky-Seller lurked and lived in the lowest and smallest and meanest of them all. He came out only at night. Daylight would have killed him; he knew that. He sold out of the darkest shadows of the night. He had only a few (though oddly select) clients, and nobody knew who his supplier was. He said that he had no supplier, that he gathered and made the stuff himself. Welkin Alauda, a full-bodied but light-moving girl (it was said that her bones were hollow and filled with air), came to the Sky-Seller just before first light, just when he had become highly nervous but had not yet bolted to his underground. “A sack of Sky from the nervous mouse. Jump, or the sun will gobble your house!” Welkin sang-song, and she was already higher than most skies. “Hurry, hurry!” the Sky-Seller begged, thrusting the sack to her while his black eyes trembled and glittered (if real light should ever reflect into them he’d go blind).
Sky
»
Welkin took the sack of Sky, and scrambled money notes into his hands
which had furred palms. (Really? Yes, really.)
“World be flat and the Air be round, wherever the Sky grows
underground,” Welkin intoned, taking the sack of Sky and soaring along with
a light scamper of feet (she hadn't much weight, her bones were hollow).
And the Sky-Seller darted headfirst down a black well-shaft thing to his
depths.
Four of them went Sky-Diving that morning, Welkin herself, Karl Vlieger,
Icarus Riley, Joseph Alzarsi; and the pilot was—(no, not who you think, he
had already threatened to turn them all in; they'd use that pilot no more)—the
pilot was Ronald Kolibri in his little crop-dusting plane.
But a crop-duster will not go up to the frosty heights they liked to take off
from. Yes it will—if everybody is on Sky. But it isn't pressurized, and it
doesn't carry oxygen. That doesn't matter, not if everybody is on Sky, not if
the plane is on Sky too.
Welkin took Sky with Mountain Whizz, a carbonated drink. Karl stuffed it
into his lip like snuff. Icarus Riley rolled it and smoked it. Joseph Alzarsi
needled it, mixed with drinking alcohol, into his main vein. The pilot, Ronny,
tongued and chewed it like sugar dust. The plane named Shrike took it
through the manifold.
Fifty thousand feet—you can't go that high in a crop-duster. Thirty below
zero—ah, that isn't cold! Air too thin to breathe at all—with Sky, who needs
such included things as air?
Welkin stepped out, and went up, not down. It was a trick she often pulled.
She hadn't much weight; she could always get higher than the rest of them.
She went up and up until she disappeared. Then she drifted down again,
completely enclosed in a sphere of ice crystal, sparkling inside it and making
monkey faces at them.
The wind yelled and barked, and the divers took off. They all went down,
soaring and gliding and tumbling; standing still sometimes, it seemed; even
rising again a little. They went down to clouds and spread out on them; dark-
white clouds with the sun inside them and suffusing them both from above
and below. They cracked Welkin's ice-crystal sphere and she stepped out of
it. They ate the thin pieces of it, very cold and brittle and with a tang of
ozone. Alzarsi took off his shirt and sunned himself on a cloud.
"You will burn,” Welkin told him. “Nobody burns so as when sunning
himself on a cloud.” That was true.
They sank through the black-whiteness of these clouds and came into the
limitless blue concourse with clouds above and below them. It was in this
same concourse that Hippodameia used to race her horses, there not being
room for such coursers to run on Earth. The clouds below folded up and the
clouds above folded down, forming a discrete space.
"We have our own rotundity and sphere here," said Icarus Riley (these are
their Sky-Diver names, not their legal names), "and it is apart from all worlds
and bodies. The worlds and bodies do not exist for as long a time as we say
that they do not exist. The axis of our present space is its own concord.
Therefore, it being in perfect concord, Time stops."
All their watches had stopped, at least.
“But there is a world below,” said Karl. “It is an abject world, and we can
keep it abject forever if we wish. But it has at least a shadowy existence, and
later we will let it fill out again in our compassion for lowly things. It is flat,
though, and we must insist that it remain flat."
“This is important,” Joseph said with the deep importance of one on Sky.
“So long as our own space is bowed and globed, the world must remain flat
or depressed. But the world must not be allowed to bow its back again. We
are in danger if it ever does. So long as it is truly flat and abject it cannot
crash ourselves to it.”
“How long could we fall,” Welkin asked, “if we had not stopped time, if
we let it flow at its own pace, or at ours? How long could we fall?”
“Hephaestus once tumbled through space all day long,” Icarus Riley said,
"and the days were longer then."
Karl Vlieger had gone wall-eyed from an interior-turned sexual passion
that he often experienced in diving. Icarus Riley seemed to be on laughing
gas suddenly; this is a sign that Sky is not having a perfect effect. Joseph
Alzarsi felt a cold wind down his spine and a series of jerky little
premonitions.
"We are not perfect,” Joseph said. “Tomorrow or the next day we may be,
for we do approach perfection. We win a round. And we win another. Let us
not throw away our victory today through carelessness. The Earth has bowed
"
his old back a little bit, and we make ready for him! Now, guys, now!"
Four of them (or maybe only three of them) pulled the rings. The chutes
unpeeled, flowered, and jerked. They had been together like a sheaf in close
conversation. But suddenly, on coming to earth, they were spread out over
five hundred yards.
They assembled. They packed their chutes. That would be all the diving
for that day.
“Welkin, how did you pack your chute so quickly?” Icarus asked her
suspiciously.
"I don't know."
“You are always the slowest one of us, and the sloppiest. Someone always
has to reroll your chute for you before it is used again. And you were the last
one to land just now. How were you the first one to be packed? How did you
roll it so well? It has the earmarks of my own rolling, just as I rolled it for
you before we took off this morning."
“I don't know, Icarus. Oh, I think I'll go up again, straight up.”
"No, you've sailed and dived enough for one morning. Welkin, did you
even open your chute?”
“I don't know.”
*
"
High on Sky, they went up again the next morning. The little plane named
Shrike flew up as no plane had ever flown before, up through Storm. The
storm-shrouded Earth shrank to the size of a pea-doogie.
“We will play a trick on it,” said Welkin. “When you're on Sky you can
play a trick on anything and make it abide by it. I will say that the pea-doogie
that was the world is nothing. See, it is gone. Then I will select another pea-
doogie, that one there, and I will call it the world. And that is the world that
we will come down to in a little while. I've switched worlds on the world,
and it doesn't know what happened to it.”
"It's uneasy, though,” Joseph Alzarsi spoke through flared nostrils. "You
shook it. No wonder the world has its moments of self-doubt.”
They were one million feet high. The altimeter didn't go that high, but
Ronald Kolibri, the pilot, wrote out the extended figure in chalk to make it
correct. Welkin stepped out. Karl and Icarus and Joseph stepped out. Ronald
Kolibri stepped out, but only for a while. Then he remembered that he was
the pilot and got back in the plane. They were so high that the air was black
and star-filled instead of blue. It was so cold that the empty space was full of
cracks and potholes. They dived half a million feet in no time at all. They
pulled up laughing.
It was invigorating, it was vivifying. They stamped on the clouds, and the
clouds rang like frosty ground. This was the ancestral country of all hoarfrost,
of all grained-snow and glare-ice. Here was weather-maker, here was wind-
son. They came into caves of ice mixed with moraine; they found antler
hatchets and Hemicyon bones; they found coals still glowing. The winds
bayed and hunted in packs through the chasms. These were the cold Fortean
clouds, and their location is commonly quite high.
They came down below Storm, finding new sun and new air. It was
pumpkin-summer, it was deep autumn in the sky.
They dropped again, miles and millennia, to full Sky-summer: the air so
blue that it grew a violet patina on it to save the surface. Their own space
formed about them again, as it did every day, and time stopped.
But not motion! Motion never stopped with them. Do you realize that
nothingness in a void can still be in motion? And how much more they of the
great centrality! There was Dynamic; there was sustaining vortex; there was
the high serenity of fevered motion.
But is not motion merely a relationship of space to time? No. That is an
idea that is common to people who live on worlds, but it is a subjective idea.
Here, beyond the possible influence of any worlds, there was living motion
without reference.
“Welkin, you look quite different today,” Joseph Alzarsi spoke in wonder.
“What is it?”
"I don't know. It's wonderful to be different and I'm wonderful."
“It is something missing from you,” said Icarus. “I believe it is a defect
missing.”
“But I hadn't any, Icarus."
They were in central and eternal moment, and it did not end, it could not
end, it goes on yet. Whatever else seems to happen, it is merely in
parentheses to that moment.
“It is time to consider again,” Icarus mused after a while. There is no time
or while in the Moment, but there is in the parentheses. “I hope it is the last
a
time we will ever have to consider. We, of course, are in our own space and
beyond time or tangent. But the Earth, such as it is, is approaching with great
presumption and speed."
"But it's nothing to us!” Karl Vlieger suddenly raged out in a chthonic and
phallic passion. “We can shatter it! We can shoot it to pieces like a clay
pigeon! It cannot rush onto us like a slashing dog. Get down, world! Heel,
you cur! Heel, I say!"
“We say to one world ‘rise' and it rises, and to another one ‘heel' and it
heels,” Icarus Sky-spoke in his dynamic serenity.
“Not yet,” Joseph Alzarsi warned. “Tomorrow we will be total. Today we
are not yet. Possibly we could shatter the world like a clay pigeon if we
wished, but we would not be lords of it if we had to shatter it.”
“We could always make another world,” said Welkin reasonably.
"Certainly, but this one is our testing. We will go to it when it is crouched
down. We cannot allow it to come ravening to us. Hold! Hold there, we order
you!"
And the uprushing world halted, cowed.
“We go down,” said Joseph. “We will let it come up only when it is
properly broken.”
(“And they inclined the heavens and came down.")
Once more, three of them pulled the rings. And the chutes unpeeled,
flowered, and jerked. They had been like a sheaf together in their moment;
but now, coming to earth, they were suddenly scattered out over five hundred
yards.
"Welkin, you didn't have your chute at all today!" Icarus gaped with some
awe when they had assembled again. “That is what was different about you."
“No, I guess I didn't have it. There was no reason to have it if I didn't
I
need it. Really, there was never any reason for me to have used one at all,
ever.”
“Ah, we were total today and didn't know it,” Joseph ventured.
“Tomorrow none of us will wear chutes. This is easier than I had believed.”
>
a
Welkin went to the Sky-Seller to buy new Sky that night. Not finding him in
the nearer shadows of the Rocks, she went down and down, drawn by the
fungoid odor and the echoing dampness of the underground. She went
through passages that were man-made, through passages that were natural,
through passages that were unnatural. Some of these corridors, it is true, had
once been built by men, but now they had reverted and became most
unnatural deep-earth caverns. Welkin went down into the total blackness
where there were certain small things that still mumbled out a faint white
color; but it was the wrong color white, and the things were all of a wrong
shape.
There was the dead white shape of Mycelium masses, the grotesqueness of
Agaricus, the deformity of Deadly Amanita and of Morel. The gray-milky
Lactarius glowed like light-less lanterns in the dark; there was the blue-white
of the Deceiving Clitocybe and the yellow-white of the Caesar Agaric. There
was the insane ghost-white of the deadliest and queerest of them all, the Fly
Amanita, and a mole was gathering this.
“Mole, bring Sky for the Thing Serene, for the Minions tall and the Airy
Queen,” Welkin jangled. She was still high on Sky, but it had begun to leave
her a little and she had the veriest touch of the desolate sickness.
“Sky for the Queen of the buzzing drones, with her hollow heart and her
hollow bones," the Sky-Seller intoned hollowly.
"And fresh, Oh I want it fresh, fresh Sky!” Welkin cried.
"With these creatures there is no such thing as fresh," the Sky-Seller told
her. "You want it stale, Oh so stale! Ingrown and aged and with its own mold
grown moldy."
“Which is it?” Welkin demanded. “What is the name of the one you gather
it from?”
"The Fly Amanita."
“But isn't that simply a poisonous mushroom?"
“It has passed beyond that. It has sublimated. Its simple poison has had its
second fermenting into narcotic.”
“But it sounds so cheap that it be merely narcotic.”
“Not merely narcotic. It is something very special in narcotic.”
“No, no, not narcotic at all!” Welkin protested. “It is liberating, it is world-
shattering. It is Height Absolute. It is motion and detachment itself. It is the
ultimate. It is mastery."
"Why, then it is mastery, lady. It is the highest and lowest of all created
things.”
“No, no,” Welkin protested again, “not created. It is not born, it is not
made. I couldn't stand that. It is the highest of all uncreated things.”
“Take it, take it,” the Sky-Seller growled, “and be gone. Something begins
to curl up inside me.”
“I go!” Welkin said, “And I will be back many times for more.”
“No, you will not be. Nobody ever comes back many times for Sky. You
will be back never. Or one time. I think that you will be back one time.”
"
They went up again the next morning, the last morning. But why should we
say that it was the last morning? Because there would no longer be divisions
or days for them. It would be one last eternal day for them now, and nothing
could break it.
They went up in the plane that had once been named Shrike and was now
named Eternal Eagle. The plane had repainted itself during the night with
new name and new symbols, some of them not immediately understandable.
The plane snuffled Sky into its manifolds, and grinned and roared. And the
plane went up!
Oh! Jerusalem in the Sky! How it went up!
They were all certainly perfect now and would never need Sky again. They
were Sky.
“How little the world is!” Welkin rang out. “The towns are like fly-specks
and the cities are like flies.”
“It is wrong that so ignoble a creature as the Fly should have the exalted
name," Icarus complained.
"I'll fix that,” Welkin sang. “I give edict: that all the flies on Earth be
dead!” And all the flies on Earth died in that instant.
“I wasn't sure you could do that,” said Joseph Alzarsi. “The wrong is
righted. Now we ourselves assume the noble name of Flies. There are no
"
Flies but us!"
The five of them, including the pilot, Ronald Kolibri, stepped chuteless out of
the Eternal Eagle. “Will you be all right?” Ronald asked the rollicking plane.
"Certainly,” the plane said. “I believe I know where there are other Eternal
Eagles. I will mate."
It was cloudless, or else they had developed the facility of seeing through
clouds. Or perhaps it was that, the Earth having become as small as a marble,
the clouds around it were insignificant.
Pure light that had an everywhere source! (The sun also had become
insignificant and didn't contribute much to the light.) Pure and intense
motion that had no location reference. They weren't going anywhere with
their intense motion (they already were everywhere, or at the supercharged
center of everything).
Pure cold fever. Pure serenity. Impure hyper-space passion of Karl
Vlieger, and then of all of them; but it was purely rampant at least. Stunning
beauty in all things along with a towering cragginess that was just ugly
enough to create an ecstasy.
Welkin Alauda was mythic with nenuphars in her hair. And it shall not be
told what Joseph Alzarsi wore in his own hair. An always-instant, a million
or a billion years!
Not monotony, no! Presentation! Living sets! Scenery! The scenes were
formed for the splinter of a moment; or they were formed forever. Whole
worlds formed in a pregnant void: not spherical worlds merely, but dodeka-
spherical, and those much more intricate than that. Not merely seven colors
to play with, but seven to the seventh and to the seventh again.
Stars vivid in the bright light. You who have seen stars only in darkness be
silent! Asteroids that they ate like peanuts, for now they were all
metamorphic giants. Galaxies like herds of rampaging elephants. Bridges so
long that both ends of them receded over the light-speed edges. Waterfalls, of
a finer water, that bounced off galaxy clusters as if they were boulders.
Through a certain ineptitude of handling, Welkin extinguished the old sun
with one such leaping torrent.
“It does not matter," Icarus told her. “Either a million or a billion years
had passed according to the timescale of the bodies, and surely the sun had
already come onto dim days. You can always make other suns.”
Karl Vlieger was casting lightning bolts millions of parsecs long and
making looping contact with clustered galaxies with them.
“Are you sure that we are not using up any time?” Welkin asked them
with some apprehension.
“Oh, time still uses itself up, but we are safely out of the reach of it all,”
Joseph explained. “Time is only one very inefficient method of counting
numbers. It is inefficient because it is limited in its numbers, and because the
counter by such a system must die when he has come to the end of his series.
That alone should weigh against it as a mathematical system; it really
shouldn't be taught."
“Then nothing can hurt us ever?" Welkin wanted to be reassured.
“No, nothing can come at us except inside time and we are outside it.
Nothing can collide with us except in space and we disdain space. Stop it,
Karl! As you do it that's buggery.”
“I have a worm in my own tract and it gnaws at me a little,” the pilot
Ronald Kolibri said. "It's in my internal space and it's crunching along at a
pretty good rate."
"No, no, that's impossible. Nothing can reach or hurt us," Joseph insisted.
“I have a worm of my own in a still more interior tract,” said Icarus, "the
tract that they never quite located in the head or the heart or the bowels.
Maybe this tract always was outside space. Oh, my worm doesn't gnaw, but
it stirs. Maybe I'm tired of being out of reach of everything."
“Where do these doubts rise from?” Joseph sounded querulous. “You
hadn't them an instant ago, you hadn't them as recently as ten million years
ago. How can you have them now when there isn't any now?”
“Well, as to that—" Icarus began—and a million years went by)—“as to
that I have a sort of cosmic curiosity about an object in my own past—"-
(another million years went by)—"an object called world.”
"Well, satisfy your curiosity then,” Karl Vlieger snapped. “Don't you even
know how to make a world?”
“Certainly I know how, but will it be the same?”
“Yes, if you're good enough. It will be the same if you make it the same."
Icarus Riley made a world. He wasn't very good at it and it wasn't quite
the same, but it did resemble the old world a little.
>
a
“I want to see if some things are still there,” Welkin clamored. “Bring it
closer.”
“It's unlikely your things are still there,” Joseph said, “Remember that
billions of years may have passed."
“The things will be there if I put them there,” Icarus insisted.
“And you cannot bring it closer since all distance is now infinite,” Karl
maintained.
“At least I can focus it better,” Icarus insisted, and he did. The world
appeared quite near.
"It remembers us like a puppy would,” Welkin said. “See, it jumps up at
us.
"It's more like a lion leaping for a treed hunter just out of reach,” Icarus
grudged. “But we are not treed.”
“It can't ever reach us, and it wants to,” Welkin piqued. “Let's reach down
to it.”
("And they inclined the heavens and went down.")
A most peculiar thing happened to Ronald Kolibri as he touched Earth. He
seemed to have a seizure. He went slack-faced, almost horror-faced, and he
would not answer the others.
"What is it, Ronald?” Welkin begged in kindred anguish. “Oh, what is it?
Somebody help him!”
Then Ronald Kolibri did an even more peculiar thing. He began to fold up
and break up from the bottom. Bones slowly splintered and pierced out of
him and his entrails gushed out. He compressed. He shattered. He splashed.
Can a man splash?
The same sort of seizure overtook Karl Vlieger: the identical slack-face
horror-face, the same folding up and breaking up from the bottom, the same
hideous sequence.
And Joseph Alzarsi went into the same sundering state, baffled and
breaking up.
"Icarus, what's happened to them?” Welkin screamed. “What is the slow
loud booming?”
“They're dead. How could that be?” Icarus puzzled trembling. “Death is in
time, and we are not.”
Icarus himself passed through time as he crashed earth, breaking up,
spilling out more odiously than any of them.
And Welkin touched earth, crashed, then what? She heard her own slow
loud booming as she hit.
(Another million years went by, or some weeks.)
A shaky old woman on crutches was going down the middle-of-the-night
passages that are under the Rocks. She was too old a woman to be Welkin
Alauda, but not too old for a Welkin who had lived millions of years outside
of time.
She had not died. She was lighter than the others, and besides she had
done it twice before unscathed. But that was before she had known fear.
Naturally they had told her that she would never walk again; and now
most unnaturally she was walking with crutches. Drawn by the fungoid odor
and the echoing dampness she went down in the total dark to where small
things were growing with the wrong color white and were all of the wrong
shape. She wanted one thing only, and she would die without it.
“Sky for salving the broken Crone! Sky for the weal of my hollow bone!”
she crackled in an old-woman voice. But it was only her own voice that
echoed back to her.
Should a Sky-Seller live forever?
Cliffs That Laughed
Introduction by Gregory Feeley
“Cliffs That Laughed” appeared in the March 1969 issue of Magazine of
Horror, surely one of Lafferty's less likely markets (it was edited by Robert
A. W. Lowndes, who had published some of Lafferty's earliest stories and
who doubtless knew enough to ask for more). It was reprinted in Lafferty's
second collection, 1972's Strange Doings, but has scarcely been seen since. It
certainly cannot be called a horror story, although what Freud called “the
horror of incest” definitely plays a role. But what kind of story is it?
It's a tale told in a bar, at least in part—but interleaved with another tale,
told decades earlier to the same narrator, by a Malay storyteller he met while
stationed in Indonesia, who gained new inspiration when he gained access to
American comic books. The storyteller's tale, which begins with “flute notes
ascending" and ends with “flute notes descending," offers a pleasing sense of
unity, but the other story, about three soldiers who disappeared on an
Indonesian island in 1945, “keeps interposing itself” upon it. In the end,
however, the two tales complete each other, forming a deeply bizarre saga
that the narrator (his protestations notwithstanding) weaves into a third tale,
the one we read.
The tale's elements will be familiar for Lafferty fans: a bloodthirsty but
colorful pirate; a willful young woman intent on withholding sexual favors; a
fell scheme foiled by a clever trick. Neither will these readers be surprised by
the rather idealized portrait of pirates, nor with what Andrew Ferguson calls
Lafferty's "lurid depictions of death and dismemberment.” What does startle
us is that the trick turns on the incest taboo, something Lafferty never
otherwise wrote about. The brutal but poetic Willy Jones finally wins over
Margaret, daughter of a man he murdered, and succeeds in consummating his
love, but when he disregards her warning not to resume pirating, she exacts a
grotesque vengeance upon his return to their sinister island, which forever
frustrates his desire to "board” his wife lest he unwittingly commit the
abomination of incest. Since her trick requires both Margaret and her nubile
-indeed indistinguishable daughter (born and bred during Willy's twenty-
year absence) to be at once dead and alive, the grotesque family romance
seethes with the Freudian unheimlich or uncanny, and leads in time to father,
mother, and daughter banding perversely together to attract other men to the
island and then slaughter them as they “frolicked" with the two beautiful
women.
This tangle of rage and baffled lust—the impulse to incest deflected into
murderous resolve-gets its sequel in the tale told in the bar, by an American
soldier who alone escaped from Willy Jones Island in 1945 and now, after
twenty years' journeying home, wishes for nothing but to go back again. A
Malay folk tale updated by Wonder Woman (complete with numerous
elements common to incest myths, such as identical mother and daughter and
a questing figure who was declared dead yet is still alive) turns into the
evocation of a composite Belle Dame Sans Merci, who leaves the men she
encounters wracked by sexual enthrallment and desolation. It is a strange
short story even for Lafferty, and this is without mentioning the “golems”
(who are clearly something else) or the uncanny intermediate condition that
haunts the text, such as the “middle state” between life and death (which
mother and daughter now inhabit) or the "middle land” that the soldier
traverses beneath the earth.
And what does the title signify? There are no cliffs in the story. The
soldier now returning to his death remembers the two women as being “like
volcanoes" and declares that "we climbed them like mountains. Man, the
uplift on them! The shoulders were cliffs that laughed. The swaying—”
It's an odd image (it does not sound like shoulders that he is praising) and
recalls a short story Lafferty published a year later, “The Cliff Climbers," in
which the eponymous cliff—which the narrator tells us at the outset is
actually “a spire”—clearly (like the “up-thrust” or “rock chimney” in
"Continued on Next Rock,” also published in 1970) stands as a synecdoche,
too blatant for readers to overlook, for a centuries-long male desire, one that
(as in “Continued on Next Rock”) proves destructive to both pursuer and
a
pursued.
Lafferty's use of “cliff” as an image of displaced sexuality remains finally
mysterious, as do his reasons for offering a different version of the three
soldiers' disappearance in his 1971 novel The Devil is Dead. “There is only
one story in the world,” the storyteller reminds us, and the version proffered
in “Cliffs That Laughed” gives us myth, humor, and virtuosity. For utter
clarity, you need look to another writer.
Cliffs That Laughed
Between ten and ten-thirty of the morning of October 1, 1945, on an island
that is sometimes called Pulau Petir and sometimes Willy Jones Island
(neither of them its map name), three American soldiers disappeared and
have not been seen since.
“I'm going back there, I tell you! It was worth it. The limbs that laughed!
Let them kill me! I'll get there! Oh, here, here, I've got to get hold of myself.
“The three soldiers were Sergeant Charles Santee of Orange, Texas;
Corporal Robert Casper of Gobey, Tennessee; and PFC Timothy Lorrigan of
Boston which is in one of the eastern states. I was one of those three soldiers.
“I'm going back there if it takes me another twenty years!”
*
No, no, no! That's the wrong story. It happened on Willy Jones Island also,
but it's a different account entirely. That's the one the fellow told me in a bar
years later, just the other night, after the usual “Didn’t I used to know you in
the Islands?”
“One often makes these little mistakes and false starts,” Galli said. “It is a
trick that is used in the trade. One exasperates people and pretends to be
embarrassed. And then one hooks them.”
Galli was an hereditary storyteller of the Indies. “There is only one story
in the world,” he said, "and it pulls two ways. There is the reason part that
says, 'Hell, it can't be' and there is the wonder part that says, 'Hell, maybe it
is.”” He was the storyteller, and he offered to teach me the art.
For we ourselves had a hook into Galli. We had something he wanted.
“We used the same stories for a thousand years,” he said. “Now, however,
a
we have a new source, the American Comic Books. My grandfather began to
use these in another place and time, and I use them now. I steal them from
your orderly tents, and I have a box full of them. I have Space Comics and
Commander Midnight; I have Galactic Gob and Mighty Mouse and the Green
Hornet and the Masked Jetter. My grandfather also had copies of some of
these, but drawn by older hands. But I do not have Wonder Woman, not a
single copy. I would trade three-for-one for copies of her. I would pay a
premium. I can link her in with an island legend to create a whole new cycle
of stories, and I need new stuff all the time. Have you a Wonder Woman?”
When Galli said this, I knew that I had him. I didn't have a Wonder
Woman, but I knew where I could steal one. I believe, though I am no longer
sure, that it was Wonder Woman Meets the Space Magicians.
I stole it for him. And in gratitude Galli not only taught me the
storyteller's art, but he also told me the following story:
“Imagine about flute notes ascending,” said Galli. “I haven't my flute with
me, but a story should begin so to set the mood. Imagine about ships coming
out of the Arabian Ocean, and finally to Jilolo Island, and still more finally to
the very island on which we now stand. Imagine about waves and trees that
were the great-great-grandfathers of the waves and trees we now have.”
It was about the year 1620, Galli is telling it, in the late afternoon of the
high piracy. These Moluccas had already been the rich Spice Islands for three
hundred years. Moreover, they were on the road of the Manila galleons
coming from Mexico and the Isthmus. Arabian, Hindu, and Chinese piracy
had decayed shamefully. The English were crude at the business. In trade the
Dutch had become dominant in the Islands and the Portuguese had faded.
There was no limit to the opportunities for a courageous and dedicated raider
in the Indies.
They came. And not the least of these new raiding men was Willy Jones.
It was said that Willy Jones was a Welshman. You can believe it or not as
a
you like. The same thing has been said about the Devil. Willy was twenty-
five years old when he finally possessed his own ship with a mixed crew. The
ship was built like a humpbacked bird, with a lateen sail and suddenly
appearing rows of winglike oars. On its prow was a swooping bird that had
been carved in Muskat. It was named the Flying Serpent, or the Feathered
Snake, depending on what language you use.
“Pause a moment,” said Galli. “Set the mood. Imagine about dead men
variously. We come to the bloody stuff at once.”
"
One early morning, the Feathered Snake overtook a tall Dutchman. The ships
were grappled together, and the men from the Snake boarded the Dutch ship.
The men on the Dutchman were armed, but they had never seen such
suddenness and savagery as shown by the dark men from the Snake. There
was slippery blood on the decks, and the croaking of men being killed. “I
forgot to tell you that this was in the passage between the Molucca Sea and
the Banda," Galli said.
The Snake took a rich small cargo from the Dutch ship, a few able-bodied
Malay seamen, some gold specie, some papers of record, and a dark Dutch
girl named Margaret. These latter things Willy Jones preempted for himself,
Then the Snake devoured that tall Dutchman and left only a few of its
burning bones floating in the ocean.
"I forgot to tell you that the tall Dutch ship was named the Luchtkastell,”
Galli said.
Willy Jones watched the Luchtkastell disappearing under the water. He
examined the papers of record, and the dark Dutch girl Margaret. He made a
sudden decision: he would cash his winnings and lay up for a season.
He had learned about an island in the papers of record. It was a rich island,
belonging to the richest of the Dutch spice men who had gone to the bottom
with the Luchtkastell. The fighting crew would help Willy Jones secure the
island for himself; and in exchange, he would give them his ship and the
whole raiding territory and the routes he had worked out.
Willy Jones captured the island and ruled it. From the ship he kept only
the gold, the dark Dutch girl Margaret, and three golems which had once
been ransom from a Jew in Oman.
"I forgot to tell you that Margaret was the daughter of the Dutch spice man
who had owned the island and the tall ship and who was killed by Willy,"
Galli said, “and the island really belonged to Margaret now as the daughter of
her father.”
For one year Willy Jones ruled the small settlement, drove the three
golems and the men who already lived there, had the spices gathered and
baled and stored (they were worth their weight in silver), and built the Big
House. And for one year he courted the dark Dutch girl Margaret, having
been unable to board her as he had all other girls.
She refused him because he had killed her father, because he had
destroyed the Luchtkastell which was Family and Nation to her, and because
he had stolen her island.
This Margaret, though she was pretty and trim as a kuching, had during
the affair of the Feathered Snake and the Luchtkastell twirled three seamen in
the air like pinwheels at one time and thrown them all into the ocean. She had
eyes that twinkled like the compounded eyes of the devil-fly; they could glint
laughter and fury at the same time.
“Those girls were like volcanoes,” the man said. “Slim, strong mountains,
and we climbed them like mountains. Man, the uplift on them! The shoulders
were cliffs that laughed. The swaying—"
No, no! Belay that last paragraph! That's from the ramble of the fellow in the
bar, and it keeps intruding.
“I forgot to tell you that she reminds me of Wonder Woman,” Galli said.
Willy Jones believed that Margaret was worth winning unbroken, as he
"
was not at all sure that he could break her. He courted her as well as he could,
and he used to advantage the background of the golden-green spicery on
which they lived.
"Imagine about the Permata bird that nests on the moon," Galli said, "and
which is the most passionate as well as the noblest-singing of the birds.
Imagine about flute notes soaring.”
Willy Jones made this tune to Margaret:
The Nutmeg Moon is the third moon of the year.
The Tides come in like loose Silk all its Nights.
The Ground is animated by the bare Feet of Margaret
Who is like the Pelepah of the Ko-eng Flower.
Willy made this tune in the Malaya language in which all the words end in
ang.
“Imagine about water leaping down rocky hills,” Galli said. “Imagine
about red birds romping in green groves.”
Willy Jones made another tune to Margaret:
A Woman with Shoulders so strong that a Man might ride upon
them
The while she is still the little Girl watching for the black Ship
Of the Hero who is the same age as the Sky,
But she does not realize that I am already here.
Willy made this tune in the Dutch language in which all the words end in lijk.
“Imagine about another flute joining the first one, and their notes scamper
like birds,” Galli said.
Willy Jones made a last tune to Margaret:
"
Damnation! That is enough of Moonlight and Tomorrows!
Now there are mats to plait, and kain to sew.
Even the smallest crab knows to build herself a house in the sand.
Margaret should be raking the oven coals and baking a roti.
I wonder why she is so slow in seeing this.
Willy made this tune in the Welsh language in which all the words end in
gwbl.
When the one year was finished, they were mated. There was still the
chilliness there as though she would never forgive him for killing her father
and stealing her island; but they began to be in accord.
“Here pause five minutes to indicate an idyllic interlude,” Galli said. “We
sing the song Bagang Kali Berjumpa if you know the tune. We flute, if I have
my flute.”
The idyllic interlude passed.
Then Willy's old ship, the Feathered Snake, came back to the Island. She
was in a pitiful state of misuse. She reeked of old and new blood, and there
were none left on her but nine sick men. These nine men begged Willy Jones
to become their captain again to set everything right.
Willy washed the nine living skeletons and fed them up for three days.
They were fat and able by then. And the three golems had refitted the ship.
“All she needs is a strong hand at the helm again,” said Willy Jones. “I
will sail her again for a week and a day. I will impress a new crew, and once
more make her the terror of the Spice Islands. Then I will return to my island,
knowing that I have done a good deed in restoring the Snake to the bloody
work for which she was born.”
"If you go, Willy Jones, you will be gone for many years," said the dark
Dutch Margaret.
"Only one at the most," said Willy.
“And I will be in my grave
when
you return."
“There is no grave could hold you, Margaret.”
“Aye, it may not hold me. I'll out of it and confront you when you come
back. But it gives one a weirdness to be in the grave for only a few years. I
will not own you for my husband when you do come back. You will not even
know whether I am the same woman that you left, and you will never know. I
am a volcano, but I banked my hatred and accepted you. But if you leave me
now, I will erupt against you forever."
But Willy Jones went away in the Flying Serpent and left her there. He
took two of the golems with him, and he left one of them to serve Margaret.
"
What with one thing and another, he was gone for twenty years.
"We were off that morning to satisfy our curiosity about the Big House,”
the fellow said, “since we would soon be leaving the island forever. You
know about the Big House. You were on Willy Jones Island too. The Jilolos
call it the House of Skulls, and the Malaya and Indonesia people will not
speak about it at all.
“We approached the Big House that was not more than a mile beyond our
perimeter. It was a large decayed building, but we had the sudden feeling that
it was still inhabited. And it wasn't supposed to be. Then we saw the two of
them, the mother and the daughter. We shook like we were unhinged, and we
ran to them.
“They were so alike that we couldn't tell them apart. Their eyes twinkled
like the compounded eyes of a creature that eats her mate. Noonday
lightning! How it struck! Arms that swept you off your feet and set your
bones to singing! We knew that they were not twins, or even sisters. We
knew that they were mother and daughter.
“I have never encountered anything like them in my life. Whatever
happened to the other two soldiers, I know it was worth it to them. Whatever
happened to them? I don't care if they kill me! They were perfect, those two
women, even though we weren't with them for five minutes."
“Then it was the Badger."
*
*
*
No, no, no! That's the wrong story again. That's not the story Galli told me.
That's part of the story the fellow told me in the bar. His confused account
keeps interposing itself, possibly because I knew him slightly when we were
both soldiers on Willy Jones Island. But he had turned queer, that fellow. "It
is the earthquake belt around the world that is the same as the legend belt,”
he said, "and the Middleworld underlies it all. That's why I was able to walk
it.” It was as though he had been keel-hauled around the world. I hadn't
known him well. I didn't know which of the three soldiers he was. I had heard
that they were all dead.
“Imagine about conspiracy stuff now,” said Galli. “Imagine about a
whispering in a pinang grove before the sun is up.”
“How can I spook that man?” Margaret asked her golem shortly after she
had been abandoned by Willy Jones. “But I am afraid that a mechanical man
would not be able to tell me how.”
“I will tell you a secret,” said the golem. “We are not mechanical men.
Certain wise and secret men believe that they made us, but they are wrong.
They have made houses for us to live in, no more. There are many of us
unhoused spirits, and we take shelter in such bodies as we find. That being
so, I know something of the houseless spirits in the depth of every man. I will
select one of them, and we will spook Willy Jones with that one. Willy is a
Welshman who has become by adoption a Dutchman and a Malayan and a
Jilolo man. There is one old spook running through them all. I will call it up
when it is time.”
“I forgot to tell you that the name of Margaret's golem was Meshuarat,"
Galli said.
>
After twenty years of high piracy, Willy Jones returned to his island. And
there was the dark Dutch Margaret standing as young and as smoldering as
when he had left. He leaped to embrace her, and found himself stretched flat
on the sand by a thunderous blow. He was not surprised, and was not (as he
had at first believed) decapitated. Almost he was not displeased. Margaret
had often been violent in her love-making.
“But I will have you," Willy swore as he tasted his own blood delightfully
in his mouth and pulled himself up onto hands and knees. “I have ridden the
Margaret-tiger before.”
"You will never ride my loins, you lecherous old goat,” she rang at him
like a bell. “I am not your wife. I am the daughter that you left here in the
womb. My mother is in the grave on the hill.”
Willy Jones sorrowed terribly, and he went to the grave.
But Margaret came up behind him and drove in the cruel lance. “I told you
that when you came back you would not know whether I was the same
woman you had left,” she chortled, “and you will never know!”
“Margaret, you are my wife!” Willy Jones gasped.
"
“Am I of an age to be your wife?” she jibed. “Regard me! Of what age do
I seem to be?”
“Of the same age as when I left," said Willy. “But perhaps you have eaten
of the besok nut and so do not change your appearance."
“I forgot to tell you about the besok nut,” said Galli. “If one eats the nut of
the besok tree, the tomorrow tree, the time tree, that one will not age. But this
is always accompanied by a chilling unhappiness."
"Perhaps I did eat it,” said Margaret. “But that is my grave there, and I have
lain in it many years, as has she. You are prohibited from touching either of
us.”
"Are you the mother or the daughter, Witch?"
“You will never know. You will see us both, for we take turns, and you
will not be able to tell us apart. See, the grave is always disturbed, and the
entrance is easy."
"I'll have the truth from the golem who served you while I was gone,"
Willy swore.
*
*
ور
“A golem is an artificial man,” said Galli. “They were made by the Jews and
Arabs in earlier ages, but now they say that they have forgotten how to make
them. I wonder that you do not make them yourselves, for you have advanced
techniques. You tell them and you picture them in your own heroic
literature,” (he patted the comic books under his arm), “but you do not have
them in actuality.”
The golem told Willy Jones that the affair was thus:
A daughter had indeed been born to Margaret. She had slain the child, and
had then put it into the middle state. Thereafter, the child stayed sometimes in
the grave, and sometimes she walked about the island. And she grew as any
other child would. And Margaret herself had eaten the besok nut so that she
would not age.
When mother and daughter had come to the same age and appearance (and
it had only been the very day before that, the day before Willy Jones had
returned), then the daughter had also eaten the besok nut. Now the mother
and daughter would be of the same appearance forever, and not even a golem
could tell them apart.
Willy Jones came furiously onto the woman again.
“I was sure before, and now I am even more sure that you are Margaret,”
he said, "and now I will have you in my fury."
“We both be Margaret,” she said. “But I am not the same one you
apprehended earlier. We changed places while you talked to the golem. And
we are both in the middle state, and we have both been dead in the grave, and
you dare not touch either of us ever. A Welshman turned Dutchman turned
Malayan turned Jilolo has this spook in him four times over. The Devil
himself will not touch his own daughters."
The last part was a lie, but Willy Jones did not know it.
“We be in confrontation forever then," said Willy Jones. "I will make my
Big House a house of hate and a house of skulls. You cannot escape from its
environs, neither can any visitor. I'll kill them all and pile their skulls up high
for a monument to you.”
Then Willy Jones ate a piece of bitter bark from the pokok ru.
“I forgot to tell you that when a person eats bark from the pokok ru in anger,
his anger will sustain itself forever,” Galli said.
“If it's visitors you want for the killing, I and my mother-daughter will
provide them in numbers,” said Margaret. “Men will be attracted here forever
with no heed for danger. I will eat a telor tuntong of the special sort, and all
men will be attracted here even to their death.”
“I forgot to tell you that if a female eats the telor tuntong of the special sort,
all males will be attracted irresistibly,” Galli said. “Ah, you smile as though
you doubted that the besok nut or the bark of the pokok ru or the telor
tuntong of the special sort could have such effects. But yourselves come now
to wonder drugs like little boys. In these islands they are all around you and
you too blind to see. It is no ignorant man who tells you this. I have read the
booklets from your orderly tents: Physics without Mathematics, Cosmology
without Chaos, Psychology without Brains. It is myself, the master of all
sciences and disciplines, who tells you that these things do work. Besides
hard science, there is soft science, the science of shadow areas and story
areas,
and
you
do wrong to deny it the name.
"I believe that you yourself can see what had to follow, from the
dispositions of the Margarets and Willy Jones,” Galli said. “For hundreds of
years, men from everywhere came to the Margarets who could not be
resisted. And Willy Jones killed them all and piled up their skulls. It became,
in a very savage form, what you call the Badger Game.”
Galli was a good-natured and unhandsome brown man. He worked around
the army base as translator, knowing (besides his native Jilolo), the Malayan,
Dutch, Japanese, and English languages, and (as every storyteller must) the
Arabian. His English was whatever he wanted it to be, and he burlesqued the
speech of the American soldiers to the Australians, and the Australians to the
Americans.
>
"Man, it was a Badger!" the man said. “It was a grizzle-haired, glare-eyed,
flat-headed, underslung, pigeon-toed, hook-clawed, clam-jawed Badger from
Badger Game Corner! They moved in on us, but I'd take my chances and go
back and do it again. We hadn't frolicked with the girls for five minutes when
the things moved in on us. I say things; I don't know whether they were men
or not. If they were, they were the coldest three men I ever saw. But they
were directed by a man who made up for it. He was livid, hopping with
hatred. They moved in on us and began to kill us."
*
No, No, that isn't part of Galli's story. That's some more of the ramble that
the fellow told me in the bar the other evening.
It has been three hundred years, and the confrontation continues. There are
skulls of Malayan men and Jilolo men piled up there; and of Dutchmen and
Englishmen and of Portuguese men; of Chinamen and Filipinos and Goanese;
of Japanese, and of the men from the United States and Australia.
"Only this morning there were added the skulls of two United States men,
and there should have been three of them,” Galli said. “They came, as have
all others, because the Margarets ate the telor tuntong of the special sort. It is
a fact that with a species (whether insect or shelled thing or other) where the
male gives his life in the mating, the female has always eaten of this telor
tuntong. You'd never talk the males into such a thing with words alone.”
“How is it that there were only two United States skulls this morning, and
there should have been three?” I asked him.
"One of them escaped,” Galli explained, “and that was unusual. He fell
through a hole to the middle land, that third one of them. But the way back
from the middle land to one's own country is long, and it must be walked. It
takes at least twenty years, wherever one's own country is; and the joker
thing about it is that the man is always wanting to go the other way.
“That is the end of the story, but let it not end abruptly,” Galli said. “Sing
the song Chari Yang Besar if you remember the tune. Imagine about flute
notes lingering in the air."
* *
“I was lost for more than twenty years, and that's a fact,” the man said. He
gripped the bar with the most knotted hands I ever saw, and laughed with a
merriment so deep that it seemed to be his bones laughing. “Did you
know
that there's another world just under this world, or just around the corner
from it? I walked all day every day. I was in a torture, for I suspected that I
I
was going the wrong way, and I could go no other. And I sometimes
suspected that the middle land through which I traveled was in my head, a
derangement from the terrible blow that one of the things gave me as he came
in to kill me. And yet there are correlates that convince me it was a real place.
“I wasn't trying to get home. I was trying to get back to those girls even if
it killed me. There weren't any colors in that world, all gray tones, but
otherwise it wasn't much different from this one. There were even bars there
a little like the Red Rooster.”
(I forgot to tell you that it was in the Red Rooster bar that the soldier from
the islands told me the parts of his story.)
“I've got to get back there. I think I know the way now, and how to get on the
road. I have to travel it through the middle land, you know. They'll kill me,
of course, and I won't even get to jazz those girls for five minutes; but I've
got to get back there. Going to take me another twenty years, though. That
sure is a weary walk.”
* *
I never knew him well, and I don't remember which of the names was his.
But a man from Orange, Texas, or from Gobey, Tennessee, or from Boston,
in one of the eastern states, is on a twenty-year walk through the middle land
to find the dark Dutch Margarets, and death.
I looked up a couple of things yesterday. There was Revel's recent work
on Moluccan narcotics. He tells of the besok nut which does seem to inhibit
aging but which induces internal distraction and hypersexuality. There is the
pokok ru whose bitter bark impels even the most gentle to violent anger.
There is one sort of telor tuntong which sets up an inexplicable aura about a
woman eater and draws all males overpoweringly to her. There is much
research still to be done on these narcotics, Revel writes.
I dipped into Mandrago's Earthquake and Legend and the Middle World.
He states that the earthquake belt around the world is also the legend belt, and
that one of the underlying legends is of the underlying land, the middle world
below this world where one can wander lost forever.
And I went down to the Red Rooster again the next evening, which was
last evening, to ask about the man and to see if he could give me a more
cogent account. For I had re-remembered Galli’s old story in the meanwhile.
"No, he was just passing through town,” the barman said. “Had a long trip
ahead of him. He was sort of a nutty fellow. I've often said the same thing
about you."
That is the end of the other story, but let it not end suddenly. Pause for a
moment to savor it. Sing the song Itu Masa Dahulu if you remember the tune.
Imagine about flute notes falling. I don't have a flute, but a story should
end so.
Seven-Day Terror
Introduction by Connie Willis
“Seven-Day Terror” was not my first introduction to R. A. Lafferty—that
was “Slow Tuesday Night”—but it instantly became my favorite Lafferty
story and remains so to this day, in spite of intense competition from "The
Hole on the Corner," the aforementioned “Slow Tuesday Night,” and “Thus
We Frustrate Charlemagne."
"Seven-Day Terror" is part of the proud tradition of science fiction stories
like C. L. Moore and Henry Kuttner's “Mimsy Were the Borogoves” and Ray
Bradbury’s “Zero Hour” which are about children and how they see the
world entirely differently from adults, a way of seeing that grants them
incomprehensible and sometimes dangerous powers. But Lafferty's children
stand alone in their audacity, precociousness, and ruthless common sense.
And wisdom: Clarissa's absolutely right about the dangers of letting
scientific discoveries like the disappearer fall into irresponsible hands, i.e.,
those of adults.
And even though this story is as lighthearted as Lafferty comes, his wry
awareness of how the world works is still present. Officer Comstock, for
instance, has a knack for "getting near the heart of dark matters. This is why
he was walking a beat out in the boondocks instead of sitting in a chair
downtown."
But mostly Lafferty's just having fun here, and so are we. The Willoughby
kids, from Clarence down to three-year-old Cyril, are charmingly
incorrigible, the dialogue's hilarious, and we get to meet the “esteemed”
scientist Willy McGilly and his pals (who pop up in several Lafferty stories).
Plus, there are oatmeal boxes, gold watches, floods, fireplugs, cats, local
officials, beer cans, and an ending you should have seen coming but didn't.
In other words, Lafferty at his best. So sit back and prepare to have a really
good time.
Seven-Day Terror
"Is there anything you want to make disappear?" Clarence Willoughby asked
his mother.
“A sink full of dishes is all I can think of. How will you do it?”
"I just built a disappearer. All you do is cut the other end out of a beer can.
Then you take two pieces of red cardboard with peepholes in the middle and
fit them in the ends. You look through the peepholes and blink. Whatever you
look at will disappear."
“Oh.”
“But I don't know if I can make them come back. We'd better try it on
something else. Dishes cost money.”
As always, Myra Willoughby had to admire the wisdom of her nine-year-
old son. She would not have had such foresight herself. He always did. "You
can try it on Blanche Manners's cat outside there. Nobody will care if it
disappears except Blanche Manners.”
"All right.”
He put the disappearer to his eye and blinked. The cat disappeared from
the sidewalk outside.
His mother was interested. “I wonder how it works. Do you know how it
works?”
“Yes. You take a beer can with both ends cut out and put in two pieces of
cardboard. Then you blink.”
.
“Never mind. Take it outside and play with it. You hadn't better make
anything disappear in here till I think about this.”
But when he had gone his mother was oddly disturbed.
“
“I wonder if I have a precocious child. Why, there's lots of grown people
who wouldn't know how to make a disappearer that would work. I wonder if
Blanche Manners will miss her cat very much?”
Clarence went down to the Plugged Nickel, a pot house on the corner.
"Do you have anything you want to make disappear, Nokomis?”
"Only my paunch."
“If I make it disappear it'll leave a hole in you and you'll bleed to death.”
“That's right, I would. Why don't you try it on the fireplug outside?”
This in a way was one of the happiest afternoons ever in the
neighborhood. The children came from blocks around to play in the flooded
streets and gutters, and if some of them drowned (and we don't say that they
did drown) in the flood and brother! it was a flood), why, you have to expect
things like that. The fire engines (whoever heard of calling fire engines to put
out a flood?) were apparatus-deep in water. The policemen and ambulance
men wandered around wet and bewildered.
"Resuscitator, resuscitator, anybody wanna resuscitator," chanted Clarissa
Willoughby.
"Oh, shut up," said the ambulance attendants.
Nokomis, the bar man in the Plugged Nickel, called Clarence inside.
“I don't believe, just for the moment, I'd tell anyone what happened to
that fireplug."
“I won't tell if you won't tell,” said Clarence.
Officer Comstock was suspicious. “There's only seven possible
explanations: one of the seven Willoughby kids did it. I dunno how. It'd take
a bulldozer to do it, and then there'd be something left of the plug. But
however they did it, one of them did it.”
Officer Comstock had a talent for getting near the truth of dark matters.
This is why he was walking a beat out here in the boondocks instead of
sitting in a chair downtown.
a
“Clarissa!” said Officer Comstock in a voice like thunder.
“Resuscitator, resuscitator, anybody wanna resuscitator?” chanted
?
Clarissa.
"Do you know what happened to that fireplug?" asked Officer C.
“I have an uncanny suspicion. As yet it is no more than that. When I am
better informed I will advise you."
Clarissa was eight years old and much given to uncanny suspicions.
»
"Clementine, Harold, Corinne, Jimmy, Cyril,” he asked the five younger
Willoughby children. “Do you know what happened to that fireplug?”
“There was a man around yesterday. I bet he took it,” said Clementine.
“I don't even remember a fireplug there. I think you're making a fuss
about nothing," said Harold.
"City hall's going to hear about this,” said Corinne.
“Pretty dommed sure,” said Jimmy, “but I won't tell.”
"Cyril!” cried Officer Comstock in a terrible voice. Not a terrifying voice,
a terrible voice. He felt terrible now.
“Great green bananas,” said Cyril, “I'm only three years old. I don't see
how it's even my responsibility.”
“Clarence,” said Officer Comstock.
Clarence gulped.
“Do you know where the fireplug went?”
Clarence brightened. “No, sir. I don't know where it went.
A bunch of smart alecs from the water department came out and shut off
the water for a few blocks around and put some kind of cap on in place of the
fireplug. “This sure is going to be a funny-sounding report,” said one of
them.
Officer Comstock walked away discouraged. “Don't bother me, Miss
Manners,” he said. “I don't know where to look for your cat. I don't even
know where to look for a fireplug.”
a
“I have an idea,” said Clarissa, “that when you find the cat you will find
the fireplug in the same place. As yet it's only an idea."
Ozzie Murphy wore a little hat on top of his head. Clarence pointed his
weapon and winked. The hat was no longer there, but a little trickle of blood
was running down the pate.
“I don't believe I'd play with that any more," said Nokomis.
"Who's playing?” said Clarence. “This is for real.”
This was the beginning of the seven-day terror in the heretofore obscure
neighborhood. Trees disappeared from the parks; lamp posts were as though
they had never been; Wally Waldorf drove home, got out, slammed the door
of his car, and there was no car. As George Mullendorf came up the walk to
his house his dog Pete ran to meet him and took a flying leap to his arms. The
dog left the sidewalk but something happened; the dog was gone and only a
bark lingered for a moment in the puzzled air.
a
But the worst were the fireplugs. The second plug was installed the
morning after the disappearance of the first. In eight minutes it was gone and
the flood waters returned. Another one was in by twelve o'clock. Within
three minutes it had vanished. The next morning fireplug number four was
installed.
The water commissioner was there, the city engineer was there, the chief
of police was there with a riot squad, the president of the Parent Teachers
Association was there, the president of the university was there, the mayor
was there, three gentlemen of the FBI, a newsreel photographer, eminent
scientists, and a crowd of honest citizens.
“Let's see it disappear now,” said the city engineer.
“Let's see it disappear now,” said the police chief.
“Let's see it disa—It did, didn't it?” said one of the eminent scientists.
And it was gone and everybody was very wet.
“At least I have the picture sequence of the year,” said the photographer.
But his camera and apparatus disappeared from the midst of them.
“Shut off the water and cap it,” said the commissioner. “And don't put in
another plug yet. That was the last plug in the warehouse."
“This is too big for me,” said the mayor. “I wonder that Tass doesn't have
it yet.”
“Tass has it,” said a little round man. “I am Tass.”
“If all of you gentlemen will come into the Plugged Nickel,” said
Nokomis, "and try one of our new Fire Hydrant Highballs you will all be
happier. These are made of good corn whiskey, brown sugar, and hydrant
water from this very gutter. You can be the first to drink them.”
Business was phenomenal at the Plugged Nickel, for it was in front of its
very doors that the fireplugs disappeared in floods of gushing water.
“I know a way we can get rich,” said Clarissa several days later to her
father, Tom Willoughby. "Everybody says they're going to sell their houses
for nothing and move out of the neighborhood. Go get a lot of money and
buy them all. Then you can sell them again and get rich.”
"I wouldn't buy them for a dollar each. Three of them have disappeared
already, and all the families but us have their furniture moved out in their
front yards. There might be nothing but vacant lots in the morning.”
"Good, then buy the vacant lots. And you can be ready when the houses
come back.”
"
"Come back? Are the houses going to come back? Do you know anything
about this, young lady?”
"I have a suspicion verging on a certainty. As of now I can say no more.”
*
"
Three eminent scientists were gathered in an untidy suite that looked as
though it belonged to a drunken sultan.
“This transcends the metaphysical. It impinges on the quantum continuum.
In some way it obsoletes Boff,” said Dr. Velikof Vonk.
“The contingence of the intransigence is the most mystifying aspect,” said
Arpad Arkabaranan.
“Yes,” said Willy McGilly. “Who would have thought that you could do it
with a beer can and two pieces of cardboard? When I was a boy I used an
oatmeal box and red crayola.”
“I do not always follow you,” said Dr. Vonk. “I wish you would speak
plainer."
So far no human had been injured or disappeared—except for a little blood
a
on the pate of Ozzie Murphy, on the lobes of Conchita when her gaudy
earrings disappeared from her very ears, a clipped finger or so when a house
vanished as the front doorknob was touched, a lost toe when a neighborhood
boy kicked a can and the can was not; probably not more than a pint of blood
and three or four ounces of flesh all together.
Now, however, Mr. Buckle the grocery man disappeared before witnesses.
This was serious.
Some mean-looking investigators from downtown came out to the
Willoughbys. The meanest-looking one was the mayor. In happier days he
had not been a mean man, but the terror had now reigned for seven days.
“There have been ugly rumors,” said one of the mean investigators, "that
link certain events to this household. Do any of you know anything about
them?”
"I started most of them," said Clarissa. “But I didn't consider them ugly.
Cryptic, rather. But if you want to get to the bottom of this just ask me a
question.”
“ "Did you make those things disappear?” asked the investigator.
“That isn't the question,” said Clarissa.
“Do you know where they have gone?” asked the investigator. “That isn’t the question either,” said Clarissa. “Can you make them come back?” “Why, of course I can. Anybody can. Can’t you?” “I cannot. If you can, please do so at once.” “I need some stuff. Get me a gold watch and a hammer. Then go down to the drug store and get me this list of chemicals. And I need a yard of black velvet and a pound of rock candy.” “Shall we?” asked one of the investigators. “Yes,” said the mayor. “It’s our only hope. Get her anything she wants.” And it was all assembled. “Why does she get all the attention?” asked Clarence. “I was the one who made all the things disappear. How does she know how to get them back?” “I knew it!” cried Clarissa with hate. “I knew he was the one that did it. He read in my diary how to make a disappearer. If I was his mother I’d whip him for reading his little sister’s diary. That’s what happens when things like that fall into irresponsible hands.” She poised the hammer over the mayor’s gold watch, now on the floor. “I have to wait a few seconds. This can’t be hurried. It’ll only be a little while.” The second hand swept around to the point that was preordained for it before the world began. Clarissa suddenly brought down the hammer with all her force on the beautiful gold watch. “That’s all,” she said. “Your troubles are over. See, there is Blanche Manners’s cat on the sidewalk just where she was seven days ago.” And the cat was back. “Now let’s go down to the Plugged Nickel and watch the fireplugs come back.” They had only a few minutes to wait. It came from nowhere and clanged into the street like a sign and a witness. “Now I predict,” said Clarissa, “that every single object will return exactly seven days from the time of its disappearance.” The seven-day terror had ended. The objects began to reappear. “How,” asked the mayor, “did you know they would come back in seven days?” “Because it was a seven-day disappearer that Clarence made. I also know
how to make a nine-day, a thirteen-day, a twenty-seven-day, and an eleven- year disappearer. I was going to make a thirteen-year one, but for that you have to color the ends with the blood from a little boy’s heart, and Cyril cried every time I tried to make a good cut.” “You really know how to make all of these?” “Yes. But I shudder if the knowledge should ever come into unauthorized hands.” “I shudder, too, Clarissa. But tell me, why did you want the chemicals?” “For my chemistry set.” “And the black velvet?” “For doll dresses.” “And the pound of rock candy?” “How did you ever get to be mayor of this town if you have to ask questions like that? What do you think I wanted the rock candy for?” “One last question,” said the mayor. “Why did you smash my gold watch with the hammer?” “Oh,” said Clarissa, “that was for dramatic effect.”
In “Boomer Flats,” which originally appeared in If Magazine in 1971, Lafferty expands on the internal mythology of his work and returns to familiar themes. Evolution, and how humans fit into it through spontaneous evolutionary leaps, features in other stories such as “Ginny Wrapped in the Sun” and “In Deepest Glass.” Lafferty asserted that storytelling was a manifestation of ancestry and that storytellers belonged “to the old ‘red-bone people.’” The journey to Boomer Flats brings the reader to a strange town where those people walk daily. To those who know who Ivan Sanderson is, the clue is there from the very first line: eminent scientists Arpad Arkabaranan, Willy McGilly, and Dr. Velikof Vonk, declaring themselves his spiritual offspring, are in search of Fortean phenomena, specifically the ABSM (Abominable Snowman). It’s a literal wild-goose chase, as McGilly notes, referring to the hundreds of mud geese in flight across the sky. This sort of linguistic play, the metaphorical made real, ripples through the story, and even sometimes slides it over into poetry’s realm, such as the repeated reassurance Crayola Catfish gives the eminent scientists about their drinks, “They’re fixing them for you now. I’ll bring them after a while.” Boomer Flats is a shadow town, an echo of the town of Boomer. “Something a little queer and primordial about the whole place!” Lafferty warns the reader, who already knows we’re wandering in strange territory. The three eminent scientists know it too. Dr. Velikof Vonk’s eyes grin “out of deep folk memory,” as he begins to drink what Crayola has brought him: a clay cup that “smelled strongly of river, perhaps of interstadial river.”
Introduction by Cat Rambo
Boomer Flats
The drinks, the Green Snake Snorters, move the trio into a strange mythopoetic world in washes, like a television show’s set where each cut- away and back reveals odder and odder details changed and added. The prose becomes stranger and stranger at the same time, moving into deeper and deeper waters of wordplay. That shabby man playing dominoes is a bear. Pieces are falling off a man called the Comet. And then, the giants enter, standing around the edges of the room in their black hats. This is where the legends dwell, almost as though Boomer Flats is the secret heart of Lafferty’s cosmos. The three eminent scientists are specifically identified as three Magi, but what they find is not an answer in the form of the Christ Child, but more and more questions about the world itself. Instead the ending turns back to story’s heart in a way that pulls the reader further in and farther out, so to speak. This is Lafferty at his luminiferous best, slipstream before the term was ever invented.
“In the tracks of our spiritual father Ivan Sanderson we may now have trailed a clutch of ABSMs to their lair,” the eminent scientist Arpad Arkabaranan was saying in his rattling voice. “And that lair may not be a mountain thicket or rain forest or swamp, but these scrimpy red clay flats. I would almost give my life for the success of this quest, but it seems that it should have a more magnificent setting.” “It looks like a wild-goose chase,” the eminent scientist Willy McGilly commented. But no, Willy was not downgrading their quest. He was referring to the wild geese that rose about them from the edges of the flats with clatter and whistle and honk. This was a flight-way, a chase of theirs. There were hundreds of them if one had the fine eyes to pick them out from the background. “Mud geese,” Willy said. “We don’t see as many of them as when I was a boy.” “I do not, and I am afraid that I will not, believe in the ABSMs,” said the eminent scientist Dr. Velikof Vonk, stroking his—(no he didn’t, he didn’t have one)—stroking his jaw, “and yet this is the thing that I also have most desired, to find this missing link finally, and to refute all believers in the other thing.” “We can’t see the chain for the links,” said Willy McGilly. “I never believed that any of them was missing. There’s always been too many of them for the length of the chain: that’s the trouble.” “I’ve traveled a million miles in search of them,” said Arpad. “I’ve pretty well probed all the meager ribs of the world in that travel. My fear has always been that I’d miss them by a trick, even that in some unaccountable way I
Boomer Flats
wouldn't know them when I found them. It would be ironic if we did find
them in such a place as this: not a wild place, only a shabby and overlooked
place.”
"My own fear has been that when I finally gazed on one I would wake
with a start and find that I had been looking in a mirror," said Velikof. "There
must be some symbolism here that I don't understand. What is your own
anticipation of them, Willy?”
"Oh, coming back to people I've always liked. There used to be a bunch of
them on the edge of my hometown,” Willy McGilly said. "Come to think of
it, there used to be a bunch of them on the edge of every hometown. Now
they're more likely to be found right in the middle of every town. They're the
scrubs, you know, for the bottoming of the breed.”
“What are you talking about, Willy?” Arpad asked sharply.
What they were all talking about was ABSMs.
"
*
Every town in the south part of that county has a shadow or secondary. There
is Meehan, and Meehan Corners; Perkins, and Perkins Corner; Boomer, and
Boomer Flats. The three eminent scientists were driving the three miles from
Boomer to Boomer Flats looking for the bones, and hopefully even the living
flesh, of a legend. It was that of the missing link, of the Abominable
Snowman, the ABSM. It wasn't snowy country there, but the so-called
Snowmen have been reported in every sort of climate and countryside. The
local legend, recently uncovered by Arpad, was that there was a non-African
non-Indian “people of color” living in the neighborhood of Boomer Flats,
“between the sand-bush thickets and the river.” It was said that they lived on
the very red mud banks of the river, and that they lived a little in the river
itself.
Then Dr. Velikof Vonk had come onto a tape in a bunch of
anthropological tapes, and the tape contained sequences like this:
“What do they do when the river floods?”
"Ah, they close their noses and mouths and ears with mud, and they lie
down with big rocks on their breasts and stay there till the flood has passed.”
“Can they be taught?”
“Some of the children go to school, and they learn. But when they are
older then they stay at home, and they forget.”
“What sort of language do they talk?”
“Ah, they don't seem to talk very much. They keep to themselves.
Sometimes when they talk it is just plain Cimarron Valley English.”
"What do they eat?”
“They boil river water in mud clay pots. They put in wild onions and
greenery. The pottage thickens then, I don't know how. It gets lumps of meat
or clay in it, and they eat that too. They eat frogs and fish and owls and
thicket filaments. But mostly they don't eat very much of anything."
“It is said that they aren't all of the same appearance. It is even said that
they are born, ah, shapeless, and that—ah—could you tell me anything about
that?”
“Yeah. They're born without much shape. Most of them never do get
much shape. When they have any, well actually their mothers lick them into
shape, give them their appearance."
“It's an old folk tale that bears do that.”
“Maybe they learned it from the bears then, young fellow. There's quite a
bit of bear mixture in them, but the bears themselves have nearly gone from
the flats and thickets now. More than likely the bears learned it from them.
Sometimes the mothers lick the cubs into the shape of regular people for a
joke.”
“That is the legend?”
“You keep saying legend. I don't know anything about legend. I just tell
you what you ask me. I'll tell you a funny one, though. One of the mothers
who was getting ready to bear happened to get ahold of an old movie
magazine that some fishers from Boomer had left on the river edge. There
was a picture in it of the prettiest girl that anyone ever saw, and it was a
picture of all of that girl. This mother was tickled by that picture. She bore a
daughter then, and she licked her into the shape and appearance of the girl in
the movie magazine. And the girl grew up looking like that and she still looks
like that, pretty as a picture. I don't believe the girl appreciates the joke. She
is the prettiest of all the people, though. Her name is Crayola Catfish.”
“Are you having me, old fellow? Have those creatures any humor?”
"Some of them tell old jokes. John Salt tells old jokes. The Licorice Man
tells really old jokes. And man, does the Comet ever tell old jokes!”
“Are the creatures long-lived?”
“Long-lived as we want to be. The elixir comes from these flats, you
know. Some of us use it, some of us don't.”
“Are you one of the creatures?”
"Sure, I'm one of them. I like to get out from it sometimes though. I
follow the harvests.”
"
This tape (recorded by an anthropology student at State University who, by
the way, has since busted out of anthropology and is now taking hotel and
restaurant management) had greatly excited the eminent scientist Dr. Velikof
Vonk when he had played it, along with several hundred other tapes that had
come in that week from the anthropology circuit. He scratched his—(no he
didn't, he didn't have one)—he scratched his jowl and he phoned up the
eminent scientists Arpad Arkabaranan and Willy McGilly.
“I'll go, I'll go, of course I'll go,” Arpad had cried. “I've traveled a
million miles in search of it, and should I refuse to go sixty? This won't be it,
this can't be it, but I'll never give up. Yes, we'll go tomorrow.”
“Sure, I'll go,” Willy McGilly said. “I've been there before, I kind of like
those folks on the flats. I don't know about the biggest catfish in the world,
but the biggest catfish stories in the world have been pulled out of the
Cimarron River right about at Boomer Flats. Sure, we'll go tomorrow.”
“This may be it,” Velikof had said. “How can we miss it? I can almost
reach out and scratch it on the nose from here."
“You'll find yourself scratching your own nose, that's how you'll miss it.
But it's there and it's real."
"I believe, Willy, that there is a sort of amnesia that has prevented us
finding them or remembering them accurately.”
"Not that, Velikof. It's just that they're always too close to see.”
So the next day the three eminent scientists drove over from T-Town to come
to Boomer Flats. Willy McGilly knew where the place was, but his pointing
out of the way seemed improbable: Velikof was more inclined to trust the
information of people in Boomer. And there was a difficulty there.
People kept saying, “This is Boomer. There isn't exactly any place called
Boomer Flats.” Boomer Flats wasn't on any map. It was too small even to
have a post office. And the Boomer people were exasperating in not knowing
about it or knowing the way to it.
"Three miles from here, and you don't know where it is?” Velikof asked
one of them angrily.
"I don't even know that it is,” the Boomer man had said in his own near
anger. “I don't believe that there is such a place.”
Finally, however, other men told the eminent scientists that there sort of
was such a place, sort of a place. Sort of a road going to it too. They pointed
out the same improbable way that Willy McGilly had pointed out.
The three eminents took the road. The flats hadn't flooded lately. The road
was sand, but it could be negotiated. They came to the town, to the sort of
town, in the ragged river flats. There was such a place. They went to the
Cimarron Hotel which was like any hotel anywhere, only older. They went
into the dining room, for it was noon.
It had tables, but it was more than a dining room. It was a common room.
It even had intimations of old elegance in blued pier mirrors. There was a
dingy bar there. There was a pool table there, and a hairy man was playing
rotation with the Comet on it. The Comet was a long gray-bearded man (in
fact, comet means a star with a beard) and small pieces were always falling
off him. Clay-colored men with their hats on were playing dominos at several
of the tables, and there were half a dozen dogs in the room. Something a little
queer and primordial about those dogs! Something a little queer and
primordial about the whole place!
But, as if set to serve as distraction, there was a remarkably pretty girl
there, and she might have been a waitress. She seemed to be waiting, either
listlessly or profoundly, for something.
Dr Velikof Vonk twinkled his deep eyes in their orbital caves: perhaps he
cogitated his massive brain behind his massive orbital ridges: and he arrived,
by sheer mentality, at the next step.
“Have you a menu, young lady?” he asked.
“No,” she answered simply, but it wasn't simple at all. Her voice didn't go
with her prettiness. It was much more intricate than her appearance, even in
that one syllable. It was powerful, not really harsh, deep and resonant as
caverns, full and timeless. The girl was big-boned beneath her prettiness,
a
a
with heavy brindled hair and complex eyes.
"We would like something to eat,” Arpad Arkabaranan ventured. "What
do you have?”
“They're fixing it for you now," the girl said. “I'll bring it after a while.”
There was a rich river smell about the whole place, and the room was
badly lit.
“Her voice is an odd one,” Arpad whispered in curious admiration. “Like
rocks rolled around by water, but it also has a touch of springtime in it,
springtime of a very peculiar duality.”
“Not just a springtime; it's an interstadial time,” Willy McGilly stated
accurately. “I've noticed that about them in other places. It's old green season
in their voices, green season between the ice.”
The room was lit only by hanging lamps. They had a flicker to them. They
were not electric.
“There's a lot of the gas-light era in this place,” Arpad gave the opinion,
"but the lights aren't gas lights either."
“No, they're hanging oil lamps,” Velikof said. “An amusing fancy just
went through my head that they might be old whale-oil lamps.”
"Girl, what do you burn in the hanging lamps?” Willy McGilly asked her.
“Catfish oil,” she said in the resonant voice that had a touch of the green
interstadial time in it. And catfish oil burns with a clay-colored flame.
“Can you bring us drinks while we wait?” Velikof of the massive head
asked.
“They're fixing them for you now," the girl said. “I'll bring them after a
while.”
Meanwhile on the old pool table the Comet was beating the hairy man at
rotation. Nobody could beat the Comet at rotation.
"We came here looking for strange creatures,” Arpad said in the direction
of the girl. “Do you know anything about strange creatures or people, or
where they can be found?”
“You are the only strange people who have come here lately,” she told
them. Then she brought their drinks to them, three great sloshing clay cups or
bulbous stems that smelled strongly of river, perhaps of interstadial river. She
set them in front of the eminents with something like a twinkle in her eyes;
something like, but much more. It was laughing lightning flashing from under
the ridges of that pretty head. She was awaiting their reaction.
Velikof cocked a big deep eye at his drink. This itself was a feat. Other men hadn’t such eyes, or such brows above them, as had Velikof Vonk. They took a bit of cocking, and it wasn’t done lightly. And Velikof grinned out of deep folk memory as he began to drink. Velikof was always strong on the folk memory bit. Arpad Arkabaranan screamed, rose backward, toppled his chair, and stood aghast while pointing a shaking finger at his splashing clay cup. Arpad was disturbed. Willy McGilly drank deeply from his own stirring vessel. “Why, it’s Green Snake Snorter!” he cried in amazement and delight. “Oh drink of drinks, thou’re a pleasure beyond expectation! They used to serve it to us back home, but I never even hoped to find it here. What great thing have we done to deserve this?” He drank again of the wonderful splashing liquor while the spray of it filled the air. And Velikof also drank with noisy pleasure. The girl righted Arpad’s chair, put Arpad into it again with strong hands, and addressed him powerfully to his cresting breaker. But Arpad was scared of his lively drink. “It’s alive, it’s alive,” was all that he could jabber. Arpad Arkabaranan specialized in primitives, and primitives by definition are prime stuff. But there wasn’t, now in his moment of weakness, enough prime stuff in Arpad himself to face so pleasant and primitive a drink as this. The liquid was sparkling with bright action, was adequately alcoholic, something like choc beer, and there was a green snake in each cup. (Velikof in his notebook states that they were green worms of the species vermis ebrius viridis, but that is only a quibble. They were snakelike worms and of the size of small snakes, and we will call them snakes.) “Do get with it, Arpad,” Willy McGilly cried. “The trick is to drink it up before the snake drinks it. I tell you though that the snakes can discern when a man is afraid of them. They’ll fang the face off a man who’s afraid of them.” “Ah, I don’t believe that I want the drink,” Arpad declared with sickish grace. “I’m not much of a drinking man.” So Arpad’s green snake drank up his Green Snake Snorter, noisily and greedily. Then it expired—it breathed out its life and evaporated. That green snake was gone. “Where did he go?” Arpad asked nervously. He was still uneasy about the
business. “Back to the catfish,” the girl said. “All the snakes are spirits of catfish just out for a little ramble.” “Interesting,” Velikof said, and he noted in his pocket notebook that the vermis ebrius viridis is not a discrete species of worm or snake, but is rather spirit of catfish. It is out of such careful notation that science is built up. “Is there anything noteworthy about Boomer Flats?” Velikof asked the girl then. “Has it any unique claim to fame?” “Yes,” the girl said. “This is the place that the comets come back to.” “Ah, but the moths have eaten the comets,” Willy McGilly quoted from the old epic. The girl brought them three big clay bowls heaped with fish eggs, and these they were to eat with three clay spoons. Willy McGilly and Dr. Velikof Vonk addressed themselves to the rich meal with pleasure, but Arpad Arkabaranan refused. “Why, it’s all mixed with mud and sand and trash,” he objected. “Certainly, certainly, wonderful, wonderful,” Willy McGilly slushed out the happy words with a mouth full of delicious goop. “I always thought that something went out of the world when they cleaned up the old shantytown dish of shad roe. In some places they cleaned it up; not everywhere. I maintain that roe at its best must always have at least a slight tang of river sewage.” But Arpad broke his clay spoon in disgust. And he would not eat. Arpad had traveled a million miles in search of it but he didn’t know it when he found it; he hadn’t any of it inside him so he missed it. One of the domino players at a near table (the three eminents had noticed this some time before but had not fully realized it) was a bear. The bear was dressed as a shabby man, he wore a big black hat on his head; he played dominos well; he was winning. “How is it that the bear plays so well?” Velikof asked. “He doesn’t play at all well,” Willy McGilly protested. “I could beat him. I could beat any of them.” “He isn’t really a bear,” the girl said. “He is my cousin. Our mothers, who were sisters, were clownish. His mother licked him into the shape of a bear for fun. But that is nothing to what my mother did to me. She licked me into pretty face and pretty figure for a joke, and now I am stuck with it. I think it
is too much of a joke. I’m not really like this, but I guess I may as well laugh at me just as everybody else does.” “What is your name?” Arpad asked her without real interest. “Crayola Catfish.” But Arpad Arkabaranan didn’t hear or recognize the name, though it had been on a tape that Dr. Velikof Vonk had played for them, the same tape that had really brought them to Boomer Flats. Arpad had now closed his eyes and ears and heart to all of it. The hairy man and the Comet were still shooting pool, but pieces were still falling off the Comet. “He’s diminishing, he’s breaking up,” Velikof observed. “He won’t last another hundred years at that rate.” Then the eminents left board and room and the Cimarron Hotel to go looking for ABSMs who were rumored to live in that area. ABSM is the code name for the Abominable Snowman, for the Hairy Woodman, for the Wild Man of Borneo, for the Sasquatch, for the Booger- Man, for the Ape-Man, for the Bear-Man, for the Missing Link, for the nine- foot-tall Giant things, for the living Neanderthals. It is believed by some that all of these beings are the same. It is believed by most that these things are no thing at all, no where, not in any form. And it seemed as if the most were right, for the three eminents could not find hide nor hair (rough hide and copious hair were supposed to be marks by which the ABSMs might be known) of the queer folks anywhere along the red bank of the Cimarron River. Such creatures as they did encounter were very like the shabby and untalkative creatures they had already encountered in Boomer Flats. They weren’t an ugly people: they were pleasantly mud- homely. They were civil and most often they were silent. They dressed something as people had dressed seventy-five years before that time—as the poor working people had dressed then. Maybe they were poor, maybe not. They didn’t seem to work very much. Sometimes a man or a woman seemed to be doing a little bit of work, very casually. It may be that the red-mud river was full of fish. Something was splashing and jumping there. Big turtles waddled up out of the water, caked with mud even around their eyes. The shores and flats were treacherous, and sometimes an eminent would sink into the sand-mud up to the hips. But the broad-footed people of the area didn’t seem to sink in.
There was plenty of greenery (or brownery, for it had been the dusty weeks) along the shores. There were muskrats, there were even beavers, there were skunks and possums and badgers. There were wolf dens and coyote dens digged into the banks, and they had their particular smells about them. There were dog dens. There were coon trees. There were even bear dens or caves. But no, that was not a bear smell either. What smell was it? “What lives in these clay caves?” Velikof asked a woman who was digging river clams there. “The Giants live in them,” she said. Well, they were tall enough to be Giants’ caves. A nine-footer need hardly stoop to enter one. “We have missed it,” Arpad said. “There is nothing at all to be found here. I will travel farther, and I may find it in other places.” “Oh, I believe we are right in the middle of it,” Velikof gave the opinion. “It is all around us, Arpad, everything you wanted,” Willy McGilly insisted. But Arpad Arkabaranan would have none of the muddy water, none of the red sand or the red sand caves, nothing of anything here. The interest had all gone out of him. The three of them went back to the Cimarron Hotel without, apparently, finding primitive creature or missing link at all. They entered the common room of the hotel again. Dominos were set before them. They played draw listlessly. “You are sure that there are no odd creatures around this place?” Arpad again asked the girl Crayola Catfish. “John Salt is an odd creature and he comes from this place,” Crayola told them. “The Licorice Man is an odd creature, I suppose. So is Ape Woodman: he used to be a big-time football player. All three of them had regular-people blood in them; I suppose that’s what made them odd. They were almost as odd as you three creatures. And the Comet playing pool there is an odd one. I don’t know what kind of blood he has in him to make him odd.” “How long has he been around here?” Velikof asked. “He returns every eighty-seven years. He stays here about three years, and he’s already been here two of them. Then he goes off on another circuit. He goes out past the planets and among the stars.” “Oh? And how does he travel out there?” Velikof asked with cocked tongue and eye. “With horse and buggy, of course.”
“Oh there, Comet,” Willy McGilly called. “Is it true that you travel out among the stars with horse and buggy?” “Aye, that I do,” the long gray-bearded man named Comet called back, “with a horse named Pee-gosh and a buggy named Harma. It’s a flop-eared horse and a broken buggy, but they take me there.” “Touch clay,” said Crayola Catfish, “for the lightning.” They touched clay. Everything was of baked clay anyhow, even the dominos. And there had been lightning, fantastic lightning dashing itself through every crack and cranny of the flimsy hotel. It was a lightning brighter than all the catfish-oil lamps in the world put together. And it continued. There was clattering sequence thunder, and there was a roaring booming sound that came from a few miles west of the thunder. The Giants came in and stood around the edges of the room. They were all very much alike, like brothers. They were tall and somber, shabby, black- bearded to the eyes, and with black hats on their heads. Unkempt. All were about nine feet tall. “Shall I sound like a simpleton if I ask if they are really giants?” Velikof questioned. “As your eyes tell you, they are the Giants,” Crayola said. “They stay here in the out-of-the-way places even more than the rest of us. Sometimes regular people see them and do not understand that they are regular people too. For that there is scandal. It was the scent of such a scandal, I believe, that brought the three of you here. But they are not apes or bears or monsters. They are people too.” “They are of your own same kindred?” Velikof asked. “Oh yes. They are the uncles, the old bachelors. That’s why they grow tall and silent. That’s why they stand around the edges of the room. And that is why they dig themselves caves into the banks and bluffs instead of living in huts. The roofs of huts are too low for them.” “It would be possible to build taller huts,” Willy McGilly suggested. “It would be possible for you, yes,” Crayola said. “It would not be possible for them. They are set in their ways. They develop a stoop and a gait because they feel themselves so tall. They let their hair grow and overflow, all over their faces and around their eyes, and all over their bodies also. They are the steers of the species. Having no children or furniture, what can they do but grow tall and ungainly like that? This happens also to the steers of
cattle and bears and apes, that they grow tall and gangling. They become bashful, you see, so sometimes it is mistakenly believed that they are fierce.” The roaring and booming from west of the thunder was becoming louder and nearer. The river was coming dangerously alive. All of the people in the room knew that it was now dark outside, and it was not yet time to be night. The Comet gave his pool cue to one of the bashful giants and came and sat with the eminents. “You are Magi?” he asked. “I am a magus, yes,” Willy McGilly said. “We are called eminent scientists nowadays. Velikof here also remains a magus, but Arpad has lost it all this day.” “You are not the same three I first believed,” the old Comet said. “Those three passed me several of my cycles back. They had had word of an Event, and they had come from a great distance as soon as they heard it. But it took them near two thousand years to make the trip and they were worried that myth had them as already arriving long ago. They were worried that false Magi had anticipated them and set up a preventing myth. And I believe that is what did happen.” “And your own myths, old fellow, have they preceded you, or have you really been here before?” Willy McGilly asked. “I see that you have a twisty tongue that turns out some really winding myths.” “Thank you, for that is ever my intent. Myths are not merely things that were made in times past: myths are among the things that maintain the present in being. I wish most strongly that the present should be maintained: I often live in it.” “Tell us, old man, why Boomer Flats is a place that the comets come back to?” Willy said. “Oh, it’s just one of the post stations where we change horses when we make our orbits. A lot of the comets come to the Flats: Booger, Donati, Encke, 1914c, and Halley.” “But why to Boomer Flats on the little Cimarron River?” Willy inquired. “Things are often more than they seem. The Cimarron isn’t really so little a river as you would imagine. Actually it is the river named Ocean that runs around all the worlds.” “Old Comet, old man with the pieces falling off of you,” Dr. Velikof Vonk asked out of that big head of his, “can you tell us just who are the under-
people that we have tracked all around the world and have probably found here no more than seventy miles from our own illustrious T-Town?” “A phyz like you have on you, and you have to ask!” the old Comet twinkled at Velikof (a man who twinkled like that had indeed been among the stars; he had their dust on him). “You’re one of them, you know.” “I’ve suspected that for a long time,” Velikof admitted. “But who are they? And who am I?” “Wise Willy here said it correctly to you last night; that they were the scrubs who bottom the breed. But do not demean the scrubs: they are the foundation. They are human as all of us are human. They are a race that underlies the other several races of man. When the bones and blood of the more manifest races grow too thin, then they sustain you with the mixture of their strong kingship: the mixing always goes on, but in special eras it is more widespread. They are the link that is never really missing, the link between the clay and the blood.” “Why are they, and me if I were not well-kempt and eminent, sometimes taken to be animals?” Velikof asked. “Why do they always live in such outlandish places?” “They don’t always. Sometimes they live in very inlandish places. Even wise Willy understands that. But it is their function to stand apart and grow in strength. Look at the strong bone structure of that girl there! It is their function to invent forms—look at the form her mother invented for her. They have a depth of mind, and they have it particularly in those ghostly areas where the other races lack it. And they share and mingle it in those sudden motley ages of great achievement and vigor. Consider the great ages of Athens, of Florence, of Los Angeles. And afterward, this people will withdraw again to gather new strength and bottom.” “And why are they centered here in a tumble-down hotel that is like a series of old daguerreotypes?” Willy McGilly asked. “Will you tell us that there is something cosmic about this little old hotel, as there is about this little old river?” “Aye, of course there is, Willy. This is the hotel named Xenodocheion. This is the special center of these Xenoi, these strangers, and of all strangers everywhere. It isn’t small; it is merely that you can see but a portion of it at one time. And then they center here to keep out of the way. Sometimes they live in areas and neighborhoods that regularized humanity has abandoned
a
(whether in inner-city or boondock). Sometimes they live in eras and decades
that regularized humanity has abandoned: for their profundity of mind in the
more ghostly areas, they have come to have a cavalier way with time. What is
wrong with that? If regular people are finished with those days and times,
why may not others use them?”
The roaring and booming to the west of the thunder had become very loud
and very near now, and in the immediate outdoors there was heavy rain.
“It is the time," the girl Crayola Catfish cried out in her powerful and
intricate voice. “The flash flood is upon us and it will smash everything. We
will all go and lie down in the river.”
They all began to follow her out, the Boomer Flats people, and the Giants
among them; the eminents, everybody.
“Will you also lie down in the river, Comet?” Willy McGilly asked.
"Somehow I don't believe it of you."
“No, I will not. That isn't my way. I will take my horse and buggy and
ascend above it.”
“Ah, but Comet, will it look like a horse and buggy to us?”
a
“No, it will look quite other, if you do chance to see it.”
“And what are you really, Comet?” Velikof asked him as they left him.
“What species do you belong to?"
“To the human species, of course, Velikof. I belong to still another race of
it; another race that mixes sometimes, and then withdraws again to gather
more strength and depth. Some individuals of us withdraw for quite long
times. There are a number of races of us in the wide cousinship, you see, and
it is a necessity that we be strangers to each other for a good part of the time.”
“Are you a saucerian?”
"Oh saucerian be damned, Velikof! Harma means chariot or it means
buggy; it does not mean saucer. We are the comets. And our own mingling
with the commonalty of people has also had quite a bit to do with those
sudden incandescent eras. Say, I'd like to talk with you fellows again some
time. I'll be by this way again in about eighty-seven years.”
“Maybe so," said Dr. Velikof Vonk.
“Maybe so," said Willy McGilly.
*
*
The eminents followed the Boomer Flats people to the river. And the Comet,
we suppose, took his horse and buggy and ascended out of it. Odd old fellow
he was; pieces falling off him; he'd hardly last another hundred years.
The red and black river was in surging flood with a blood-colored crest
bearing down. And the flats—they were just too flat. The flood would be a
mile wide here in one minute and everywhere in that width it would be deep
enough and swift enough to drown a man. It was near dark: it was near the
limit of roaring sound. But there was a pile of large rocks there in the
deepening shallows: plenty of rocks: at least one big heavy rock for every
person.
The Boomer Flats people understood what the rocks were for, and the
Giants among them understood. Two of the eminents understood; and one of
them, Arpad, apparently did not. Arpad was carrying on in great fear about
the dangers of death by drowning.
Quickly then, to cram mud into the eyes and ears and noses and mouths.
There is plenty of mud and all of it is good. Spirits of Catfish protect us now!
-it will be only for a few hours, for two or three days at the most.
Arpad alone panicked. He broke and ran when Crayola Catfish tried to put
mud in his mouth and nose to save him. He ran and stumbled in the rising
waters to his death.
But all the others understood. They lay down in the red roaring river, and
one of the Giants set a heavy rock on the breast of every person of them to
hold them down. The last of the Giants then rolled the biggest of the rocks
onto his own breast.
So all were safe on the bottom of the surging torrent, safe in the old mud-
clay cradle. Nobody can stand against a surging flood like that: the only way
is to lie down on the bottom and wait it out. And it was a refreshing, a
deepening, a renewing experience. There are persons, both inside and outside
the orders, who make religious retreats of three days every year for their
renewal. This was very like such a retreat.
When the flood had subsided (this was three days later), they all rose
again, rolling the big rocks off their breasts; they cleared their eyes and ears
and mouths of the preserving mud, and they resumed their ways and days.
For Velikof Vonk and for Willy McGilly it had been an enriching
experience. They had found the link that was not really lost, leaving the other
ninety-nine meanwhile. They had grown in cousinship and wisdom. They
said they would return to the flats every year at mud-duck season and turtle-
egg season. They went back to T-Town enlarged and happy.
There is, however, a gap in the Magi set, due to the foolish dying of Arpad
Arkabaranan. It is not of scripture that a set of Magi should consist of only
three. There have been sets of seven and nine and eleven. It is almost of
scripture, though, that a set should not consist of less than three. In the
Masulla Apocalypse it seems to be said that a set must contain at the least a
Comet, a Commoner, and a Catfish. The meaning of this is pretty muddy, and
it may be a mistranslation.
There is Dr. Velikof Vonk with his huge head, with his heavy orbital
ridges, with the protruding near-muzzle on him that makes the chin
unnecessary and impossible, with the great back-brain and the great good
humor. He is (and you had already guessed it of him) an ABSM, a neo-
Neanderthal, an unmissing link, one of that branch of the human race that
lives closest to the clay and the catfish.
There is Willy McGilly who belongs (and he himself has come to the
realization of this quite lately) to that race of mankind called the Comets. He
is quite bright, and he has his periods. He himself is a short-orbit comet, but
for all that he has been among the stars. Pieces fall off of him; he leaves a
wake; but he'll last a while yet.
One more is needed so that this set of Magi may be formed again. The
other two aspects being already covered, the third member could well be a
regularized person. It could be an older person of ability, an eminent. It could
be a younger person of ability, a pre-eminent.
This person may be you. Put your hand to it if you have the surety about
you, if you are not afraid of green snakes in the cup (they'll fang the face off
you if you're afraid of them), or of clay-mud, or of comet dust, or of the
rollicking world between.
So, here’s a quick story of mine, relevant to this particular story. My wife became pregnant when I was twenty-nine years old, and when she told me the news
a) I was ecstatic; b) I suddenly begun waking up at three in the morning every night with the thought “dude, you’re totally gonna die one day” ricocheting through my brain.
You don’t need to be a genius of psychology to figure this one out. With the advent of our child, I was no longer the final generation on the family chain; a new link would be forged and I would be inevitably pulled into eternity’s maw. I would survive by passing along my genes, not by living forever, which, up to age twenty-nine apparently, was my unspoken assumption. I got over it. My kid’s pretty great and I don’t mind shuffling off the mortal coil, because I helped make her, and also I wrote a few books people might still read after I’m gone. I’m doing OK. But that jolt of awareness I got at twenty-nine pops up again every now and then, in a slightly different way. I don’t mind so much that I will die. But I’m sad that I will no longer exist. I enjoy existing. Existing is pretty neat. And while I’m pretty sure that when I no longer exist I won’t mind (I didn’t mind not existing before I was born, after all), right now I’m put out about it. I mean, I put a lot of effort into developing a sense of self, here, people. I don’t get to take it with me? That’s some bullshit right there, I tell you.
Introduction by John Scalzi
Old Foot Forgot
It’s selfish of me but I don’t mind that little bit of selfishness. It won’t help me in the end, but until then it gets me along. As I said, this story is relevant to “Old Foot Forgot,” which is a story that makes me both happy and sad. Happy because clearly Lafferty got where I was coming from. Sad because, well. Oblivion awaits, doesn’t it? Fine. Bring it on (eventually). Until then: hey, I’m here, man. And I like it.
“Dookh-Doctor, it is a sphairikos patient,” Lay Sister Moira P. T. de C. cried happily. “It is a genuine spherical alien patient. You’ve never had one before, not in good faith. I believe it is what you need to distract you from the—ah— happy news about yourself. It is good for a Dookh-Doctor to have a different patient sometimes.” “Thank you, lay sister. Let it, him, her, fourth case, fifth case, or whatever come in. No, I’ve never had a sphairikos in good faith. I doubt if this one is, but I will enjoy the encounter.” The sphairikos rolled or pushed itself in. It was a big one, either a blubbery kid or a full-grown one. It rolled itself along by extruding and withdrawing pseudopods. And it came to rest grinning, a large translucent rubbery ball of fleeting colors. “Hello, Dookh-Doctor,” it said pleasantly. “First I wish to extend my own sympathy and that of my friends who do not know how to speak to you for the happy news about yourself. And secondly I have an illness of which you may cure me.” “But the sphairikoi are never ill,” Dookh-Doctor Drague said dutifully. How did he know that the round creature was grinning at him? By the colors, of course; by the fleeting colors of it. They were grinning colors. “My illness is not of the body but of the head,” said the sphairikos. “But the sphairikoi have no heads, my friend.” “Then it is of another place and another name, Dookh-Doctor. There is a thing in me suffering. I come to you as a Dookh-Doctor. I have an illness in my Dookh.”
Old Foot Forgot
“That is unlikely in a sphairikos. You are all perfectly balanced, each a cosmos unto yourself. And you have a central solution that solves everything. What is your name?” “Krug Sixteen, which is to say that I am the sixteenth son of Krug; the sixteen fifth case son, of course. Dookh-Doc, the pain is not in me entirely; it is in an old forgotten part of me.” “But you sphairikoi have no parts, Krug Sixteen. You are total and indiscriminate entities. How would you have parts?” “It is one of my pseudopods, extended and then withdrawn in much less than a second long ago when I was a little boy. It protests, it cries, it wants to come back. It has always bothered me, but now it bothers me intolerably. It screams and moans constantly now.” “Do not the same ones ever come back?” “No. Never. Never exactly the same ones. Will exactly the same water ever run past one point in a brook? No. We push them out and we draw them back. And we push them out again, millions of times. But the same one can never come back. There is no identity. But this one cries to come back, and now it becomes more urgent. Dookh-Doc, how can it be? There is not one same molecule in it as when I was a boy. There is nothing of that pseudopod that is left; but parts of it have come out as parts of other pseudopods, and now there can be no parts left. There is nothing remaining of that foot; it has all been absorbed a million times. But it cries out! And I have compassion on it.” “Krug Sixteen, it may possibly be a physical or mechanical difficulty, a pseudopod imperfectly withdrawn, a sort of rupture whose effects you interpret wrongly. In that case it would be better if you went to your own doctors, or doctor: I understand that there is one.” “That old fogey cannot help me, Dookh-Doc. And our pseudopods are always perfectly withdrawn. We are covered with the twinkling salve; it is one-third of our bulk. And if we need more of it we can make more of it ourselves; or we can beg some of it from a class four who makes it prodigiously. It is the solvent for everything. It eases every possible wound; it makes us round as balls; you should use it yourself, Dookh-Doc. But there is one small foot in me, dissolved long ago, that protests and protests. Oh, the shrieking! The horrible dreams!” “But the sphairikoi do not sleep and do not dream.”
"Right enough, Dookh-Doc. But there's an old dead foot of mine that sure
does dream loud and wooly."
The sphairikos was not grinning now. He rolled about softly in
apprehension. How did the Dookh-Doctor know that it was apprehension? By
the fleeting colors. They were apprehension colors now.
“Krug Sixteen, I will have to study your case," said the Dookh-Doctor. “I
will see if there are any references to it in the literature, though I don't
believe that there are. I will seek for analogy. I will probe every possibility.
Can you come back at the same hour tomorrow?”
"I will come back, Dookh-Doc,” Krug Sixteen sighed. "I hate to feel that
small vanished thing crying and trembling.”
It rolled or pushed itself out of the clinic by extruding and then
withdrawing pseudopods. The little pushers came out of the goopy surface of
the sphairikos and then were withdrawn into it completely. A raindrop falling
in a pond makes a much more lasting mark than does the disappearing
pseudopod of a sphairikos.
But long ago, in his boyhood, one of the pseudopods of Krug Sixteen had
not disappeared completely in every respect.
“There are several jokers waiting," Lay Sister Moira P. T. de C. announced a
little later, “and perhaps some valid patients among them. It's hard to tell.”
“Not another sphairikos?” the Dookh-Doctor asked in sudden anxiety.
“Of course not. The one this morning is the only sphairikos who has ever
come. How could there be anything wrong with him? There is never anything
wrong with a sphairikos. No, these are all of the other species. Just a regular
morning bunch.”
So, except for the visitation of the sphairikos, it was a regular morning at
the clinic. There were about a dozen waiting, of the several species; and at
least half of them would be jokers. It was always so.
There was a lean and giddy subula. One cannot tell the age or sex of them.
But there was a tittering. In all human or inhuman expression, whether of
"
sound, color, radioray, or osmerhetor, the titter suggests itself. It is just
around the corner, it is just outside, it is subliminal, but it is there somewhere.
“It is that my teeth hurt so terrible,” the subula shrilled so high that the
Dookh-Doctor had to go on instruments to hear it. “They are tromping pain.
They are agony. I think I will cut my head off. Have you a head-off cutter,
Dookh-Doctor?”
“Let me see your teeth,” Dookh-Doctor Drague asked with the beginnings
of irritation.
“There is one tooth jump up and down with spike boot,” the subula
shrilled. “There is one jag like poisoned needle. There is one cuts like coarse
rough saw. There is one burns like little hot fires.”
“Let me see your teeth,” the Dookh-Doctor growled evenly.
“There is one drills holes and sets little blasting powder in them,” the
subula shrilled still more highly. “Then he sets them off. Ow! Good night!”
“Let me see your teeth!!”
"Peeef!” the subula shrilled. The teeth cascaded out, half a bushel of them,
ten thousand of them, all over the floor of the clinic.
"Peeef,” the subula screeched again, and ran out of the clinic.
Tittering? (But he should have remembered that the subula have no teeth.)
Tittering? It was the laughing of demented horses. It was the jackhammer
braying of the dolcus, it was the hysterical giggling of the ophis (they were a
half a bushel of shells of the little stink conches and they were already
beginning to rot), it was the clown laughter of the arktos (the clinic would
never be habitable again; never mind, he would burn it down and build
another one tonight).
The jokers, the jokers, they did have their fun with him, and perhaps it did
them some good.
“I have this trouble with me,” said a young dolcus, “but it make me so
nervous to tell it. Oh, it do make me nervous to tell it to the Dookh-Doc.”
“Do not be nervous,” said the Dookh-Doctor, fearing the worst. “Tell me
your trouble in whatever way you can. I am here to serve every creature that
is in any trouble or pain whatsoever. Tell it.”
“Oh but it make me so nervous. I perish. I shrivel. I will have accident I
am so nervous.”
“Tell me your trouble, my friend. I am here to help.”
“Whoops, whoops, I already have accident! I tell you I am nervous.”
The dolcus urinated largely on the clinic floor. Then it ran out laughing.
The laughing, the shrilling, the braying, the shrill giggling that seemed to
scrape the flesh from his bones. (He should have remembered that the dolcus
do not urinate; everything comes from them hard and solid.) The hooting, the
laughing! It was a bag of green water from the kolmula swamp. Even the
aliens gagged at it, and their laughter was of a pungent green sort.
Oh well, there were several of the patients with real, though small,
ailments, and there were more jokers. There was the arktos who—(Wait,
wait, that particular jokerie cannot be told with human persons present; even
the subula and the ophis blushed lavender at the rawness of it. A thing like
that can only be told to arktos themselves.) And there was another dolcus
who—
Jokers, jokers, it was a typical morning at the clinic.
One does whatever one can for the oneness that is greater than self. In the
case of Dookh-Doctor Drague it meant considerable sacrifice. One who
works with the strange species here must give up all hope of material reward
or material sophistication in his surroundings. But the Dookh-Doctor was a
dedicated man.
Oh, the Dookh-Doctor lived pleasantly and with a sort of artful simplicity
and dynamic involvement in the small articles of life. He had an excited
devotion and balanced intensity for corporate life.
He lived in small houses of giolach-weed, woven with careful double-
rappel. He lived in each one for seven days only, and then burned it and
scattered the ashes, taking always one bitter glob of them on his tongue for
reminder of the fleetingness of temporal things and the wonderfulness of the
returning. To live in one house for more than seven days is to become dull
and habitual; but the giolach-weed will not burn well till it has been cut and
plaited for seven days, so the houses set their own terms. One half day to
build, seven days to inhabit, one half day to burn ritually and scatter, one
renewal night under the speir-sky.
The Dookh-Doctor ate raibe, or he ate innuin or ull or piorra when they
were in season. And for the nine days of each year when none of these were
in season, he ate nothing at all.
His clothing he made himself of colg. His paper was of the pailme plant.
His printer used buaf ink and shaved slinn stone. Everything that he needed
he made for himself from things found wild in the hedgerows. He took
nothing from the cultivated land or from the alien peoples. He was a poor and
dedicated servant.
Now he stacked some of the needful things from the clinic, and Lay Sister
Moira P. T. de C. took others of them to her own giolach house to keep till
the next day. Then the Dookh-Doctor ritually set his clinic on fire, and a few
moments later his house. This was all symbol of the great nostos, the
returning. He recited the great rhapsodies, and other persons of the human
kind came by and recited with him.
“That no least fiber of giolach die,” he recited, “that all enter immediately
the more glorious and undivided life. That the ashes are the doorway, and
every ash is holy. That all become a part of the oneness that is greater than
self.
“That no splinter of the giuis floorboards die, that no glob of the chinking
clay die, that no mite or louse in the plaiting die. That all become a part of the
oneness that is greater than self.”
He burned, he scattered, he recited, he took one glob of bitter ash on his
tongue. He experienced vicariously the great synthesis. He ate holy innuin
and holy ull. And when it was finished, both of the house and the clinic,
when it had come on night and he was homeless, he slept that renewal night
under the speir-sky.
And in the morning he began to build again, the clinic first, and then the
house. “It is the last of either that I shall ever build,” he said. The happy news
about himself was that he was a dying man and that he would be allowed to
take the short way out. So he built most carefully with the Last Building
Rites. He chinked both the buildings with special uir clay that would give a
special bitterness to the ashes at the time of final burning.
Krug Sixteen rolled along while the Dookh-Doctor still built his final
clinic, and the sphairikos helped him in the building while they consulted on
the case of the screaming foot. Krug Sixteen could weave and plait and
rappel amazingly with his pseudopods; he could bring out a dozen of them, a
hundred, thick or thin, whatever was needed, and all of a wonderful dexterity.
That globe could weave.
“Does the forgotten foot still suffer, Krug Sixteen?” Dookh-Doctor
Drague asked it.
“It suffers, it's hysterical, it's in absolute terror. I don't know where it is; it
does not know; and how I know about it at all is a mystery. Have you found
any way to help me, to help it?"
"No. I am sorry, but I have not.”
“There is nothing in the literature on this subject?”
“No. Nothing that I can identify as such.”
"And you have not found analogy to it?”
“Yes, Krug Sixteen, ah— In a way I have discovered analogy. But it does
not help you. Or me."
“That is too bad, Dookh-Doc. Well, I will live with it; and the little foot
will finally die with it. Do I guess that your case is somewhat the same as
mine?”
“No. My case is more similar to that of your lost foot than to you.”
“Well, I will do what I can for myself, and for it. It's back to the old
remedy then. But I am already covered deep with the twinkling salve."
"So am I, Krug Sixteen, in a like way.”
a
“I was ashamed of my affliction before and did not mention it. Now,
however, since I have spoken of it to you, I have spoken of it to others also.
There is some slight help, I find. I should have shot off my big bazoo before.”
“The sphairikoi have no bazoos."
“Folk-joke, Dookh-Doc. There is a special form of the twinkling salve.
My own is insufficient, so I will try the other.”
“A special form of it, Krug Sixteen? I am interested in this. My own salve
seems to have lost its effect.”
"There is a girlfriend, Dookh-Doc, or a boyfriend person. How shall I say
it? It is a case four person to my case five. This person, though promiscuous,
is expert. And this person exudes the special stuff in abundance."
“Not quite my pot of ointment I'm afraid, Krug Sixteen; but it may be the
answer for you. It is special? And it dissolves everything, including
objections?”
“It is the most special of all the twinkling salves, Dookh-Doc, and it solves
and dissolves everything. I believe it will reach my forgotten foot, wherever
it is, and send it into kind and everlasting slumber. It will know that it is itself
that slumbers, and that will be bearable."
“If I were not-ah-going out of business, Krug Sixteen, I'd get a bit of it
and try to analyze it. What is the name of this special case four person?”
"Torchy Twelve is its name.”
“Yes. I have heard of her.”
* *
*
Everybody now knew that it was the last week in the life of the Dookh-
Doctor, and everyone tried to make his happiness still more happy. The
morning jokers outdid themselves, especially the arktos. After all, he was
dying of an arktos disease, one never fatal to the arktos themselves. They did
have some merry and outrageous times around the clinic, and the Dookh-
Doctor got the sneaky feeling that he would rather live than die. He hadn't, it
was plain to see, the right attitude. So Lay Priest Migma P. T. de C. tried to
inculcate the right attitude in him.
"It is the great synthesis you go to, Dookh-Doctor," he said. "It is the
happy oneness that is greater than self.”
"Oh I know that, but you put it on a little too thick. I've been taught it
from my babyhood. I'm resigned to it.”
“Resigned to it? You should be ecstatic over it! The self must perish, of
course, but it will live on as an integral atom of the evolving oneness, just as
a drop lives on in the ocean.”
"Aye, Migma, but the drop may hang onto the memory of the time when it
was cloud, of the time when it was falling drop, indeed, of the time when it
was brook. It may say, “There's too damned much salt in this ocean. I'm lost
here.'
"Oh, but the drop will want to be lost, Dookh-Doctor. The only purpose of
existence is to cease to exist. And there cannot be too much of salt in the
evolving oneness. There cannot be too much of anything. All must be one in
it. Salt and sulfur must be one, undifferentiated. Offal and soul must become
one. Blessed be oblivion in the oneness that collapses on itself.”
"Stuff it, lay priest. I'm weary of it."
“Stuff it, you say? I don't understand your phrase, but I'm sure it's apt.
Yes, yes, Dookh-Doctor, stuff it all in: animals, people, rocks, grass, worlds,
and wasps. Stuff it all in. That all may be obliterated into the great—may I
not coin a word even as the master coined them?—into the great stuffiness!”
“I'm afraid your word is all too apt.”
دور
"
"It is the great quintessence, it is the happy death of all individuality and
memory, it is the synthesis of all living and dead things into the great
amorphism. It is the—”
"It is the old old salve, and it's lost its twinkle," the Dookh-Doctor said
sadly. “How goes the old quotation? When the salve becomes sticky, how
then will you come unstuck?”
No, the Dookh-Doctor did not have the right attitude, so it was necessary
that many persons should harass him into it. Time was short. His death was
due. And there was the general fear that the Dookh-Doctor might not be
properly lost.
He surely came to his time of happiness in grumpy fashion.
The week was gone by. The last evening for him was come. The Dookh-
Doctor ritually set his clinic on fire, and a few minutes later his house.
He burned, he scattered, he recited the special last-time recital. He ate holy
innuin and holy ull. He took one glob of most bitter ash on his tongue: and he
lay down to sleep his last night under the speir-sky.
He wasn't afraid to die.
“I will cross that bridge gladly, but I want there to be another side to that
bridge,” he talked to himself. “And if there is no other side of it, I want it to
be me who knows that there is not. They say, 'Pray that you be happily lost
forever. Pray for blessed obliteration.' I will not pray that I be happily lost
forever. I would rather burn in a hell forever than suffer happy obliteration!
I'll burn if it be me that burns. I want me to be me. I will refuse forever to
surrender myself."
It was a restless night for him. Well, perhaps he could die easier if he were
wearied and sleepless at dawn.
“Other men don't make such a fuss about it,” he told himself (the self he
refused to give up). “Other men are truly happy in obliteration. Why am I
suddenly different? Other men desire to be lost, lost, lost. How have I lost the
faith of my childhood and manhood? What is unique about me?”
There was no answer to that.
“Whatever is unique about me, I refuse to give it up. I will howl and moan
against that extinction for billions of centuries. Ah, I will go sly! I will devise
a sign so I will know me if I meet me again.”
About an hour before dawn the Lay Priest Migma P. T. de C. came to Dookh-
Doctor Drague. The dolcus and the arktos had reported that the man was
resting badly and was not properly disposed.
“I have an analogy that may ease your mind, Dookh-Doctor," the Lay
Priest whispered softly, "ease it into great easiness, salve it into great salving
“Begone, fellow, your salve has lost its twinkle.”
“Consider that we have never lived, that we have only seemed to live.
Consider that we do not die, but are only absorbed into great selfless self.
Consider the odd sphairikoi of this world—”
“What about the sphairikoi? I consider them often.”
“I believe that they are set here for our instruction. A sphairikos is a total
globe, the type of the great oneness. Then consider that it sometimes ruffles
its surface, extrudes a little false-foot from its soft surface. Would it not be
odd if that false-foot, for its brief second, considered itself a person? Would
you not laugh at that?"
“No, no. I do not laugh.” And the Dookh-Doctor was on his feet.
“And in much less than a second, that pseudopod is withdrawn back into
the sphere of the sphairikoi. So it is with our lives. Nothing dies. It is only a
ripple on the surface of the oneness. Can you entertain so droll an idea as that
the pseudopod should remember, or wish to remember?”
“Yes. I'll remember it a billion years for the billion who forget.”
The Dookh-Doctor was running uphill in the dark. He crashed into trees and
boles as though he wished to remember the crashing forever. “I'll burn before
I forget, but I must have something that says it's me who burns!”
Up, up by the spherical hills of the sphairikoi, bawling and stumbling in
the dark. Up to a hut that had a certain fame he could never place, to the hut
a
that had its own identity, that sparkled with identity.
"Open, open, help me!" the Dookh-Doctor cried out at the last hut on the
hill.
“Go away, man!” the last voice protested. “All my clients are gone, and
the night is almost over with. What has this person to do with a human man
anyhow?"
It was a round twinkling voice out of the roweled dark. But there was
enduring identity there. The twinkling, enduring-identity colors, coming from
the chinks of the hut, had not reached the level of vision. There was even the
flicker of the I-will-know-me-if-I-meet-me-again color.
"Torchy Twelve, help me. I am told that you have the special salve that
solves the last problem, and makes it know that it is always itself that is
solved.”
"Why, it is the Dookh-Doc! Why have you come to Torchy?”
"I want something to send me into kind and everlasting slumber," he
moaned. “But I want it to be me who slumbers. Cannot you help me in any
way?”
"Come you in, the Dookh-Doc. This person, though promiscuous, is
expert. I help you—”
The World as Will and
Wallpaper
Introduction by Samuel R. Delany
Along with “The Primary Education of the Camiroi,” this was one of the first
tales by Raphael Aloysius Lafferty (1914–2002) I read.
Where it appeared, however, I have no notion. Possibly that's because
today I know so much more about the intellectual context that informs his
story than I did when I first read it, and it is easy to let the context overwhelm
the tale. One suspects that is part of the story's project. But in whose
anthology–Judith Merril's? Terry Carr's?—I first read this piece, I have no
notion at all.
I once taught a Clarion workshop at Tulane (where the students included
George R. R. Martin), and I wondered if somehow Lafferty himself might be
in evidence. He wasn't. And the class was in some confusion because the
young man who had set up the whole thing had also pulled out at the last
minute. It's interesting that even at that time Lafferty as a myth was so in
evidence.
But what of the tale to hand?
William Morris (1834–1896) was intelligent, rich, and multitalented. He
was a committed socialist, and the author of a number of fantasies, including
News from Nowhere and The World Beyond the Wood. He supported a
number of other artists, including Edward Burne-Jones, and he designed
ornate wallpapers still used today; as well, he printed sumptuous illustrated
editions of books such as the Kelmscott Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. He is
one of the most written-about men of his times, and he is the avatar of the
hero of Lafferty's futuristic tale of a trip through the City of the World.
As much or more than any famous Victorian figure, it's easy to see how
the nature of Morris's fame is entirely an accident of a social position.
Lafferty's title riffs on the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer's
(1788–1860) two-volume philosophical treatise The World as Will and
Representation. Schopenhauer is known for the extreme pessimism of his
philosophy and the beauty of his writing.
Like a Wallace Shawn play, Lafferty's tale takes place in a stressed future
and moves from there to its distressing end.
The story begins from a seeming common-sense challenge to the classical
description of a city, straight out of Jane Jacobs (“a concentration of persons
that is not economically self-contained...”) and sets it at the limit of its
growth: “The World City is economically self-contained.”
By the story's end, Lafferty's own pessimism is running neck and neck
with Schopenhauer’s. Lafferty's Catholicism was a topic often referred to by
fans and critics: the other writer who sits in my mind as a (severely lapsed)
Catholic is Thomas Disch. And I wonder to what extent that can be read as
part of the cultural context that informs both writers.
Lafferty's is a story of bookies and talkies and readies, where the World
City is a tidy place because it tips and tilts with the tides it floats on, and
Willy, whose “name game” is based on William Morris, goes to explore with
Kandy Kalosh and later Fairhair Farquhar, the World City which is, of
course, much too large for them to see more than a fraction of—though what
of it that's revealed, with each narrative move, is more and more distressing.
In all, “The World as Will and Wallpaper" offers a grim view of what a
world as it approaches its end times requires to be self-sustaining.
a
The World as Will and
Wallpaper
A template, a stencil, a plan.
Corniest, orniest damsel and man,
Orderly, emptily passion and pity,
All-the-World, All-the-World, All-the-World City.
-13th Street Ballad
a
There is an old dictionary-encyclopedia that defines a City as "... a
concentration of persons that is not economically self-contained.” The
dictionary-encyclopedia being an old one, however (and there is no other
kind), is mistaken. The World City is economically self-contained.
It was William Morris who read this definition in the old book. William
was a bookie, or readie, and he had read parts of several books. But now he
had a thought: if all the books are old, then things may no longer be as the
books indicate. I will go out and see what things are like today in the City. I
will traverse as much of the City as my life allows me. I may even come to
the Wood Beyond the World that my name-game ancestor described.
William went to the Permit Office of the City. Since there was only one
City, there might be only one Permit Office, though it was not large.
“I want a permit to traverse as much of the City as my life allows me,”
William told the permit man. “I even want a permit to go to the Wood Beyond
the World. Is that possible?”
The permit man did a little skittish dance around William, “like a one-
eyed gander around a rattlesnake.” The metaphor was an old and honored
one, one of the fifty-four common metaphors. They both understood it: it
didn't have to be voiced. William was the first customer the permit man had
had in many days, though, so the visit startled him.
"Since everything is permitted, you will need no permit,” the permit man
said. "Go, man, go."
“Why are you here then?” William asked him. “If there are no permits,
why is there a Permit Office?"
“This is my niche and my notch,” the permit man said. “Do away with me
and my office and you begin to do away with the City itself. It is the custom
to take a companion when you traverse the City.”
Outside, William found a companion named Kandy Kalosh and they
began to traverse the City that was the World. They began (it was no more
than coincidence) at a marker set in stone that bore the words “Beginning of
Stencil 35,352.” The City tipped and tilted a bit, and they were on their way.
Now this is what the City was like:
It was named Will of the World City, for it had been constructed by a
great and worldwide surge of creative will. Afterward, something had
happened to that surge, but it did not matter; the City was already created
then.
The City was varied, it was joyful, it was free, and it covered the entire
world. The mountains and heights had all been removed, and the City, with
its various strips of earth and sweet water and salt water, floated on the ocean
on its interlocking floaters. As to money values, everything was free; and
everything was free as to personal movement and personal choice. It was not
really crowded except in the places where the people wanted it crowded, for
people do love to congregate. It was sufficient as to foodstuff and shelter and
entertainment. These things have always been free, really; it was their
packaging and traffic that cost, and now the packaging and traffic were
virtually eliminated.
“Work is joy" flashed the subliminal signs. Of course it is. It is a joy to
stop and turn into an area and work for an hour, even an hour and a half, at
some occupation never or seldom attempted before. William and Kandy
entered an area where persons made cloth out of clamshells, softening them
in one solution, then drawing them out to filaments on a machine, then
forming (not weaving) them into cloth on still another machine. The cloth
was not needed for clothing or for curtains, though sometimes it was used for
-
one or the other. It was for ornamentation. Temperature did not require cloth
(the temperature was everywhere equitable) and modesty did not require it,
but there was something that still required a little cloth as ornament.
William and Kandy worked for nearly an hour with other happy people on
the project. It is true that their own production was all stamped “Rejected”
when they were finished, but that did not mean that it went all the way back
to the clamshells, only back to the filament stage.
"Honest labor is never lost,” William said as solemnly as a one-horned
owl with the pip.
“I knew you were a readie, but I didn't know you were a talkie,” Kandy
said. People didn't talk much then. Happy people have no need to talk. And
of course honest labor is never lost, and small bits of it are pleasurable.
This portion of the City (perhaps all portions of the City) floated on an old
ocean itself. It had, therefore, a slight heave to it all the time. "The City is a
tidy place” was an old and honored saying. It referred to the fact that the City
moved a little with the tides. It was a sort of joke.
The two young persons came ten blocks; they came a dozen. For much of
this traverse the City had been familiar to William but not to Kandy. They
had been going west, and William had always been a westing lad. Kandy,
however, had always wandered east from her homes, and she was the farthest
west that she had ever been when she met William.
They came to the 14th Street Water Ballet and watched the swimmers.
These swimmers were very good, and great numbers of curiously shaped fish
frolicked with them in the green salt-fresh pools. Anyone who wished to
could, of course, swim in the Water Ballet, but most of the swimmers seemed
to be regulars. They were part of the landscape, of the waterscape.
William and Kandy stopped to eat at an algae-and-plankton quick-lunch
place on 15th Street. Indeed, Kandy worked there for half an hour, pressing
the plankton and adding squirts of special protein as the people ordered it.
Kandy had worked in quick-lunch places before.
The two of them stopped at the Will of the World Exhibit Hall on 16th
Street. They wrote their names with a stylus in wax when they went in, or
rather William wrote the names of both of them for Kandy could not write.
And because he bore the mystic name of William, he received a card out of
the slot with a genuine Will of the World verse on it:
This City of the World is wills
Of Willful folk, and nothing daunts it.
With daring hearts we hewed the hills
To make the World as Willy wants it.
Really, had it taken such great will and heart to build the City of the World?
It must have or there would not have been a Will of the World Exhibit Hall to
commend it. There were some folks, however, who said that the building of
the World City had been an automatic response.
Kandy, being illiterate (as the slot knew), received a picture card.
They stopped at the Cliff-Dweller Complex on 17th Street. This part of the
City was new to William as well as to Kandy.
The cliffs and caves were fabricated and not natural cliff dwellings, but
they looked very much as old cliff dwellings must have looked. There were
little ladders going up from one level to the next. There were people sitting
on the little terraces with the small-windowed apartments behind them. Due
to the circular arrangement of the cliff dwellings, very many of the people
were always visible to one another. The central courtyard was like an
amphitheater. Young people played stickball and Indian ball in this area.
They made music on drums and whistles. There were artificial rattlesnakes in
coils, artificial rib-skinny dogs, artificial coyotes, artificial women in the act
of grinding corn with hand querns. And also, in little shelters or pavilions,
there were real people grinding simulacrum corn on apparatus.
Kandy Kalosh went into one of the pavilions and ground corn for fifteen
minutes. She had a healthy love for work. William Morris made corndogs out
of simulacrum corn and seaweeds. It was pleasant there. Sometimes the
people sang simulacrum Indian songs. There were patterned blankets,
brightly colored, and woven out of bindweed. There were buffoons in masks
and buffoon suits who enacted in-jokes and in-situations that were
understood by the cliff-dwelling people only, but they could be enjoyed by
everyone.
“All different, all different, every block different,” William murmured in
rapture. It had come on evening, but evening is a vague thing. It was never
very bright in the daytime or very dark at night. The World City hadn't a
clear sky but it had always a sort of diffused light. William and Kandy
traveled still farther west.
"It is wonderful to be a world traveler and to go on forever,” William
exulted. “The City is so huge that we cannot see it all in our whole lives and
every bit of it is different.”
"A talkie you are,” Kandy said. "However did I get a talkie? If I were a
talkie too I could tell you something about that every-part-of-it-is-different
bit.”
“This is the greatest thing about the whole World City,” William sang, “to
travel the City itself for all our lives, and the climax of it will be to see the
Wood Beyond the World. But what happens then, Kandy? The City goes on
forever, covering the whole sphere. It cannot be bounded. What is beyond the
Wood Beyond the World?”
“If I were a talkie I could tell you,” Kandy said.
But the urge to talk was on William Morris. He saw an older and
somehow more erect man who wore an armband with the lettering “Monitor”
on it. Of course only a readie, or bookie, like William would have been able
to read the word.
“My name-game ancestor had to do with the naming as well as the
designing of the Wood Beyond the World,” William told the erect and smiling
man, “for I also am a William Morris. I am avid to see this ultimate wood. It
is as though I have lived for the moment."
"If you will it strongly enough, then you may see it, Willy," the man said.
“But I am puzzled,” William worried out the words, and his brow was
furrowed. “What is beyond the Wood Beyond the World?”
“A riddle, but an easy one.” The man smiled. “How is it that you are a
readie and do not know such simple things?”
“Cannot you give me a clue to the easy riddle?” William begged.
“Yes,” the man said. “Your name-game ancestor had to do with the
designing of one other particular thing besides the Wood Beyond the World."
"Come along, readie, come along," Kandy said.
They went to the West Side Show Square on 18th Street. Neither of them
had ever been to such a place, but they had heard rumors of it for there is
nothing at all like the West Side Show Square on 18th Street.
There were the great amplifiers with plug-ins everywhere. Not only were
the instruments plugged in, but most of the people were themselves plugged
in. And ah! The wonderful setting was like the backside of old tenements all
together in a rough circuit. There were period fire escapes that may even have
»
been accurate. They looked as though persons might actually climb up and down on them. Indeed, light persons had actually done this in the past, but it was forbidden now as some of the folks had fallen to death or maiming. But the atmosphere was valid. Listen, there was period washing on period clotheslines! It was flapped by little wind machines just as though there were a real wind blowing. No wonder they called this the show square. It was a glum-slum, a jetto-ghetto, authentic past time. The performing people (and all the people on that part of 18th Street seemed to be performing people) were dressed in tight jeans and scalloped or ragged shirts, and even in broken shoes full of holes. It must have been very hot for them, but art is worth it. It was a memento of the time when the weather was not everywhere equitable. There were in-dramas and in-jokes and in-situations acted out. The essence of the little dramas was very intense hatred for a group or class not clearly defined. There were many of those old-period enemy groups in the various drama locations of the City. The lights were without pattern but they were bright. The music was without tune or melody or song or chord but it was very loud and very passionate. The shouting that took the place of singing was absolutely livid. Some of the performers fell to the ground and writhed there and foamed at their mouths. It was a thing to be seen and heard—once. William and Kandy finally took their leave with bleeding ears and matter-encrusted eyes. They went along to 19th Street where there was a Mingle-Mangle. It was now as dark as it ever got in the City but the Mangle was well lighted. Certain persons at the Mangle laughingly took hold of William and Kandy and married them to each other. They had bride and groom crowns made of paper and they put them on their heads. Then they wined and dined them, an old phrase. Really, they were given fine cognac made of fish serum and braised meat made of algae but also mixed with the real chopped flesh of ancients. Then William and Kandy padded down in the great Pad Palace that was next to the Mangle. Every night there were great numbers of people along that part of 19th Street, at the Mingle-Mangle and at the Pad Palace, and most of these folks were friendly, with their glazed eyes and their dampish grins.
In the morning, Kandy Kalosh wanted to return to her home even though it was nearly twenty blocks to the eastward. William watched her go without
The world’s resources are consumed disproportionately by the intelligent classes. Therefore we will keep our own numbers drastically reduced. The wan-wits have not strong reproductive or consuming urge so long as they are kept in reasonable comfort and sustenance. They are happy, they are entertained; and when they are convinced that there is no more for them to see, they become the ancients and go willingly to the choppers. But the 2 percent or so of us superior ones are necessary to run the world. Why then do we keep the others, the simple-minded billions? We keep them for the same reason that our ancestors kept blooms or lands or animals or great houses or trees or artifacts. We keep them because we want to, and because there is no effort involved. But a great effort was made once. There was an incredible surge of will. Mountains were moved and leveled. The sky itself was pulled down, as it were. The Will of the World was made manifest. It was a new act of creation. And what is the step following creation when it is discovered that the Commonality is not worthy of the City created? When it is discovered also that they are the logical cattle to fill such great pens? The next step is hierarchies. The Angels themselves have hierarchies, and we are not less. It is those who are intelligent but not quite intelligent enough to join the Club who are imperiled and destroyed as a necessity to the operation of the City. At the Summit is always the Club. It is the Club in the sense of a bludgeon and also of an organization. Will of the World Annals—Classified Abstract
2. Pleasant most special to folks of the club! Pleasant for manifold minions and hinds of it! Stuff them with plankton and choppings and chub! Simple the City and simple the minds of it. —20th Street Ballad
sorrow. He would get a westering girl to go with him on the lifelong exploration of the endlessly varied City. He might get a girl who was a talkie or even a readie, or bookie. And he did. She was named Fairhair Farquhar, though she was actually dark of hair and of surface patina. But they started out in the early morning to attain (whether in a day or a lifetime) the Wood Beyond the World. “But it is not far at all,” Fairhair said (she was a talkie). “We can reach it this very evening. We can sleep in the Wood in the very night shadow of the famous Muggers. Oh, is the morning not wonderful! A blue patch was seen only last week, a real hole in the sky. Maybe we can see another.” They did not see another. It is very seldom that a blue (or even a starry) hole can be seen in the greenhouse glass–gray color that is the sky. The Will of the World had provided sustenance for everyone, but it was a muggy and sticky World City that provided almost equally warm from pole to pole, cloyingly fertile in both the land strips and the water strips, and now just a little bit queasy. “Run, William, run in the morning!” Fairhair cried, and she ran while he shuffled after her. Fairhair did not suffer morning sickness but most of the world did: it had not yet been bred out of the races. After all, it was a very tidy world. There was a great membrane or firmament built somewhere below, and old ocean was prisoned between this firmament and the fundamental rock of Gehenna-earth. But the ocean-monster tossed and pitched and was not entirely tamed: he was still old Leviathan. Along and behind all the streets of the World City were the narrow (their width not five times the length of a man) strips, strips of very nervous and incredibly fertile land, of salt water jumping with fish and eels and dark with tortoise and so thick with blue-green plankton that one could almost walk on it, of fresh water teeming with other fish and loggy with snapping turtles and snakes, of other fresh water almost solid with nourishing algae, of mixed water filled with purged shrimp and all old estuary life; land strips again, and strips of rich chemical water where people voided themselves and their used things and from which so many valuable essences could be extracted; other strips, and then the houses and buildings of another block, for the blocks were not long. Kaleidoscope of nervous water and land, everywhere basic and everywhere different, boated with boats on the strange overpass canals,
crossed by an infinity of bridges. “And no two alike!” William sang, his morning sickness having left him. “Every one different, everything different in a world that cannot be traversed in a lifetime. We’ll not run out of wonders!” “William, William, there is something I have been meaning to tell you,” Fairhair tried to interpose. “Tell me, Fairhair, what is beyond the Wood Beyond the World, since the world is a globe without bounds?” “The World Beyond the Wood is beyond the Wood Beyond the World,” Fairhair said simply. “If you want the Wood, you will come to it, but do not be cast down if it falls short for you.” “How could it fall short for me? I am a William Morris. My name-game ancestor had to do with the naming as well as the designing of the Wood.” “Your name-game ancestor had to do with the designing of another thing also,” Fairhair said. Why, that was almost the same thing as the monitor man had said the day before. What did they mean by it? William and Fairhair came to the great Chopper House at 20th Street. The two of them went in and worked for an hour in the Chopper House. “You do not understand this, do you, little William?” Fairhair asked. “Oh, I understand enough for me. I understand that it is everywhere different.” “Yes, I suppose you understand enough for you,” Fairhair said with a touch of near sadness. (What they chopped up in the Chopper House was the ancients.) They went on and on along the strips and streets of the ever- changing city. They came to 21st Street and 22nd and 23rd. Even a writie could not write down all the marvels that were to be found at every street. It is sheer wonder to be a world traveler. There was a carnival at 23rd Street. There were barkies, sharkies, sparkies, darkies, parkies, and markies; the visitors were the markies, but it was not really bad for them. There was the very loud music even though it was supposed to be period tingle-tangle or rinky-dink. There was a steam calliope with real live steam. There were the hamburger stands with the wonderful smell of a touch of garlic in the open air, no matter that it was ancient chopper meat and crinoid-root bun from which the burgers were made. There were games of chance, smooch houses and cooch houses, whirly rides and turning wheels, wino and steino bars and bordellos, and Monster and
Misbegotten displays in clamshell-cloth tents. Really, is anyone too old to enjoy a carnival? Then let that one declare himself an ancient and turn himself in to a Chopper House. But on and on; one does not tarry when there is the whole World City to see and it not be covered in one lifetime. On 24th (or was it 25th?) Street were the Flesh Pots; and a little beyond them was the Cat Center. One ate and drank beyond reason in the Flesh Pots region and also became enmeshed in the Flesh Mesh booths. And one catted beyond reason in the honeycomb-like cubicles of the Cat Center. Fairhair went and worked for an hour at the Cat Center; she seemed to be known and popular there. But on and on! Everywhere it is different and everywhere it is better. Along about 27th and 28th Streets were the Top of the Town and Night- Life Knoll, those great cabaret concentrations. It was gin-dizzy here; it was yesterday and tomorrow entangled with its great expectations and its overpowering nostalgia; it was loud as the West Side Show Square; it was as direct as the Mingle-Mangle or the Pad Palace. It was as fleshy as the Flesh Pots and more catty than the Cat-Center. Oh, it was the jumpingest bunch of places that William had yet seen in the City. Something a little sad there, though; something of passion and pity that was too empty and too pat. It was as though this were the climax of it all, and one didn’t want it to be the climax yet. It was as if the Top of the Town and Night-Life Knoll (and not the Wood Beyond the World) were the central things of the World City. Perhaps William slept there awhile in the sadness that follows the surfeit of flesh and appetite. There were other doings and sayings about him, but mostly his eyes were closed and his head was heavy. But then Fairhair had him up again and rushing toward the Wood in the still early night. “It is only a block, William, it is only a block,” she sang, “and it is the place you have wanted more than any other.” (The Wood began at 29th Street and went on, it was said, for the space of two full blocks.) But William ran badly and he even walked badly. He was woozy and confused, not happy, not sad, just full of the great bulk of life in the City. He’d hardly have made it to his high goal that night except for the help of Fairhair. But she dragged and lifted and carried him along in her fine arms and on her dusky back and shoulders. He toppled off sometimes and cracked his crown, but there was
never real damage done. One sometimes enters the Wood Beyond in a sort of rhythmic dream, grotesque and comic and jolting with the sway of a strong friend and of the tidy world itself. And William came in with his arms around the neck and shoulders of the girl named Fairhair, with his face buried in her hair itself, with his feet touching no ground. But he knew it as soon as they were in the Wood. He was afoot again and strong again in the middle of the fabled place itself. He was sober? No, there can be no sobriety in the Wood; it has its own intoxication. But it had real grass and weeds, real trees (though most of them were bushes), real beasts as well as artificial, real spruce cones on the turf, real birds (no matter that they were clattering crows) coming in to roost. There was the carven oak figure of old Robin Hood and the tall spar-wood form of the giant lumberjack Paul Bunyan. There was the Red Indian named White Deer who was carved from cedarwood. There was maple syrup dripping from the trees (is that the way they used to get it?), and there was the aroma of slippery elm with the night dampness on it. There were the famous Muggers from the mugger decades. They were of papier-mâché, it is true, and yet they were the most fearsome. There were other dangerous beasts in the Wood, but none like the Muggers. And William and Fairhair lay down and wept in the very night shadow of the famous Muggers for the remainder of the enchanted night. 3. “Wander-bird, wander-bird, where do you fly?” “All over the City, all under the sky.”
“Run, William, run in the morning!” Fairhair cried, and she ran while William (confused from the night) shuffled after her. “We must leave the Wood?” he asked.
“Wandr’ing through wonders of strippies and streets, Changing and challenging, bitters and sweets.”
“Wander-bird, squander-bird, should not have budged: City is sicko and sky is a smudge.” —1st Street Ballad
“Of course you must leave the Wood. You want to see the whole world, so you cannot stay in one place. You go on, I go back. No, no, don’t you look back or you’ll be turned into a salt-wood tree.” “Stay with me, Fairhair.” “No, no, you want variety. I have been with you long enough. I have been guide and companion and pony to you. Now we part.” Fairhair went back. William was afraid to look after her. He was in the world beyond the Wood Beyond the World. He noticed though that the street was 1st Street and not 31st Street as he had expected. It was still wonderful to be a world traveler, of course, but not quite as wonderful as it had been one other time. The number of the street shouldn’t have mattered to him. William had not been on any 1st Street before. Or 2nd. But he had been on a 3rd Street before on his farthest trip east. Should he reach it again on his farthest trip west? The world, he knew (being a readie who had read parts of several books), was larger than that. He could not have gone around it in thirty blocks. Still, he came to 3rd Street in great trepidation. Ah, it was not the same 3rd Street he had once visited before; almost the same but not exactly. An ounce of reassurance was intruded into the tons of alarm in his heavy head. But he was alive, he was well, he was still traveling west in the boundless City that is everywhere different. “The City is varied and joyful and free,” William Morris said boldly, “and it is everywhere different.” Then he saw Kandy Kalosh and he literally staggered with the shock. Only it did not quite seem to be she. “Is your name Kandy Kalosh?” he asked as quakingly as a one-legged kangaroo with the willies. “The last thing I needed was a talkie,” she said. “Of course it isn’t. My name, which I have from my name-game ancestor, is Candy Calabash, not at all the same.” Of course it wasn’t the same. Then why had he been so alarmed and disappointed? “Will you travel westward with me, Candy?” he asked. “I suppose so, a little way, if we don’t have to talk,” she said. So William Morris and Candy Calabash began to traverse the City that was the world. They began (it was no more than coincidence) at a marker set in stone that bore the words “Beginning of Stencil 35,353,” and thereat
William went into a sort of panic. But why should he? It was not the same
stencil number at all. The World City might still be everywhere different.
But William began to run erratically. Candy stayed with him. She was not
a readie or a talkie, but she was faithful to a companion for many blocks. The
two young persons came ten blocks; they came a dozen.
They arrived at the 14th Street Water Ballet and watched the swimmers. It
was almost, but not quite, the same as another 14th Street Water Ballet that
William had seen once. They came to the algae-and-plankton quick-lunch
place on 15th Street and to the Will of the World Exhibit Hall on 16th Street.
Ah, a hopeful eye could still pick out little differences in the huge sameness.
The World City had to be everywhere different.
They stopped at the Cliff-Dweller Complex on 17th Street. There was an
artificial antelope there now. William didn't remember it from the other time.
There was hope, there was hope.
And soon William saw an older and somehow more erect man who wore
an armband with the word “Monitor” on it. He was not the same man, but he
had to be a close brother of another man that William had seen two days
before.
“Does it all repeat itself again and again and again?” William asked this
man in great anguish. “Are the sections of it the same over and over again?"
“Not quite,” the man said. “The grease marks on it are sometimes a little
different.”
“My name is William Morris,” William began once more bravely.
“Oh, sure. A William Morris is the easiest type of all to spot,” the man
said.
“You said—no, another man said that my name-game ancestor had to do
with designing of another thing besides the Wood Beyond the World,”
William stammered. “What was it?”
"Wallpaper," the man said. And William fell down in a frothy faint.
Oh, Candy didn't leave him there. She was faithful. She took him up on her
shoulders and plodded along with him, on past the West Side Show Square
on 18th Street, past the Mingle-Mangle and the Pad Palace, where she (no,
another girl very like her) had turned back before, on and on.
“It's the same thing over and over and over again,” William whimpered as
she toted him along.
“Be quiet, talkie,” she said, but she said it with some affection.
They came to the great Chopper House on 20th Street. Candy carried
William in and dumped him on a block there.
“He's become ancient,” Candy told an attendant. “Boy, how he's become
ancient!" It was more than she usually talked.
Then, as she was a fair-minded girl and as she had not worked any stint
that day, she turned to and worked an hour in the Chopper House. (What they
chopped up in the Chopper House was the ancients.) Why, there was
William’s head coming down the line! Candy smiled at it. She chopped it up
with loving care, much more care than she usually took.
She'd have said something memorable and kind if she'd been a talkie.
a
Funnyfingers
Introduction by Andrew Ferguson
Ask a few readers of Lafferty what they treasure him for, and you'll get a lot
of the same answers. He will make you laugh, uproariously. He will show
you new possibilities inherent in language—not just in English, but many
others as well. He will provide you a vantage point on this world (and other
worlds, to boot) that flips you inside out, inverting everything you thought
you knew about the workings of fiction.
What they won't mention as often—partly because he doesn't do it that
much, and partly because it hurts so much when he does—is that he will
break your heart wide open.
"Funnyfingers" is, at its most basic level, a tale of doomed love. It isn't
spoiling anything to say that in an introduction, either, because as he often
does, Lafferty tells us what's going to happen right from the start. Here it's in
an epigram alluding to Orpheus, something you don't do unless a Eurydice is
about to be lost. With admirable narrative economy, the main character
immediately thereafter poses the central question that will lead to her
romantic impasse—who, or what, am I?—and then the reader is given several
valid answers: she is a somewhat exasperating and precocious little girl, and
she is also a young Dactyl, a creature of myth, one of a number who gave
humankind ironworking, arithmetic, and the alphabet and who (in their adult
years) remain responsible for manufacturing letters and numbers and pieces
for the entire world.
The story plays out from there, though the narrative beats and resolution
are hardly formulaic. However, Lafferty is as usual concerned with much
more than just the central relationship of his unhappy couple: he's exploring
a
humanity’s relationship with its stories, as well as his own particular relation as a channel for those myths. While Lafferty’s personal relationship experience was limited to what he could glean from others, he nonetheless understood that much of what we love about another is the stories we construct around them, myths that are deeply personal even as they partake of the universal. But when what you love is a story—or you yourself are a story —the deck is stacked against you from the start. As the young lovers in “Funnyfingers” realize to their dismay, our stories will outlive us, and in particular they will outlive their own tellers. The result is a curious (if typically Laffertian) inversion of the Orpheus legend: it’s not the stories who must be left behind to the darkness, but us. When Oread Funnyfingers traipses through the mine, assembling iron dogs or iron boys or iron philosophies, it’s us she’s putting together. And when she disassembles them at the end of play, it’s us she puts back in the spare-part bins. And, in the end, though we too feel heartbreak at the conclusion of our all-too-brief parts, it is Oread and it is Pluto, the stories themselves, who will weep iron tears.
“Who am I?” Oread Funnyfingers asked her mother one day, “and, for that matter, what am I?” “Why, you are our daughter,” the mother Frances Funnyfingers told her, “or have you been talking to someone?” “Only to myself and to my uncles in the mountain.” “Oh. Now first, dear, I want you to know that we love you very much. There was nothing casual about it. We chose you, and you are to us—” “Oh, take it easy, Mother. I know that I’m adopted. And I’m sure that you both love me very much; you tell me so often enough. But what am I really?” “You are a little girl, Oread, a somewhat exasperating and precocious little girl.” “But I don’t feel precocious. I feel like a rock-head. How can I be a little bit like Papa and not anything like anyone else at all? What was the connection between myself and Papa?” “There wasn’t any at first, Oread, not like that. We were looking for a child since we could not have one of our own. I fell in love with you at first sight because you reminded me of Henry. And Henry fell in love with you at first sight because you reminded him of Henry. Henry was always the favorite person of both myself and Henry. That’s a joke, dear. But not entirely; my husband is so delightfully boyish and self-centered. Now run out and play.”
Funnyfingers
“—and Pluto, Lord of Hell, wept when Orpheus played to him that lovely phrase from Gluck—but these were iron tears.” —H. Belloc, On Tears of the Great
“No, I think I’ll run in and play.” “Oh, but it’s so dark and dirty and smoky in there.” “And it’s so light and unsmoky everywhere else, Mama,” Oread said, and she ran inside the mountain to play. Well, the house and the shop of Henry Funnyfingers backed onto the mountain. It was really only a low but steep foot-hill to the Osage Hills. This was on the northwest fringe of the city. The shop was the typewriter repair shop of Henry the father of Oread. You wouldn’t know that from the sign out front, though. The sign said “Daktylographs Repaired Here, Henry Funnyfingers.” The shop part of the building was half into and under the hill. Behind the shop was a dimly lit parts room that was entirely under the hill. And behind this were other parts rooms, one after the other, rock-walled and dark, rockier and darker as one went on, all deep under the hills. And these continued, on and on, as tunnel and cavern without apparent end. In these places of total darkness, if only one knew where to reach in which pot, there was to be found every part for every sort of machine in the world; or so Henry Funnyfingers said. Oread ran through room after room, through passage after passage in the blackness. She drew parts from the pots and the furnaces as she ran. She put the parts together, and it barked remindfully. “What have I forgotten?” Oread asked. “Ah, Rusty, I’ve given you only one ear. I’m sorry.” She took the other ear from the Other Ear Pot as she ran past, and she put it on him. Then she had an iron dog complete. It would run and play and bark after her in the tunnels under the mountain. “Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three! Come out of the mountain and play with me.” Oread sang that. Sometimes the three Mountain Uncles were busy (they had to make numbers and letters and pieces for the whole world) and couldn’t come to play. But almost always one of them came, and Kelmis came today. Kelmis was the smoky smelly one, but Oread didn’t mind that. He was full of stories, he was full of fun, he was full of the hot darkness-fire from which anything can be made. It was great fun there through all the afternoon and evening, as they are called out in the light. But then Kelmis had to go back to work. Oread and the iron dog Rusty ran back up the passages toward the house.
She took the dog apart as they went back and put each piece into its proper
pot. Last of all she put its bark in the bark pot, and she came up through the
shop and into the inside of the house for supper.
"Oh, Oread, however do you get so smoky and smelly?" mother Frances
Funnyfingers asked her. "Why don't you play out in the sunshine like other
girls do? Why don't you play with other girls and boys?”
“I made an iron boy to play with once, Mama,” Oread said. “You wouldn't
believe how he carried on or the things he wanted to do. I had the devil's own
time taking him apart again. That's the last boy I ever make, I tell you.
They're tricky."
“Yes, as I remember it, they are,” Frances conceded. “Whatever do you
make your stories out of, Oread?”
"Oh, I make them out of iron," Oread told her seriously. "Iron is what
everything is made out of first. The pieces are all there in the pots and the
furnaces. You just put them together.”
"Pieces of stories, Oread?”
"Oh yes.
"
"Iron stories, girl?”
"Oh, yes, yes, iron stories."
"You are funny-fingers and funny-face and funny-brains," the mother told
her. “I think I'll have you eat your supper off an iron plate with iron spoon
and knife.”
"Oh, may I? I'll go make them," Oread cried.
“Make me a set while you're at it,” father Henry Funnyfingers said.
"No, Oread. Sit down and eat your supper from what we have, both of
you.” Frances Funnyfingers loved her husband and her daughter, but
sometimes they puzzled her.
We cannot honestly say that Oread grew up; we can hardly say that she grew
older. She finally started school when she was nine years old, and she looked
as though she were four or five. Going to school was only for seemliness
anyhow. Oread already knew everything. She got on well. She was a peculiar
little girl, but she didn't know it. She gave disconcerting answers in class, but
nobody could say that they were wrong answers. What difference does it
make which end you start and answer at? She was a strange, smiling little
girl, and she was liked by most of her schoolmates. Those who didn't like
her, feared her; and why should anyone fear so small a creature as Oread
Funnyfingers? They feared her because she said, “Be good to me or I'll make
an iron wolf to eat you up.” She would have done it, and they knew she
would have done it.
And she always got her homework and got it right. She had, what seemed
to her mother, an unscholarly way of doing it, though. She would take her
books or her printed assignments. She would walk singing through the shop,
through the parts room, through the other parts rooms behind that, and down
into the passages in the toes of the hills.
"Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
Make ready all pots where the answers may be.”
Oread would sing so. Then she would pick the iron answers out of the
answer pots. She'd put them together by subjects. She would stamp them
onto her papers, and they would mark all the answers correct in her
handwriting. So she would have the Catechism, the Composition, the
questions on the Reading, the Arithmetic all perfect. Then she'd drop all the
iron answers back into the answer pots where they would melt themselves
down to iron slag again.
“Don't you think that's cheating?” her mother would ask her. “What if all
the other children got their homework that way?”
“They couldn't unless they were funnyfingers,” Oread said. “The hot iron
answers would burn their hands clear off unless they were funnyfingers. No,
it isn't cheating. It's just knowing your subject.”
"I guess so then," mother Frances said. There were so many things she
didn't understand about her husband Henry (“He's boyish, like a boy, like an
iron boy," she'd say), and about her daughter (“She's like an owl, like a little
owl, a little iron owl”). Neither Henry nor Oread liked the daylight very
much, but they always faced it as bravely as they could.
One day Oread found her mother in tears, yet there was happy salt in
them. “Look," the mother Frances said. She had a valentine, an iron valentine
that Henry had given her. There was an iron heart on it and an iron verse:
"
a
“When you are dead five hundred years
Who once were full of life,
I'll think of you with salty tears,
And take another wife.”
“Oh, it's nice, Mama,” Oread said.
“But of iron?" Frances asked.
“Oh yes, the very first rimes were made out of iron, you know.”
"And what of the five hundred years?"
"I think it's considerate that he would wait five hundred years after you
die to take another wife.”
“Yes, I suppose so, Oread.” But Frances wasn't completely at ease with
her family.
Henry always made a good living from his typewriter repair shop, or rather
,
he made a good living from his parts stocks in the rooms behind. Other
dealers and repairmen, not just of typewriters but of everything, came to him
for parts. His prices were reasonable, and there was never a part that he didn't
have. A dealer would rattle off the catalog number of something for a tractor
or a hay-baler or a dishwasher. “Just a minute,” Henry Funnyfingers would
say, and he would plunge into his mysterious back rooms. He had a comical
little song he would croon to himself as he went:
"Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
Now this is the number, Oh make it for me!”
And in a second, with the last word of the song just out of his mouth, he'd
be back with the required part still hot in his hand. He never missed. Parts of
combines, parts of electric motors, parts for Fords, he could come up with all
of them instantly with only a catalog number or the broken piece itself or
even a vague description to go on. And he did repair typewriters quicker and
better than anyone in town. He wasn't rich, he was fearful of becoming rich;
but he did well, and nobody in the Funnyfinger family wanted for anything.
When they were in the sixth grade, Oread had a boyfriend. He was a Syrian
boy named Selim Elia. He was dark and he was handsome. He looked the
veriest little bit as though he were made of iron; that was the main reason that
Oread liked him. And he seemed to suspect entirely too much about the
funnyfingers; she thought that was a reason that she'd better like him.
"When you grow up (Oh, Oread, will you ever grow up?) I'm going to
marry you,” Selim said boldly.
"Of course I'll grow up. Doesn't everyone?” Oread said. “But you won't
be able to marry me.”
"Why not, little horned owl?”
“I don't know. I just feel that we won't be grown up at the same time.”
“Hurry up then, little iron-eyes, little basilisk-eyes," Selim said. “I will
marry you."
They got along well. Selim was very protective of little Oread. They liked
each other. What is wrong with people liking each other?
When in the eighth grade, Oread made a discovery about Sister Mary Dactyl,
the art teacher for all the grades. Sister Mary D seemed to be very young.
“But she can't be that young,” Oread told Selim. “Some of the mythological
things she draws, they've been gone a long time. She has to be old to have
seen them.”
“Oh, she draws them from old stories and old descriptions,” Selim said,
"or she just draws them out of her imagination.”
“A couple of them she didn't draw out of her imagination,” Oread insisted.
“She had to have seen them.” That, however, wasn't the discovery.
Sister was drawing something very rapidly one day, and she forgot that
someone with very rapid eyes might be watching her hands. Oread saw, and
she waited around after class.
"You are a funnyfingers,” she said to Sister. “All your fingers are triple-
jointed like mine. They can move fast as light like mine. I bet you can pick
up iron parts out of the hot pots without getting burned.”
“Sure I can,” said Sister M.D.
“But are you a funnyfingers all the way?” Oread asked. “Papa says that, in
the old language, our name Funnyfingers meant both funny-fingers and
funny-toes. Are you?”
“Sure I am,” said the very young-looking Sister Mary Dactyl. She took off
her shoes and stockings. Sisters didn't do that very often in the classroom
then. Now, of course they go everywhere barefooted and in nothing but a
transparent short shift, but that wasn't so when Oread Funnyfingers was still
in the eighth grade.
Yes, Sister was a funny-toes also. She had the triple-jointed fast-as-vision
toes. She could do more things with her toes than other people could do with
their fingers.
“Did you have a little hill or mountain when you were young, I mean
when you were a girl?” Oread asked her.
"Oh, yes, yes, I have it still, an interior mountain.”
“How old are you, sister who always looks so young and pretty?”
"Very old, Oread, very old.”
”
"How old?"
“Ask me again in eight years, Oread, if you still want to know.”
"In eight years? Oh, all right, I will."
High school went by, four years just like a day. Selim had made a big twisted
hammered iron thing that said “Selim Loves Oread.” He suspected something
very strongly about the iron. But he wasn't a funny-fingers, so it took him
three weeks instead of three seconds to make the thing. Many other things
happened in those four years, but they were all happy things so there is no
use mentioning them.
When they were in and almost through college (Oread still looked like a
nine- or ten-year-old, and this was maddening) they were into some very
intricate courses. Selim was veritable genius, and Oread always knew in
which pots the answers might be found, so the two of them qualified for the
profound fields. It is good to have a piece of the deep raw knowledge as it
births, it is good to see the future lifted out of the future pots.
“We have come to the point where we must invent a whole new system of
concepts and symbols,” said the instructor of one powerful course one day.
“Little girl, what are you doing in this room,” he added to Oread. “This is a
college building and a college course.”
“I know it. We've been through this every day for a year,” she said.
“We are as much at a crossroads as was mankind when the concept of a
crossroads was first invented," the instructor continued. "If that concept
(excluding choice pictured graphically with simple diverging lines) had not
been invented, mankind would have remained at that situation, unchoosing
and merely accepting. There are dozens of cases where mankind has
remained in a particular situation for thousands of years for failure to invent a
particular concept. I suspect that is the situation here; we have not moved in a
I
certain area because we have not entertained the possibility of movement in
that area. A whole new concept is needed, but I cannot even conceive what
that concept should be.”
"Oh, I'll make it for you tonight,” Oread said.
“Has that little girl wandered into the class again today?” the instructor
asked with new irritation. “Oh yes, I remember now, you always come up
with some sort of proof that you're an enrolled member of the class and that
you're twenty-one years old. You're not, though. You're just a little girl with
little-girl brains.”
"Oh, I know it,” Oread said sadly, "but I'll still make the thing for you
tonight.”
“Make what thing, little girl?”
“The new concept, and the symbol set that goes with it.
“And just what does one make a concept out of?” that man asked her with
near exasperation.
"I'll make it mostly out of iron, I think,” Oread said. “I'll use whatever is
in the pots, but I guess it will be mostly iron.”
“Oh God help us!” the man cried out.
“Such a nice expression,” Oread told him, “and somebody had told me
that you were an unbeliever.”
"
* *
"Actually,” said the instructor, controlling himself and talking to the rest of
the class and not to Oread Funnyfingers. “Actually, these things often appear
simple in retrospect. So may this be if ever we are able to make it retro. The
ABCs, the alphabet isn't very hard, is it? Yes, Mr. Levkovitch, I know all
about those hard letters after C. A little humor, it is said, is a tedious thing.
But the alphabet was a hard thing when mankind stood at the foothills—”
"En daktulos, at the toes of, that's what the original form of the expression
>
"
was,” Oread told him.
"Be quiet, little girl,” the instructor muttered darkly. “—when mankind
stood at the foothills of the alphabetical concept and looked up at the
mountain, it was hard then.”
"Yes, the first alphabets were all made out of hammered iron," Oread told
the world, “and they were quite hard.”
“The same was the case with simple arithmetic,” said the instructor,
disregarding Oread with a deep sigh. “It is easy as we look back on it in its
ordered simplicity. But when it was only a crying need and not yet a real
concept, then it was hard, very hard."
“Sure, it was made out of iron too,” Oread whispered to Selim. “Why does
he get so mad when I tell him about things being made out of iron?”
"It's just a weakness of the man, Oread," Selim whispered. “We'll have to
accept it.”
“And so we are probably at an end,” the instructor was ending his class for
the day. “If we cannot come up with a new dimension, with a
symbolism, with a new thought and a new concept (having no idea at all what
they should be) then we might as well end this class forever. We might as
well, as a matter of likely fact, end the world forever. And on that somber
note I leave you till tomorrow, if there should be a tomorrow.”
“Don't worry, Mr. Zhelezovitch,” Oread said. “I'll make it for you
tonight.”
new
2.
The name Daktuloi (Fingers) is variously explained from their
number being five or ten, or because they dwelt at the foot (en
daktulois) of Mount Ida. The original number seems to have been
three: i.e., Kelmis the smelter, Damnameneus the hammer, and
Acmon the anvil. This number was afterward increased to five,
then to ten ... and finally to one hundred.
-Harper's Dictionary of Classical Literature and Antiquities
In the forests of Phrygian Ida there lived cunning magicians
called the Dactyls. Originally there were three of them. Celmis,
Damnameneus, and the powerful Acmon who in the caves of the
mountains was the first to practice the art of Hephaestus and who
Just after closing time that evening, Oread Funnyfingers went by City Museum to see Selim. Selim Elia worked as night watchman there to help pay his way through the University. There really wasn’t much to do on the job. He sat at a big administrator’s desk and studied all night. Studying all night every night is how he got to be a genius. Oread had brought some sandwiches with her. “Peanut-butter and jelly sandwiches made out of iron,” Selim joked. “No, they’re not of iron,” Oread said solemnly. “One would need iron teeth to eat an iron sandwich.” “Surely a funnyfingers could manage iron teeth.” “Oh, our third set comes in iron, but for me that should be many years yet.” “Oread, I want to marry you.” “Everyone calls you a cradle-robber.” “I know they do. And yet we’re almost exactly the same age.” “There’s so many people here,” Oread said. “Terra Cotta People, Marble People, Sandstone People, Basalt People, Raffia People, Wooden People, Wax People. I will have to find out from my uncles which ones are real. Some of them aren’t, you know; some of them never lived at all.” “We have one of your friends or uncles here, Oread, in wax. Over here.” “I know where. You have all three of my uncles here in wax,” Oread said. “You might not recognize them from the forms of their names on the plaques, though. “Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
knew how to work blue iron, casting it into the burning furnace. Later their number increased. From Phrygia they went to Crete where they taught the inhabitants the use of iron and how to work metals. To them is also attributed the discovery of arithmetic and the letters of the alphabet. —Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology
It is also said of the Dactyls (the Finger-Folk inside the hills) that they live very long lives and retain their youthful appearance for very many years. —Groff Crocker, Mear-Daoine
Come out of your cases and play with me. “I don’t think they’ll come out though, Selim, since they’re made out of wax instead of iron. Effigies should always be made out of iron.” “What do their names mean, Oread?” “Oh Smelter, Oh Anvil, Oh Hammer all three, Come out of your cases and play with me. “No, they won’t come out. I’d have to be a bee-brain to evoke anything out of wax.” “Oread, I love you very much.” “No, they won’t come out at all. I’ll have them come over here themselves some night and make iron effigies of themselves. Then you can get rid of those silly wax ones.” “Little iron-ears, I said that I loved you very much.” “Oh, I heard you. You won’t be alarmed when they come out some night to make the effigies? They’re kind of funny-looking.” “So are you, Oread. No, I won’t be alarmed. Why should a Syrian be alarmed over fabulous people? We’re fabulous people ourselves. And if they’re your uncles they cannot be dangerous.” “Sure they can. I am. You said yourself that I’d set the flaming ducks after you again. I go home now, Selim, to get my homework made, and also to make that concept-symbol system for Mr. Zhelezovitch the instructor. It’s important, isn’t it?” “I’ll go with you, Oread. Yes, it’s important to Zhelly and to the class and the course. It’s true that he might as well end the class forever if he doesn’t find it. But it isn’t true that we might as well end the world if we don’t find it. It’s not quite that important.” “Who will watch the museum if you leave? I want very much to make this correctly and understandably for Mr. Zhelezovitch. I am a Funnyfinger, and making things for people is the whole business and being of the funnyfingers.” “Oh, tell Kelmis to watch the place for me. Will it take long for them and you to make the concept?” “Oh watch it for Selim, and watch it real nice, Oh Kelmis, from rotters and robbers and mice. “Sure, he’ll watch it for you. Even a Waxman-Kelmis will be faithful in that. Oh no, they never take very long to make anything for anybody any
more.” (Time had slipped by, though not much of it; Selim had a sporty car
that he drove like a flaming rocket; and it wasn't very far to the northwest
side of town. They were out at the Funnyfingers' place now, and into the
back, back rooms that turned into tunnels.) “They never take very long to
make things anymore," Oread was continuing, “not since that time, you
know, when God got a little bit testy with them on Sinai when there was a
little delay. They first made the tablets out of iron entirely, and they wouldn't
do. They had to make them out of slate-stone with the iron letters inset in it,
and the iron had to be that alloy known as command iron. Since then they are
all pretty prompt with everyone, and they follow instructions exactly. You
never know who it really is who places an order.
“Kelmis has the original all-iron set. I'll get him to show them to you
some time.”
"Where do you get your stories, Oread?”
“I tell my mother that I make them out of iron.”
"And where do you really get them?"
“I make them out of iron.”
"
Selim talked easily with the three uncles while they wrought and hammered
the white-hot parts that Oread was to assemble into a symbol concept.
“How is it that you work inside a little hill in Oklahoma?” he asked them.
“Shouldn't you be in the forests or hills of Phrygian Ida? How did you come
to leave the Old Country?”
“This is the Old Country, and we haven't left it,” powerful Acmon said.
“Everything underground anywhere is part of the Old Country. All hills and
mountains of the world connect down in their roots, in their toes, and they
make a single place. We are in Mount Ida, we are in Crete, we are in
Oklahoma. It is all one.”
They made the pieces. And Oread, dipping the parts out of the white-hot
iron as if it were water, put them together to make the thing. It was a new
concept-symbol system, and it looked as if it would work.
And it looked much more as if it would work the next afternoon. Mr.
Zhelezovitch the instructor was almost out of his mind with it. The graduate
students and the regular students (for this was one of those advanced, mixed
classes) crowded about it and went wild. The implications of the new thing
would tumble in their minds for weeks; the class would be a marathon affair
going on and on as the wonderful new things were put to work to uncover
still more wonderful things. The stars were out when Oread and Selim left the
class, and no one else would leave it at all that night. But these two had
something between them, and it might take another new concept to solve it.
“Oread, give me your answer,” Selim was saying again. “I want to marry
you."
“Make a wish on a star then. On that one where I'm pointing.”
“Triple jointed funnyfingers, who can tell where you're pointing?"
“On that male star there between the several eunuch stars."
“Yes, I see the one you mean, Oread. I make a wish. Now, when will you
answer me?”
“Within a half hour. I go to question two people first.”
I
Oread left there at a run. She went home. She talked to her mother.
“Mama, why is my father so boyish? Is he really just a boy?”
"Yes he is, Oread. Just a boy."
“After some years would he be a man, really, and not just a pleasant young
kid?”
"I think so, Oread, yes."
“Then after some years you two could have children of your own? Being a
funnyfingers isn't an obstacle?”
"I'll never know that, Oread. When he is grown up I will be long dead."
Oread ran out of there and ran to the convent that was behind the school she
used to attend. She entered and went upstairs and down a hallway. She knew
where she was going. One funnyfingers can always find another one.
Besides, the eight years was up. She opened the door and found Sister Mary
Dactyl playing solitaire with iron cards.
“How old?” Oread asked.
“Three hundred and fifty-eight years,” said Sister M.D. without looking
up. “Were I not vowed, I would be coming to the family age now.”
Oread ran all the way back to where Selim was still waiting in the street
under the stars. She was crying, she was bawling.
“The answer is no,” she blubbered. Selim, under the stars, was as white-
faced as it is possible for a Syrian to be. But he must not give up.
“Oread, I love you more than you can know,” he said. “Maybe we can
make a different answer out of iron,” he proposed in desperate jest.
“This is the iron answer,” she bawled, "and the answer is no.” She ran
away too fast to follow.
Deep under the hills Oread was crying. She was weeping big hot tears.
They weren't, however, iron tears that she wept. That part is untrue.
The tears were actually of that aromatic flux of salt and rosin that
wrought-iron workers employ in their process.
.
Thieving Bear Planet
Introduction by Jeff VanderMeer
“Anomalies are messy,” R. A. Lafferty writes at the beginning of “Thieving
Bear Planet,” and the reader might be forgiven for thinking Lafferty was
referring to his own career and body of work. But, in fact, he's referring to
the alien thieving bears of the title, which follow their own peculiar set of
rules. Too often science fiction gives us humans in uncanny bear suits, so to
speak, when it comes to aliens. But Lafferty in this story and several others
manages to create deeply strange and original alien encounters that both
unsettle the reader and send up traditional science fiction approaches.
As ever with Lafferty, too, he manages feats of compression that are
beyond most writers. Take the deliberately blithe reference to a Directory and
Delineation of Planets, which, in offering an entry on the Thieving Bear
Planet, tries from the start to impose a cage of logic on the unknowable, with
its catalog of the usual planetary attributes, even if it destabilizes its authority
in the same instant by including irrational statements from a former explorer
of the planet. Or take Lafferty's riotous description of the current
expedition's gastronome's delight of a meal—which proves to be a great set-
up to the stealing of the thieving bears, who are not just robbing the
explorers' very stomachs of plain old pork-and-beans, but a sumptuous feast,
that the reader may feel the loss quite viscerally. These are lovely stories
within the main story, little whirlpools of magnificent narrative energy.
“Visceral” is a key word when thinking of Lafferty's triumphs, alongside
"weird.” In, again, a condensed tale-like form Lafferty accomplishes what
some space operas take trilogies to get to. A space opera, in its finest form, is
just a mimic: a commercial delivery system for some of the strangest
moments and situations in science fiction. (See: early Alastair Reynolds, for
example.) With Lafferty, the traditional tropes of SF—alien contact, alien
invasion, the noble exploration of space—are jewels he likes to put beneath
tattered overturned cups, daring the reader to bet on where in the world the
true treasure lies. But beware—when you pin down the location of that
treasure, it'll likely change shape, grow legs, and hop off the table.
This applies even to the thieving bears of the title, who take on a
marvelous initial form, able to fly not so much because of having lightweight
bones but because they're almost like drifting toupees in structure. The
mimicry they are capable of seems cute at first and then horribly brutal as the
explorers become caught up in events they cannot control. Yet even then,
Lafferty isn't content, restless. It would have been easy enough for him to
take the initial set-up to a very satisfying conclusion, but instead he roughs up
and destabilizes his own story with the second act, which makes the reader
question ... well, everything. Is all that occurs just a joke by the thieving
bears? Is there some other animating impulse at work? How is it that this
Jenga-like structure Lafferty creates doesn't fall and crash to the ground?
Along with many other complexities, then, “Thieving Bear Planet”
chronicles the impossibility of comprehension of the alien, the war between
the logical and illogical in ourselves that spills out into the cosmos beyond-
all in the context of the certain knowledge that human beings will never know
everything about this world, let alone the next, or the universes we inhabit.
And that there is something wonderful about that fact.
Not many writers could grapple with such ideas and create a story that's
both so creepy and so funny and in the moment, but as in Lafferty's best work
in general, the author manages to channel a narrative momentum and a kind
of joy in the very act of outrageous and madcap invention that provides unity,
depth, and, yes, even a kind of beautiful closure.
Thieving Bear Planet
"Deliver me from carks and cares,
Deliver me from Thieving Bears.”
—John Chancel, Logs and Epilogs of Sector 24
A simple explanation was needed for the conditions on Thieving Bear Planet.
It was needed because, as the great Reginald Hot had phrased it, “Anomalies
are messy.”
Every decade or so, somebody with a passion for regularity takes over the
administration of the Directory and Delineation of Planets, that massive
cataloging operation, and makes a new survey of the anomalies. And there
was not any way that such a survey could miss Thieving Bear Planet.
"It offers no threat to human life or activity, no danger to bodily health,
and only slight danger to mental health," the great John Chancel had written
about it a century before this. "It has almost uniformly ideal climate, though
it is not a place to generate sudden wealth. It is serene in environment and in
ecological balance, and it is absolutely caressing in its natural beauty. But it
does have a strange effect on some of its visitors. It forces them to write
things that are untrue, as it is forcing me to do at this moment.” That was an
odd thing to write in a ship’s log.
And, as one later old hand put it, “There is nothing to conquer here. It is a
poorly endowed and counterproductive world. And everything goes wrong
here. I will say this for it: things go wrong here in the most pleasant way
possible. But they do go wrong.'
Now another expedition consisting of six explorers—George Mahoon (he
was wrestler-big, and with a groping, grappling, leverage-seeking wrestler-
mind); Elton Fad (he was long on information and short on personal
incandescence); Benedict Crix-Crannon (buff and charming, and he knew all
the jobs of the expedition); Luke Fronsa (he was a “comer,” as they said in
the department, but wasn't he a little bit overage in grade as a "comer"
now?); Selma Last-Rose (what can you say after you say that somebody has
everything?); Gladys Marclair (pleasant, capable, but she wasn't a genius,
and genius was really required for an explorer); and Dixie Late-Lark (sheer
Spirit, she!)—had set down on Thieving Bear Planet. These were not the
most experienced explorers in the Service, but they were among the newest
and freshest. And they had already demonstrated that they were top people at
clearing up anomalies.
“It's a pleasant place, but not good for much," George Mahoon said before
they had been there ten minutes. “Why didn't the earlier explorers simply say
that it was ‘Only marginally or submarginally productive, indicated by fast
scans to be poor in both radioactive and base metals and also in rare earths
and fossil fuels, not recommended for development in the present century
when so many better places are available,' or some such thing as that? Why
did they put so much stuttering gibberish in their reports? I'm going to like it
here, though. It's nice for a brief vacation."
“Oh, I'm going to like it too,” Selma Last-Rose spoke in her curious rat-a-
tat-tat voice. “There must be a puzzle here, and I like puzzles. And there's a
minor mystery in this ‘Plain of the Old Spaceships.' I may as well solve
that.”
They had landed in a clear place on the Plain of the Old Spaceships. Here
there were remarkable full-scale drawings or schematics of old spaceships,
twelve of them in two-thirds of a circle, from the earliest to the latest, going
clockwise on the ground. What medium these schematics were done in was
not certain, but the lush grass refrained from growing on the lines of them
and so marked them off. The "drawings” showed the circle-spheres of the
spaceships and their fore and aft bulges. They gave accurate indication of the
interior bulkheads. This was really a life-sized museum of ships that lacked
only substance and the dimension of height.
"I recall two passages in the log of the ship Sorcerer about this plain or
meadow," Elton Fad said. “The first of them stated, “Some of our party
believe that the plain of the ships was actually done by the Thieving Bears in
a historical marker sort of response, but I myself do not credit the little
a
beasties with that much intelligence.' And there was a later entry in another
hand, “The Thieving Bears really did make those schematics-in-the-grass
memorials of all the spaceships that had been here, but they didn't do it in
any way that we had imagined.' But that latter log entry, like latter entries of
several of the explorers, had been written in something other than ink.
“Well, I'll imagine a few ways that the little buggers could have done it,
and I'll test it somehow. I'll ask them how they did it. If the tittering little
obscenities have any intelligence at all, I'll find a way to ask them."
The "tittering little obscenities,” the Thieving Bears, were not much like
bears. They were more like large flying squirrels, and they did glide on the
winds, apparently for sport. They were more like pack rats (the Neotoma
cinerea of Earth) both in appearance and in their thieving ways, but larger. It
was old John Chancel who had named the species “Ursus furtificus, the
Thieving Bears." Oh, the explorers had their introduction to the thieving of
the little animals within five minutes of planet-landing. The creatures came
into the ship itself and got into places that should have been impossible to
them. They stole Selma's candy and Dixie's snuff. They stole (by drinking it
on the spot) George Mahoon's “He-Man Scent—Cinnamon,” thirteen bottles
of it, but they did not drink any of the other scents. They went wild over
mustard, emptying whole containers of it and then wheezing in delicious
agony from the effect. Elton Fad tried to drive them away with heavy sticks.
They fastened onto the sticks while he swung them and ate them right up to
his hands. They were funny, but they could become infuriating. They stole
six of Dixie Late-Lark's French horror story novels.
That wouldn't be fatal to her. She had lots of them.
“They're going to sample them,” Dixie said. (She herself looked a little bit
like one of those Thieving Bears.) “They'll be the test. If they do read them
and appreciate them, it'll prove that they're intelligent creatures and have
better reading tastes than my crewmates. That will be a start in analyzing
them, something to put into the electronic notebooks."
Could the Thieving Bears talk? That was not determined for sure within
the first ten or even twenty minutes.
“Say ‘Good morning,' fuzzy head,” Selma rattled at one of the creatures.
“Say good morning, fuzzy head," it bear-barked back at her. Well, it had
the right number of syllables, and the right rhythm and stress. And the bear-
barks did resemble Selma's rattling words. And whenever the bears answered
one of the persons, it answered in that person’s own timbre. The bears began to imitate the people quickly, and there was never any doubt as to which person was being imitated. The tittering that went with the imitations, though! Ooooh, that could become tiresome after a little while. “Tittering little obscenities,” yes. Could the Thieving Bears read? ’Twould be known in a bit, maybe. The bears had gotten into those big lockers that were full of comic books and had stolen big bunches of them. These comic books from the Trader Planets were now collector’s items on Old Earth, and they generated quite a profit. The wonderful things should be collector’s items everywhere. Some of the big Thieving Bears were “reading” those comic books to some of the little Thieving Bears, reading them in the Thieving Bears’ own barking talk. And some of the little bears would bark their excitement and incredulity at parts of the narration and would come and look at the pictures and the worded balloons themselves. And then there would be that damned tittering! It was clear that the big bears believed that they were reading, and that the little bears believed they were understanding. But the wording in the comic book balloons was in the Gno-Pidgin dialect of the Trader Planets, and people from the Traders had never been to Thieving Bear Planet. It was almost too much to believe that “Sangster’s Syndrome Intuitive Translation” was being practiced by animals below the level of conceptual thinking. Then some of the little bears were clearly acting out episodes from the comic books (very subtle episodes, according to Benedict Crix-Crannon, who had total knowledge of the content of all the comic books from the lockers). Well, there was no easy explanation for that. The explorers treated themselves to a bonus meal within an hour of their arrival, after things were pretty well settled down. On a new world, they did this only when they had complete confidence that everything was under control. It was a traditional Earth-hearty meal, though it was from a packet of such bonus meals that had been packaged on Trader Planet Number Four. There were ten-centimeter-thick Cape buffalo steaks, mountains of Midland mushrooms, Camiroi currants and Astrobe apples, Elton eels, Wrack World rye bread, “Galaxy” brand goat butter, Rain Mountain coffee, Rumboat cordials, and Ganymede cigars (“They have an aroma that outlasts the Everlasting Hills,” a testimonial said of those perfectos).
“Logs of earlier explorers say that there is no real enjoyment in eating on Thieving Bear Planet because of the harassment of the bears,” Benny Crix- Crannon gloated. “Well, I’m enjoying this meal (another bumper of Rumboat cordial, Luke, please), and I’d like to see anybody take that enjoyment away from me.” And yet the enjoyment and savor of that grand meal began to disappear almost at that moment. How? Oh, it was just that all the items of their enjoyment were being mysteriously stolen away from them. “All the rest of Dixie’s snuff has been stolen by the bears now,” Gladys said. “That’s too bad. She loves it so much. If all her idiosyncrasies are stolen away, it’s as if she is stolen away too.” “And another thirty or so of Dixie’s French horror story novels have been stolen by the bears,” Elton Fad grumbled. “She’s bound to be frustrated by that. We should insist on fair play from the bears.” “Her gold snuffboxes have been stolen, too,” Selma Last-Rose lamented. “How mean of the bears! The snuffboxes were valuable, even for the gold.” “And her hookah pipe is gone,” Luke Fronsa complained. “What will the bears steal next?” “I don’t know,” George Mahoon wondered, “but Dixie Late-Lark has herself been stolen now, or at least she’s gone. She could not have gone out unrecorded, for the ship is on full security. And yet the ship itself registers that she is no longer on board. She was sitting between you and Selma, was she not, Gladys?” “She was, yes, just a moment ago, on the chair between the two of us. But there isn’t any chair between us now, and there couldn’t have been; there isn’t any room for one. She must have been sitting on something else. Oh, that damned tittering! I wonder how they stole her and what they did with her.” “Be rational, Gladys,” Luke said. “There’s no way the little bears could have stolen Dixie Late-Lark.” “Then where did she go? And how?” “I don’t know,” Mahoon admitted, “and I don’t believe that any of us know. All at once, it doesn’t seem very important. Ah, I’m queasy. Yes, and I’m hungry. After a perfect bonus meal, I shouldn’t be either. Fortunately, I had plugged myself into the ship’s monitor, because of early reports of anomalies on Thieving Bear Planet, reports of the well-feeling and the wits of the explorers being stolen away. All right, monitor, what has gone wrong
with me?” The ship’s monitor spilled it all out. It was in coded chatter. “But we all understand the coded chatter just like our mother’s milk,” as Dixie had once said. All of them were completely tuned to the code of their own ship. And each of them put it into words automatically. “Essential food value suddenly stolen from your ingested food,” the monitor chattered. “Pepsin stolen from your stomach, thalmatite stolen from your thalamus, thyroxine stolen from your pharynx, Cape buffalo essence stolen from your esophagus and stomach, mushrooms and currants and apples stolen from your lower stomach and small intestine, rum alcohol stolen from your stomach and ileum and bloodstream, and normal blood alcohol and blood sugar stolen as part of the same theft. Slurry of rye bread and butter and coffee stolen from your paunch and antrum stomach. Essence of Elton eels stolen from some saltwater swamp of you. And at the same time, insulin and glucagon are stolen from your pancreas, hepatocytes and bile salts from your bile duct and duodenum; and words, ideas, and inklings have been swiped from several parts of your brain. No wonder you’re queasy and hungry at the same time.” “Thank you, ship’s monitor,” George Mahoon said. “Well, it seems that I’ve been infected by some microbe or germ or virus. I’ll take a few of the anti-anti pills to quell the infection.” “Forget the anti-anti pills, George!” Elton Fad cried angrily. “I think we should take a couple of steel bars and teach the Thieving Bears a lesson. There are microbes and germs and viruses infecting me too, but they are about half my own size and are known as the Thieving Bears. Damn those tittering little idiots! They’re beginning to intrude too intimately with their thefts and their eatings; but I don’t know how they’re doing these things so interiorly. Sometimes I wish I’d gone into the family business and never become an explorer at all.” Elton Fad’s family was in eels: they were big and rich people in eels. A little doll made out of wax and rags, with thorns and pins and needles sticking clear through it, and with its throat cut horribly, came sailing through the air and landed on the table where all the explorers had just finished their fine meal that had lost its power just after passing its climax. The tortured little doll had Dixie Late-Lark’s face on it. Its mouth was wide open and it was screaming silently and horribly.
"At least we know that the bears can read and absorb world-French,"
Gladys Marclair laughed. And they all laughed. “They couldn't have learned
about the poupées-fetiches, the fetish dolls, anywhere except from Dixie's
French horror stories. Why, it's Stridente Mimi, Screaming Mimi herself.
That's really Dixie's theme story. Oh, I wish that Dixie would come back so
she could see this comical takeoff of herself. Shut your mouth, doll-Dixie!"
Gladys pushed her forefinger against the mouth of the little fetish doll to
close it, but the doll bit her finger suddenly, viciously, terribly, and set the
blood gushing from it. When Gladys got her finger loose again, the doll
opened its mouth wide once more and continued to scream silently and
horribly from a now blood-dribbling mouth. It has long been noted that fetish
dolls seem to have a life of their own.
That little comic interlude cheered them all a bit, and they left the table in
a happier state. And they went out from the ship.
Oh, the Thieving Bears wanted to play games, did they! Well, the explorers
would beat them at their games, and they would solve all the mysteries about
them at the same time. But the explorers had now come to regard the bears as
more complex and as more nearly intelligent than they had previously
seemed. They were still tittering little stinkers, though. The Thieving Bears
were bigger than police dogs and a little bit smaller than Great Danes. They
were toothless and clawless and apparently harmless. How can you worry
about such tittering and giggling things?
a
"Quick! Come quick!” Selma Last-Rose was calling, in a queer voice on the
edge of panic. "Come quick! I've found Dixie.”
The Thieving Bears, however large they seemed, gave the impression of
being nearly weightless. They had to be nearly weightless to glide on the
wind the way they did. They seemed to be mostly—well, it wasn't hair and it
wasn't feathers—they seemed to be mostly made out of a fluffy and deep-
piled covering with not much body inside it.
"Come, come, somebody come!" Selma was still calling in her rattling
voice. "Dixie is dead.”
The bears had to be ninety percent fluffy covering and no more than ten
percent body. Otherwise, big as they seemed, they couldn't have gotten
through some of the holes that they did go through.
“Horribly, horribly dead,” Selma was chanting in a little-girl singsong
voice. “Horribly, horribly dead. Oh please, somebody come and help me look
at her. I can hardly manage to look at her all by myself.”
Dead Dixie Late-Lark was an exact life-sized replica of her own many
times-transfixed fetish doll. Her throat was just as flamboyantly and terribly
cut as the doll's had been. The same thorns and pins and needles ran through
her, but now they were meter-long thorns and two-meter-long needles. And
her mouth was very wide open, as had been that of the doll; and Dixie was
likewise screaming horribly and silently.
And a tittering, a giggling in the Thieving Bears' fashion, was coming
from her silently screaming mouth and also from her laid-open throat. How
ghastly!
The horror was broken a bit, or diverted into a wondering exasperation, by
Benny Crix-Crannon's voice booming, "Here's another one of them. This
one's better done. It's good!”
Yes, it was another horribly dead Dixie Late-Lark, with her throat cut even
more savagely, with her poor body transfixed with even longer thorns and
needles, with the tittering and giggling from her wide-open and silently
screaming mouth even more disconcerting.
In all, they found seven life-sized versions of Dixie Late-Lark horribly and
ritually murdered. Then all seven of them jumped up, turned into rather
young Thieving Bears, and ran away tittering. And the very stones of that
planet seemed to join in that tittering and giggling.
But where was Dixie Late-Lark herself? Was that not a pertinent question?
More pertinent questions may have been: why did all the explorers stop
wondering what had happened to their colleague Dixie Late-Lark? And why
did they now feel that her disappearance was unimportant?
"
"I have lost my judgment,” George Mahoon lamented. “I've still got most of
the pieces of things in my mind, but I can no longer put them together.
Putting things together is what judgment is. One of you others will have to
take over the captaincy of this expedition."
"Oh, bother the captaincy!” Gladys Marclair rejected it. "Expeditions
would be better without captains anyhow. And you can't lose something that
you never had, George. Let's play ‘Ask the Question' with this situation. And
let's wonder why no bunch, coming here, has played it before. This is an
Earth-sized planet and remarkably monotonous. On its look-alike continents,
there are hundreds and thousands of little low plains or meadows comparable
to this Plain of the Old Spaceships. Why have all the expeditions to this
world, from that of John Chancel to our own, landed here within one
thousand meters of each other? Instructions for exploration landing sites have
always been 'Random selection, tempered with intelligence.' And another
instruction has been 'Examine new ground wherever possible.' For whose
convenience have we all landed in this one place? Oh, your diminished
judgment, George! Probably somebody has been eating the hippo out of your
hippocampus (I've always believed that the 'little hype' is the center of the
judgment as well as of the memory), so now you're not as well hyped as you
were. What if hardly any of the area of this planet has been checked out?”
“Oh, we made sixteen scanning circuits of Thieving Bear Planet before we
landed,” George Mahoon said. “Sixteen circuits will give a very good
recorded sample. And some of the previous expeditions made the full sixty-
four scanning circuits, and the full scan doesn't miss much."
“Do we believe that the Thieving Bears are to be found in all parts of this
planet, George?” Selma Last-Rose asked.
“I don't know. Do we believe it, Benny?”
"Oh no. The Thieving Bears are strictly small-species and small-area
creatures. Their crankinesses as well as their brilliancies indicate that they
have far too small a gene-pool. They have to stay close together in a small
area to keep warm' in the special (of a species) identity-survival sense."
“As to myself, I've lost more than my judgment,” Luke Fronsa mourned.
“I've lost all my ideas, and all that I have left now are notions. Somebody is
eating all my ideas right out of my head and leaving only the hulls of them.
Did you know that notions are only the shells or hulls of ideas after the meat
is eaten out of them?”
The bears were toothless, and they were playful. Sometimes they came
gliding in on the air, and they might be practically invisible when the light
was in their favor. They came gliding in or ambling in, and they tagged the
people gently as a breath. But whenever they touched the people, however
briefly or lightly, they left what seemed to be very small entering marks. And
they also left a redness, like the stings of nettles. One of the explorers (no
matter which one; they had begun to run together, even in their own regard)
said that the Thieving Bears were really a species of giant insects, insects
with strange appetites and always hungry.
*
Seven days and nights went by very rapidly. It was a giddy world in this
respect, fast-spinning: for seven days and nights on Thieving Bear Planet
were the equivalent of only about eighteen hours on Old Earth or sixteen
hours on Astrobe. And the fast-spin did make a difference on Thieving Bear.
It was because of the fast-spin that there were no large treelike plants, not
even any very large bushes. There were small bushes, and there was the non-
gramineous grass.
a
2.
People without an accompaniment of ghosts are a deprived
people. They will descend to almost any depth of "oriental”
cultishness or modish superstition or silliness or astrological
depravity to hide the fact that they have lost their ghosts.
Ghosts without an accompaniment or “neighborness” of
people are similarly deprived, and they will cast themselves into
the most bizarre roles or forms to try to create a company for
themselves.
Both of these conditions are unhealthy.
-Terrance Taibhse, Introduction to Ghost Stories of Sector 24
The storminess of Thieving Bear Planet wouldn't have permitted any
botanical constructs taller than small bushes. And the fast-spin of Thieving
Bear compelled certain surface conditions for that world. On most worlds, the
hills go up. On Thieving Bear Planet, the hills went down.
The upper levels of all the continents of Thieving Bear were flat and lush,
and sometimes they were swept by violent winds. And down from them, the
hills ran to the sheltered plains or meadows or circle-valleys (such as was the
Plain of the Old Spaceships), and on these lower levels the winds were less
violent.
Two of the seven short nights just past had been "electric nights," and the
ghosts walked on electric nights. The electric nights were highlighted
(literally) by massive thunderstorms and plasmal displays. (The odds are that
these storms are more violent than the storms where you come from.) The
lightning piled up on the high places, roaring like lazaruslions. Then it rolled
down the hills like waterfalls and formed hot and spitting pools on the lower
plains and meadows.
The ghosts were always there, but some of them were ordinarily like
empty balloons. On the electric nights, they filled up with lightning and
manifested themselves. But others of the ghosts were always low-key, living
out their endless nights and days till they would finally fade away after a long
era. One of the ghosts was that of John Chancel, one of the earlier visitors to
Thieving Bear Planet, usually called the “discoverer” of Thieving Bear, but
now he said that this wasn't true. During the second of the electric nights,
Chancel's ghost sat in the cockpit room of the ship with the explorers and
lovingly handled the eight hundred knobs, wheels, levers, push buttons,
keyboards, and voice boxes that commanded the ship. The ships hadn't been
so sophisticated in his day.
“I catch onto all the new and enjoyable advances in ship control quicker
than ‘he' would,” Chancel's ghost spoke softly. “Oh, he has the physical
brains with him, most of them; but I have the intuition. And he, we, were
never very good on brains anyhow. We had the mystique and the personality,
we had the intuition, we guessed a lot, and we faked a lot. But we were never
a well-linked personality."
“Just how does one become a ghost?” Gladys Marclair asked. “Besides
dying, I mean, is there any way to bring it about?”
"It happens, in many cases, long before death. I was his ghost here for
twenty years (Earth years) before Chancel died elsewhere. He left his (my)
>
a
ghost here on his second landing. He came back here for me several times
after that, but I wouldn't rejoin him or go away with him. He had become
quite cranky in his ways, and I in mine. There would have been everlasting
conflict if we had joined. But it was also psychic disaster (more for him than
for me) for us to be separated.
“It's not at all rare for a living person to be separated from his ghost. I see
that two of you six have become separated from your own ghosts, and none
of you can guess which two of you it is. On Thieving Bear, the conditions
seem to be favorable for these split-ups. It leaves a great hunger (yes, a
physical hunger) in the ghosts who are left behind. But each planet has its
own ghostliness that is different from that of other places. Even Old Earth has
remnants and tatters of ghostliness, and it isn't a hungry world. As a prophet
said, 'Happy the world that has iron meadows and rich essences on which the
spirits may feed, and then go to sleep.' But we spirits are most often sleepless
here."
"What happened to Dixie Late-Lark?” Gladys Marclair asked this pleasant
ghost.
“Oh, she's a ghost of a different sort. There never was any Dixie Late-
Lark as a person. There were only the six of you who arrived here. Dixie was
your esprit de group, your group effigy, and also a manifestation of your
'goofiness syndrome.' But we made her visible to you for the first time. And
you recognized her and accepted her in your unthinking way. This
‘unthinking way' has become part of the environment of Thieving Bear
Planet. She was the toothsome imaginative essence of all of you, the
capriciousness or coltishness of you, and that made her very appetizing. We
love essence. It's so concentrated.”
"Why did you make her visible?” Selma asked.
“Because we like to see what we're eating.”
"Who or what are the Thieving Bears?” Luke Fronsa asked Chancel's
ghost.
“Oh, they're a sort of tumbleweed, a sort of nettle. Ghosts use them to get
around in some of the time; so I myself am often a Thieving Bear. It is only
on the electric nights that we can inflate ourselves with enough plasm to look
like ourselves. We walk here a lot because we are always hungry and restless.
Ghosts in places that are richer in organics and metals and minerals stay well
fed by a sort of osmosis, so they walk and stir very little. They sleep their
"
decades and centuries away. Notice it sometimes that active ghosts are only
to be found in deprived regions. One of my counterparts has hardly stirred in
a hundred years. I can feel my counterparts, but there's not much of them to
feel.”
"Where do the little Thieving Bears come from?”
“From a very early landing, perhaps the earliest, for they were here when I
arrived. It was an ill-advised settlement expedition of men, women, and
children. Then all died of starvation, not knowing how to turn the lush grass
into food. They were the first of the hungry ghosts. It was their crying hunger
that has drawn all the ships to land in this one place. 'Come let us eat you' is
their cry, and it is still a most passionate cry.”
"You spoke of your counterparts' a moment ago," George Mahoon said.
“Did John Chancel generate more ghosts than one? Is he himself restless and
hungry?”
“Oh, I myself (the central John Chancel) have gone to my glory. But all of
us great ones leave multiple ghosts behind us. He (I) left at least two others
besides myself. We have a sort of awareness of each other, a loose feeling.
He had real greatness (unlikely as it seems), and I didn't. And yet this is the
paradox: he saw himself entirely from the outside, and he loved what he saw;
I saw us from the inside, and I wasn't impressed. And we were not the first
man on as many planets as is claimed for us. We were not the first man here.
There were already Thieving Bears here when we came, ghosts of earlier
explorers. But John Chancel had the greatness; and the earlier explorers had it
not. So Chancel was credited with many first landings.
“Good luck to you, ladies and gentlemen, when you lift off in your capsule
this electric morning. There are several entries that you must make in your
log immediately after lift-off, or you will forget them and never make them at
all. And you will have to make these entries in something other than ink.”
"Why should we lift off in our capsule?” Elton Fad asked. “We use the
capsule only when the ship is inoperative.”
"It's inoperative now and forever,” the ghost of John Chancel said. "Well,
it's a good ship and it eased the hunger of a lot of us. You'd better lift off in
a
the capsule as soon as possible now. We try to play fair, but we'll be feeding
on it very soon if it's still here.”
That John Chancel was a nice fellow, even in his fading ghost form.
>
* * *
But a much more violent ghost (right at that electric dawn after the second
electric night) was the ghost of Manbreaker Crag. After the second of the
electric nights had ended, Manbreaker decided to remain apparent out of
sheer stubbornness. They had all been feeling the powerful presence of this
Manbreaker Crag for some time.
"I'm the only one here of any moment or weight," Manbreaker's ghost
spoke in a rough sort of roar. “I'm not a person to crawl into pieces of nettle
or tumbleweed or any weeds except my own mortal weeds. I'm not one to
take on the form of a cutie giggling bear or other toy. I am not a ghost, nor
any part of a ghost story. Ghost stories are for children and cutie bears. I am a
simple dead man who is restless and hungry on this mineral-poor world. On
electric nights, I go get my own body where I keep it. I enter it and I inflate it
with the crackling lightning and the electricity that has gathered here. I'm a
hungry dead man with a dead man's temper. Don't mess with me!"
“Don't mess with us, fellow," George Mahoon spoke sharply. “Our ship
seems to be in a very weakened condition and we have to be getting out of
here quickly. Stay out of the way, grave-rot oaf, and be quiet. Elton, go
sharpen this, and then bring it back to me along with a heavy sledgehammer.
I think I know how to deal with hungry dead men.”
George Mahoon handed a thick and heavy hardwood dowel pin to Elton
Fad. It was about the length and heft of a baseball bat.
“The other ones, the real ghosts, which is to say the real unreal ones, have
their little self-saving fables that they recite when they feed on people and the
possessions of people," the hungry, long-dead man, Manbreaker Crag,
roared. The only speaking voice he possessed was this sort of dogged roar.
“They say, “We do not steal important things out of your minds. We steal
only funny-shaped, trifling things. Serious people like you are better off
without them. Our gain is your gain.' That is what they are telling you, but
they lie. What we eat out of your minds are the most serious things that your
minds are capable of holding. What we steal and eat out of your bodies are
the tastiest things in your bodies. We come to table on you, and we feast on
you. What we eat out of your ships and your stores are the most nourishing
and sophisticated things you have brought, wotto metal, data gelatin,
electronic reta, codified memories and processes. We eat these things because
we are hungry. And I eat them more ravenously than do any of the others. I
eat the essence of minds and leave gibbering idiocy in its place. I eat the
bodies of whole people where they stand.”
"Is everything possible transferred from the ship to the capsule?” big
George Mahoon asked his party.
"It is," several of them answered.
"I will eat the essence of your capsule-boat just as all of us on Thieving
Bear have eaten the essence of your ship,” dead Manbreaker Crag roared.
"Is it sharpened?” Mahoon asked as he took the thick hardwood dowel
from the returning Elton Fad.
“It is sharpened,” Elton said, “but something has gone wrong with it. It
loses weight as I stand here. They feed across short distances.”
"Scrawny ship captain, I think I'll eat you as you stand there," dead
Manbreaker roared at Captain Mahoon. “You'd make a big bite, but I'll eat
you."
Big George Mahoon felled bigger dead-man Manbreaker Crag with a
powerful blow to his dead face. Then he put the point of the sharpened dowel
pin (“Yes, Elton, I believe that he ate the heart out of it, but how could it have
been prevented?” Mahoon asked) to the region of the heart of Manbreaker
and struck the pin a heavy blow with the big sledgehammer. But the wooden
pin or stake came apart into weak splinters and pieces of worm-eaten (or
zombie-eaten) wood.
“Ah well, we'll have to leave him as he is,” Mahoon said. “I don't know
any other way to kill a man who's already dead.”
The six explorers got into the capsule-boat then and lifted off. They looked
down on the ship they had left behind them then, and it crumbled down and
became a part of its own outline and schematic. It became one more of the
token spaceships that formed that part-circle that gave the name Plain of the
Old Spaceships to that curious site. Those drawn outlines of the old
spaceships, they were the old spaceships. There must have been a lot of good
eating in each of them, though.
“To the log!” George Mahoon howled. “I feel it all slipping out of my
memory so fast! Each one of us take a long log page and write as rapidly as
a
possible. Get it down, before we lose it as earlier explorers lost it.”
“No use lamenting that there is no ‘ink’ in any stylus or pen or log pencil
laid out or still boxed,” Selma Last-Rose rattled. “No use lamenting that even
the electronic ink is eaten out of every recorder and that the remembering
jelly is eaten out of every memory pot. The hungers of the Thieving Bears are
unaccountable. All the earlier logs had a few words written in something
other than ink. If we all write as fast as we can, we may get more than a few
words down. We may even get the explanation down onto the log sheets
before it fades completely from our minds."
They all opened their veins and wrote on the long log sheets in their own
blood. It was sticky going. So many free-flowing things had been eaten out of
their blood that it was now viscous and thick. But they made it do. They got
the explanation all down, even though (when it was shown to them later) they
hardly remembered writing it.
A simple explanation had been needed for the conditions on Thieving Bear
Planet. It was needed because, as the great Reginald Hot had once phrased it,
“Anomalies are messy.”
And that simple explanation is herewith given, more or less as it was
written in thick blood in the log book.
Days of Grass, Days of
Straw
Introduction by Gary K. Wolfe
“Days of Grass, Days of Straw” first appeared in New Dimensions 3, the third
in a series of rather adventurous anthologies edited by Robert Silverberg
throughout the 1970s. Coming close on the heels of science fiction's
controversial New Wave, Silverberg's series was clearly out to recognize
new voices and new literary approaches to science fiction and fantasy, and
Lafferty had stories in each of the first four volumes. The volume with “Days
of Grass, Days of Straw" also included two stories which would become
widely reprinted, Hugo Award-winning classics, Ursula K. Le Guin's "The
Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas” and James Tiptree, Jr.'s “The Girl
Who Was Plugged In” (Tiptree was of course later revealed to be a
pseudonym of Alice Sheldon). Each of those would be reprinted dozens of
times in the coming decades, but Lafferty's story—despite now being
regarded as one of his best and most strikingly visionary by aficionados-
was reprinted only in a few of his own collections. It did, however, get
translated into Dutch and inspired the 2004 song Dagen van gras, dagen van
stro (a literal translation of the title) by the performer Spinvis (Erik de Jong).
Spinvis's lyrics have only an elliptical connection with Lafferty's story, but
the point is that Lafferty's best stories, even when not widely familiar,
manage to find their way into unexpected corners of the culture and leave
traces there.
The story itself is one that some readers find challenging—within the first
two lines, a city street morphs into a road, then a trail, then a mere path, and
"
our protagonist Christopher finds himself in a pre-urban, pre-industrial
landscape with features resembling Native American legends and Oklahoma
tall tales. Even his own name doesn't ring true, and half-recognized people
and places never quite coalesce into a more traditionally realized fantasy
landscape. Yet he feels revived and invigorated, as though the world had
been “pumped full of new juice.” “Things were mighty odd here,” he notices
in an observation that may well sound familiar to anyone reading a Lafferty
story for the first time. “There was just a little bit of something wrong about
things.”
We eventually learn that Christopher hasn't crossed into a fantasy world at
all, but rather to a different kind of time—a “day of grass," one of the
"overflowing and special days apart from the regular days,” which are called
days of straw. Although these special days are “Days out of Count” in terms
of history and the calendar, they are earned at great cost by prophets and
"prayer-men," who wrestle with God to gain them. Called by different names
in different cultures, these "rich days, full of joy and death, bubbling with
ecstasy and blood” may include entire seasons, and although “nobody has
direct memory of being in them or living in them,” we give them pallid
names like Indian Summer. Lafferty's stunning vision of a more vital and
perhaps more dangerous world just beyond the one we know, but somehow
folded into it, is one of his most haunting recurrent themes.
Days of Grass, Days of
Straw
1.
Fog in the corner and fog in his head:
Gray day broken and bleeding red.
-Henry Drumhead, Ballads
Christopher Foxx was walking down a city street. No, it was a city road. It
was really a city trail or path. He was walking in a fog, but the fog wasn't in
the air or the ambient: it was in his head. Things were mighty odd here. There
was just a little bit of something wrong about things.
Oceans of grass for one instance. Should a large and busy city (and this
was clearly that) have blue-green grass belly-high in its main street? Things
hardly remembered: echoes and shadows, or were they the strong sounds and
things themselves? Christopher felt as though his eyeballs had been cleaned
with a magic cleaner, as though he were blessed with new sensing in ears and
nose, as though he went with a restored body and was breathing a new sort of
air. It was very pleasant, but it was puzzling. How had the world been
pumped full of new juice?
Christopher couldn't recall what day it was; he certainly didn't know what
hour it was. It was a gray day, but there was no dullness in that gray. It was
shimmering pearl-gray, of a color bounced back by shimmering water and
shimmering air. It was a crimson-edged day, like a gray squirrel shot and
bleeding redly from the inside and around the edges. Yes, there was the
pleasant touch of death on things, gushing death and gushing life.
Christopher's own name didn't sound right to him. He didn't know what
town he was in. Indeed he'd never before seen a town with all the storefronts
flapping in the wind like that. Ah, they'd curl and bend, but they wouldn't
break. A town made of painted buckskin, and yet it was more real than towns
made of stone and concrete.
He saw persons he almost knew. He started to speak and only sputtered.
Well, he'd get a newspaper then; they sometimes gave information. He
reached in his pocket for a coin, and discovered that he didn't have regular
pockets. He found a little leather pouch stuck in his belt. What's this? What
else was stuck in his belt? It was a breechclout with the ends fore and aft
passing under his belt. Instead of pants he had a pair of leggings and a
breechclout, three-piece pants. Oh, oh, what else?
Oh, he wore a shirt that seemed to be leather of some sort. He wore soft
shoes that were softer than slippers. He was hatless, and his hair came
forward over his shoulders in two tight long braids. He had dressed casually
before, but he didn't remember ever dressing like this. How were the rest of
the people dressed? No two alike, really, no two alike.
But he did bring a coin out of that leather pouch that was stuck in his belt.
A strange coin. It wasn't metal: it was made of stone, and made roughly. On
the face of it was the head and forequarters of a buffalo. On the reverse side
was the rump of a buffalo. The words on the obverse of it read WORTH
ONE BUFFALO, and on the reverse they read MAYBE A LITTLE BIT
LESS.
“And where do I put a coin in this contraption?” Christopher asked
himself angrily and loudly. A hand extended itself, and Christopher put the
coin in the hand. The hand belonged to an old wrinkled brown man, swathed
in robes and folds of blackened leather, and sitting in the dust.
The old man gave Christopher a newspaper, or gave him something
anyhow. It was on leather that was almost board-stiff. It was illustrated, it
was printed in a variety of hands; and here and there it had a little hair
growing out of it as though its leather were imperfectly scraped.
“Wait, your change,” the old brown man said. He gave Christopher seven
small coins. These were neither metal nor stone: they were clay baked in the
sun. The obverse of each was the head and fore of a badger, puffed and
bristled and hissing in high defense. And the reverse was the reared rump of
the same badger in embattled clawed stance.
“Price go down a little but not a whole badger,” the old man said. “Take
three puffs. It's close as I can get to even change.” Wondering at himself,
Christopher took three strong rich smoky puffs from the old pipe of the old
man. He felt that he had received full value then. It was about all that he felt
satisfied with. But is it wrong to feel unsatisfied, which is unsated?
Christopher thought about it.
He went over and sat on a bale of rags outside the shop with the sign HOT
ROAST DOG FOR SALE OR GIVE. The bale of rags seemed somehow
lively; it was as if there was no division between the animate and the
inanimate this day. He tried to make something out of the strange newspaper
or the strange day, or the newly strange man who was apparently himself.
Oh, the newspaper was interesting. It could be read one way or another; by
picture, by stylized pictograph, by various writings and printings. Here were
anecdotes; wooly, horny, bottomlessly funny anecdotes: and they were about
people that Christopher knew, or almost knew. And all the people passing by
(Christopher realized it with a chuckling gasp) were also people that he knew
or almost knew. Well, what made them so different then? They looked like
familiar people, they smelled like familiar people (which the familiar people
erstwhile had not done), they had the familiar name that came almost to the
edge of the tongue.
“But what town is this? What day is this? What is the context?”
Christopher wailed out loud. “Why is everything so strange?”
"Kit-Fox, you call me?” Strange Buffalo boomed at him. Strange Buffalo
was a big and boisterous man and he had always been a good friend of
Christopher. He had? Then why did he look so different? And why was his
real name, or his other name, now unremembered?
“Will the buffalo go to war, do you think, Kit-Fox?" Strange Buffalo
asked him. “Do you believe that the two great herds of them will go to war?
They come near to each other now and they swear that neither will give
way.”
“No, there will be only the pushing and goring of a few thousand bulls, not
much else,” Christopher said. “The buffalo simply haven't the basis for a real
war." He was surprised at his own knowledge of the subject.
"But the buffalo have human advisers now,” Strange Buffalo said. “It
began with the betting, of course, but now we can see that there is real cause
a
>
a
of conflict on both sides. I dabble in this myself and have some good ideas.
We are tying spear-shafts to the horns of some of the big bulls and teaching
them to use them. And we're setting up big bows and teaching them to bend
them with their great strength, but they haven't any accuracy at all.”
“No, I don't believe they were meant to have a real war. It's a wonderful
dust they raise, though, when they all come together. It makes you glad to be
alive. And the thunder of their millions of hoofs!" (There was the distant
sound of morning thunder.) “Or is that a thundering in the mountains?" Kit-
Fox-ah, Christopher was asking.
"Well, there is quite a clatter in the mountains this morning, Kit,” Strange
Buffalo was saying in happy admiration. “The deep days, the grass days like
this one aren't come by easily. It's a wonder the mountains aren't knocked to
pieces when the big prophets pray so noisily and wrestle so strong. But, as
the good skin says, we must work out our salvation in fear and thundering."
"Is it not 'In fear and trembling'?" Christopher asked as he lounged on the
lively bale of rags.
“No, Kit-Fox, no!” Strange Buffalo pealed at him. “That's the kind of
thing they say during the straw days; not here, not now. In the Cahooche
shadow-writing it says ‘In fear and chuckling,' but the Cahooche words for
thunder and chuckling are almost the same. On some of the Kiowa antelope-
skin drawings, 'In scare-shaking and in laughter-shaking.' I like that. I wish I
could pray and wrestle as wooly and horny as the big ones do. Then I'd get to
be a prophet on the mountain also, and I'd bring in more days of grass. Yes,
and days of mesquite also."
“The mountain is a funny one this morning, Strange Buffalo. It doesn't
reach clear down to the ground," Christopher said. “There's a great space
between, and there are eagles flying underneath it.”
“Ah, it'll fall back after a while, Kit-Fox, when they have won or lost the
wrestling for the day; after they have generated sufficient juice for this day,
for I see that they have already won it and it will be a day of grass. Let's go
have a rack of roast dog and a gourd of choc beer,” Strange Buffalo
proposed.
“In a minute, Strange Buffalo. I am in the middle of a puzzle and I have
this fog in my head. What day is this?"
"It's one of the days of grass, Kit-Fox. I just told you that.”
“But which one, Strange Buffalo? And what, really, are ‘days of grass'?”
“I believe that it is the second Monday of Indian Summer, Kit-Fox,"
Strange Buffalo was saying as he gave the matter his thought and attention.
“Or it may be the first Monday of Blue-Goose Autumn. We're not sure,
though, that it is a Monday. It sounds and tastes more like a Thursday or an
aleikaday.”
“It sure does,” Christopher—ah, Kit-Fox agreed.
A laughing, dying man was carried past by four hale men. This fortunate one
had been smashed by bear or rolled on by horse or gored by buffalo, and the
big red blood in him was all running out. "It works,” the happy dying man
cried out. “It works. I got a little too close to him and he ripped me to pieces,
but it works. We are really teaching those big bulls to use the spears lashed to
their horns. Others will carry on the work and the fun. I bet that I've had it.”
“A little blood to bless me!" Strange Buffalo cried out, and the dying man
splashed him with the rich and rigorous blood.
"For me also," Kit-Fox begged, and the dying man smeared him with
blood on the brow and breast and shoulders and loins. Two other friends,
Conquering Sharp-Leaf and Adoration on the Mountain, came and were
blessed with the blood. Then the man died and was dead.
“There is nothing like the fine rich blood to make a grass day sing in your
head and in your body,” Strange Buffalo exulted. “On the straw days they try
to hide the blood or they bleed in a dark corner.”
(What was all this about the grass days and the straw days? There was
now a sordid dull-dream quality, a day-of-straw quality that kept trying to
push itself in. "For a little while,” it begged, "to reestablish rigor and rule and
reason for just a little while.” “Go away,” said the day-of-grass quality. “The
wrestle was won this morning, and this is a day out of the count.”)
Kit-Fox and Strange Buffalo went in, past the booths and work areas of
the coin-makers, past the stands of the eaglewing-bone-whistle makers, and
into the shop which had roast dog for sale or give. Strange Buffalo had a
shoulder of dog and Kit-Fox had a rack of ribs. There was fried bread also,
and hominy and pumpkin. There was choc beer dipped with gourd dippers
out of a huge crock. Thousands of people were there. It was crowded and it
was supposed to be. The man named Mountain twinkled in the air. Why had
a
"
a
they not noticed that about him before? Folks rolled up the walls and tied them. Now the strong smoke and savor could visit all the places, and the folks in every shop could see into every other shop. It was full morning and beginning to get warm. “But I still want to know the date,” Kit-Fox insisted, not quite converted to the day of grass, not quite clear of the head-fog that accompanies the sullen burning of the straw days. “What newspaper is this that doesn’t have a date? I want a date!” “Look at it. It tells,” said Strange Buffalo. “You want a date, honey?” the top of the newspaper writhed in sudden flickering of day-fire print. “Phone 582-8316 and I give you a real date.” Then the day-fire print was gone. “I hope I can remember that number,” Kit-Fox said anxiously. “Strange Buffalo, where is there a telephone exchange?” “They are the same and single and right outside past the booths,” Strange Buffalo said. “You were sitting upon it when I came upon you. And you, you old straw-head, you thought it was a bale of rags.” Kit-Fox went outside, past the booths of the stone-buffalocoin makers and the clay-badger-coin makers, past the tents of the porcupine-quill dealers, to what he had thought was a bale of rags, a lively bale of rags as he now remembered it. Well, it was an ample lady in her glad rags and she was the telephone exchange lying there in the grass. “I want to call number 582-8316,” Kit-Fox said uneasily. “Here are a handful of dice,” the glad-rags lady told him. “Arrange them here in the short grass and make any number you want.” “But proper dice have numbers only to six,” Kit-Fox protested, “and some of the numbers are higher.” “Those are improper dice, they are crooked dice,” the lady said. “They have numbers more than six and numbers less than one. Number out your telephone number in the short grass with them.” “Are you sure this is the way to dial a number?” Kit-Fox asked. “Sure I’m not sure,” the lady said. “If you know a better way, do it that way. Worth a try, kid, worth a try.” Kit-Fox numbered out his numbers in the short grass. “Now what do I do?” he asked. “Oh, talk into the telephone here.”
“That buckskin bag is a telephone?” “Try it, try it. Drop a badger coin in and try it.” Kit-Fox dropped the coin into the telephone. “Hello, hello,” he said. “Hello, hello,” the lady answered. “That’s my number you called. You want a date, I wait for you awhile. Believe me, I get pretty tired of waiting pretty soon.” “I don’t think this is a telephone exchange at all,” Kit-Fox grumbled. “How else I can get guys so easy to drop badger-coins in a buckskin bag,” the lady said. “Come along, lover man, we will have a grand time this day.” The lady was full-bodied and jolly. Kit-Fox remembered her from somewhere. “Who are you?” he asked her. “I’m your wife in the straw days,” she said, “but this is a grass day. They’re harder to find, but they’re more fun when you find one. They have something to do with grandfather’s brother and that wrestling of his.” “Days of grass, days of straw,” Kit-Fox said as he embraced the lady passionately. “How about a hay day?” “You mean a heyday? Those are special. We hope to make them more often, if only the wrestle is better. They’re fuller of juice than the grass days even. We try to make one now.” They made a heyday together (together with a whole nation of people); and it went on and on. Day-Torch (that was the lady in the glad rags, the lady who was Kit-Fox’s wife during the straw days) bought an eagle-wing-bone whistle from a dealer, and she whistled happy haunting tunes on it. The people followed Kit-Fox and Day-Torch out of town, out to the oceans of buffalo grass and blue-stem grass. They torched everything that was dry and set the blue-black smoke to rolling. But the fundamental earth was too green to burn. All mounted horses and took lances. They went out after buffalo. Word was brought to them that some of the newly armed buffalo bulls wanted to schedule battle with them. And the battle was a good one, with gushing blood and broken-open bodies, and many on each side were killed. Strange Buffalo was killed. That big boisterous man died with a happy whoop. “Strange Buffalo, indeed,” one of the buffalo bulls said. “He looks like a man to me.”
When the ground there had become too soggy and mired in blood, they adjourned the battle till the next day of grass, or the one after that. Bloody battles are fine, but who wants to spend a whole day on one? There are other things. Kit-Fox and Day-Torch and a number of other folks went to higher ground. There was a roaring river on the higher ground, the biggest river ever and the loudest. “Oh be quiet,” Day-Torch said. “You’ve got the tune wrong.” The great river ceased to roar. Day-Torch whistled the right tune on the eagle-wing- bone whistle. Then the river resumed its roaring, but in this right tune now. This mightiest of all rivers was named Cottonwood Creek. Henry Drumhead added his beat to the tune. Then the folks had a rain dance till the sharp rain came down and drenched them through. They had a sun dance then, till the sun dried up the mud and began to burn the hides of the people. They had a cloud dance then. They had an antelope dance till enough antelope came to provide a slaughter and a feast. They had a pit dance, a fire dance, a snake dance, and an ashes dance: the ashes from pecan wood and hickory wood are a better condiment than salt to go with roast antelope. They had a feast dance. Then (after a while) a shakedown dance. They had a thunder dance and a mountain dance. Say, it is spooky to come to the foot of the mountain itself and see the great gap between it and the ground! Rocks and boulders fell off of the bottom of the mountain and killed many of the people below. And, from the mountain itself, a broken, bloody, and headless torso fell down to the earth. Helen Hightower—ah, that is to say the glad-rag lady Day-Torch—set up a rakish screaming, “The head, the head, somebody forgot the head!” There was a thunderous grumbling, a mountain-shaking irritation, but the bloody head did come down and smash itself like a bursting pumpkin on the earth. “A lot of times they forget to throw the head down if you don’t remind them,” Day-Torch said. The meaning of the fallen torso and head was that there was now one less prophet or wrestler on the mountain; that there was now an opportunity for one more man to ascend to glory and death. Several of the men attempted it by various devices, by piling cairns of stones to climb upon, by leaping into the air to try to grab one of the dangling
roots of the mountain, by hurling lances with trailing lianas to fasten quivering in the bottom of the mountain. They played it out in the garish day there where all the colors were so bright that they ached. Many of the men fell to their deaths, but one ascended. There is always one who is able to ascend to the great wrestle when there is an empty place to receive him. And the one who ascended was—no, no, you’ll not have his name from us yet. Something was mighty odd here. There was just a little bit of something right about things. 2. Draftsman, draftsman, what do you draw? Dog days, draggy days, days of straw. —Ballads, Henry Drumhead 3. Indian Summer. A period of warm or mild weather late in autumn or in early winter. —Webster’s Collegiate
So Webster’s Collegiate defines it, but Webster’s hasn’t the humility ever to admit that it doesn’t know the meaning of a word or phrase. And it doesn’t know the meaning of this one. There are intervals, days, hours, minutes that are not remembered directly by anyone. They do not count in the totality of passing time. It is only by the most sophisticated methods that even the existence of these intervals may be shown. There are whole seasons, in addition to the four regular seasons that are supposed to constitute the year. Nobody knows where they fit in, there being no room for them anywhere in the year; nobody has direct memory of being in them or living in them. Yet, somehow, they have names that have escaped these obliterations. The name of one of the misfit seasons is Indian Summer. (“Why can’t the Indians have their summer in the summertime like the rest of us?” comes a high voice with a trace of annoyance. Not a high-pitched voice: a high voice.)
But all that is neither here nor there. It is yonder, and we will come to it.
Christopher Foxx was walking down a city street. Things were mighty even
here, mighty neat. There was just a little bit of something wrong about their
rightness.
The world was rubbed, scrubbed, and tubbed; it was shaved, paved, and
saved; it was neat, sweet, and effete. Ah, the latter was possibly what was
wrong with it, if anything could be wrong with perfection. The colors were
all flat (flat colors had been deemed best for nerves and such), and the sounds
were all muted. Christopher, for a moment, wished for a color that shrieked
and for a sound that blazed. He put the thought resolutely out of his head.
After all, he had for wife Helen Hightower, and he suffered much criticism
because of her gaudiness and exuberance.
Christopher took a paper from the slot on the corner, noted that it was a
day in May (he had a queer feeling that he had been uneasy about the date,
and yet all that registered with him was that it fell within a familiar month).
He entered the North Paragon Breakfast Club. It was there that the
Symposium would begin (it would last the whole day and into the night, and
be held at various sites) on the multiplex subject “Spatial and Temporal
Underlays to the Integrated World, with Insights as to Their Possible Reality
and Their Relationship to the World Unconscious and to the Therapeutic
Amnesia; with Consideration of the Necessity of Belief in Stratified Worlds,
and Explorations of the Orological Motif in Connection with the Apparent
Occurrence of Simultaneous Days.” It would have been an exciting subject if
Excitement had not become another of the muted things.
Buford Strange was already at the North Paragon, and with him were
Adrian Montaigne and Vincent Rue.
"I have already ordered for ourselves and for yourself, Christopher,"
Buford said. “It is sheldrake, and I hope that you like it. They will not prepare
it for fewer than four persons. 'We can't go around killing quarter ducks,
they say.”
“That is all right,” Christopher said meekly. He glanced at the other three
nervously. There was surely something familiar about them all.
Great blue mountain thunder! Why shouldn't there be! He had worked
>
with these men daily for several years. But, no, no, his edgy mind told him
that they were familiar in some other and more subtle way. He glanced at the
paper which he had taken from the corner slot outside. Something like quick
flame ran across the top of it and was gone too quickly to verify. But was it
possible that the flame had said “You want a date, honey? You phone” Of
course it was not possible. Clearly, at the top of the paper it was printed A
DAY IN MAY. Clearly? Was that clear enough for a date?
“What date is this?” Christopher asked the three of them.
"May the eighth, of course,” Adrian answered him. "You've got today's
Journal in your hand and still you ask?”
Well now it was printed clearly there, May 8, and there was no nonsense
about "a day in May"; still less was there anything like "You want a date,
honey?"
Some wild-looking children burst into the North Paragon Breakfast Club.
"Straw-Men! Straw-Men!” they cried at the four gentlemen there. "Straw-
Men! Straw-Men!” The children buffeted the four men a bit, did other
extravagant things that are since forgotten, and then they went out of the
Breakfast Club again: or at least they disappeared; they were no longer there.
"Why should they have done that?” Adrian asked, puzzled. “Why should
they have called us that, and done the other things?”
“Why should who have called us what?” Vincent asked, even more
puzzled.
“I don't know,” Adrian said dryly. “It seemed that someone was here and
said or did something."
"You're witless, Adrian," Vincent chided. "Nobody was here."
"Straw-Man,” Christopher Foxx said softly. “I remember the word now
and I couldn't remember it before. I woke up this morning trying to
remember it. It seemed to be the key to a dream that was slipping away in
spite of my trying to hang on to it. I have the key word now, but it fits
nothing. The dream is gone forever.”
"We will come back to this subject later in our discussions," Buford
Strange said. “I believe that your word ‘Straw-Man,’ Christopher, is a part of
the underlay, or perhaps of the overlay, that pertains to our world and our
study. There is a good chance that certain children, or perhaps dwarfs or
gnomes, entered here several moments ago. Did any of you notice them?”
"No," said Vincent Rue.
"No one entered," said Adrian Montaigne.
“No. I didn't see anyone,” said Christopher Foxx.
"Yet I believe that a group did come in,” Buford Strange continued
suavely. “It was a group unusual enough to be noticed. Then why didn't we
notice it? Or why did we forget, within a short moment, that we had seen it at
all? I believe it was because the group was in a different sort of day. I am
nearly sure that it is a group that lives in either St. Martin's Summer or in the
Kingfisher Days. Ah, here is the sheldrake ready with all the trimmings!
Drool and be happy. We shall never know such moment again."
It was a momentous fowl, no question of that. It was good, it was rich, it
was overflowing with juice. It was peer of the fowl that are found in the land
named St. Succulentus's Springtime. (What? What? There is a land named
that?)
The four noble men (they were ennobled by the circumstance) fell to
eating with what, in days of another sort, might almost be called gusto. It was
a royal bird and was basted with that concoction of burst fruits and crushed
nuts and peppers and ciders and holy oils and reindeer butter that is called-
(wait a bit)
“Do you know that the sheldrake is really a mysterious creature?” Buford
Strange asked as he ate noisily (nobody eats such royal fare in quiet). Buford
acted as if he knew a secret.
“It is not a mysterious creature at all,” Adrian countered (he knew it was,
though). “It is only the common European duck.”
"It is not only the common European duck," Buford said strongly. "In
other days it may be quite uncommon.”
"What are you saying, Buford?” Vincent Rue asked him. "In what other
days?"
"Oh, I believe, possibly, in what the Dutch call Kraanzomer, Crane-
Summer. Are we agreed that the other days, the days out of count, are topic
rather than temporal?”
"We are not even agreed that there are days out of count,” Christopher
objected.
“Drakes' teeth, by the way, while rare, are not unknown,” Adrian
Montaigne popped the statement out of his mouth as if in someone else's
voice. He seemed startled at his own words.
“Drake is really the same word as Drakos, a dragon,” Christopher Foxx
"
mumbled. “Ah, I was going to say something else but it is gone now.”
“Waiter, what is the name of the excellent stuff with which the drake is
basted and to which it is wedded?” Vincent Rue asked in happy wonder.
"Dragons' sauce," said the waiter.
"Well, just what is the mystery, the uncommonness of the sheldrake,
Buford?” Christopher asked him.
“I don't seem to remember," that man said. “Ah, let us start our discussion
with my, our, failure to remember such things. Vincent, did you not have a
short paper prepared on 'Amnesia, the Holes in the Pockets of the Seamless
Garment’?”
“I forget. Did I have such a paper prepared? I will look in my own
pockets.”
Meanwhile, back on the mountain, back on the thundering mountain there
were certain daring and comic persons rushing in and out and counting coup
on the Wrath of God. It is a dangerous game. These were the big prophets
who prayed so violently and sweated so bloodily and wrestled so strongly. It
was they who fought for the salving or the salvation of the days, in fear and
in chuckling, in scare-shaking and in laughter-shaking. The thundering
mountain was a funny one this morning. It didn't reach clear to the ground.
There was a great space between, and there were eagles flying under it. And
the day, the day, was it really the first Monday of Blue-Goose Autumn? Was
it really a Monday at all? Or was it a Thursday or an aleikaday?
It was like another morning of not long before. The eagles remember it;
the clouds remember it; the mountain wrestlers remember it dimly, though
some of the memory has been taken away from them.
Remember how it is written on the holy skins: “If you have faith you shall
say to the mountain 'Remove from here and cast thyself into the sea' and it
will do it.” Well, on that morning they had tried it. Several of the big
prophets and wrestlers tried it, for they did have faith. They groaned with
travail and joy, they strove mightily, and they did move the mountain and
make it cast itself into the sea.
But the thunders made the waters back off. The waters refused to accept or
to submerge the mountain. The prayer-men and wrestlers had sufficient faith,
but the ocean did not. Whoever had the last laugh on that holy morning?
The strivers were timeless, of the prime age, but they were often called the
“grandfathers” brothers' by the people. They were up there now, the great
prophets and prayer-men and wrestlers. One of these intrepid men was an
Indian and he was attempting to put the Indian Sign on God himself. God,
however, was like a mist and would not be signed.
“We will wrestle,” the Indian said to God in the mist, "we will wrestle to
see which of us shall be Lord for this day. I tell you it is not thick enough if
only the regular days flow. I hesitate to instruct you in your own business,
and yet someone must instruct you. There must be overflowing and special
days apart from the regular days. You have such days, I am sure of that, but
you keep them prisoned in a bag. It is necessary now that I wrest one of them
from you.”
They wrestled, inasmuch as a man slick with his own sweat and blood
may wrestle with a mist: and it seemed that the Indian won the lordship of a
day from God. “It will be a day of grass,” the Indian said. “It will be none of
your dry and juiceless days.” The Indian lay exhausted with his fingers
entwined in the won day: and the strength came back to him. “You make a
great thing about marking every sparrow's fall,” the Indian said then. “See
that you forget not to mark this day."
The thing that happened then was this: God marked the day for which they
had wrestled, but he marked it on a different holy skin in a different place,
not on the regular skin that lists the regular days. This act caused the wrested
day to be one of the Days out of Count.
Prophets, wrestlers, praying-men of other sorts were on the mountain also.
There were black men who sometimes strove for kaffir-corn days or ivory-
tree days. There were brown island men who wrestled for sailfish days or
wild-pig days. There were pinkish north-wood men who walked on pine
needles and balsam; there were gnarled men out of the swampy lands; there
were town men from the great towns. All of these strove with the Lord in fear
and in chuckling.
Some of these were beheaded and quartered, and the pieces of them were
flung down violently to earth: it is believed that there were certain qualities
lacking in these, or that their strength had finally come to an end. But the
others, the most of them, won great days from the Lord, Heydays, Halcyon or
Kingfisher Days, Maedchensommer Days, St. Garvais Days, Indian Summer
Days. These were all rich days, full of joy and death, bubbling with ecstasy
and blood. And yet all were marked on different of the holy skins and so they
became the Days out of Count.
*
ور
“Days out of the Count,” Buford Strange was saying, “It's an entrancing idea,
and we have almost proved it. Seasons out of the count! It's striking that the
word for putting a condiment on should be the same word as a division of the
year. Well, the seasons out of the count are all well seasoned and spiced.
There are whole multiplex layered eras out of the count. The ice ages are
such. I do not say 'were suchʼ; I say “are such.”
"But the ice ages are real, real, real,” Helen Hightower insisted. (Quite a
few long hours had passed in the discussions, and now Helen Hightower, the
wife of Christopher Foxx, was off her work at the telephone exchange and
had put on her glad rags and joined the scholars.)
“Certainly they are real, Helen,” Buford Strange said. “If only I were so
real! I believe that you remember them, or know them, more than most of us
do. You have a dangerously incomplete amnesia on so many things that I
wonder the thunder doesn't come and take you. But in the days and years and
centuries and eras of the straight count there are no ice ages.”
"Well then, how, for instance, would local dwellers account for terminal
moraines and glacial till generally?” asked Conquering Sharp-Leaf—ah,
Vincent Rue.
(They were at the University, in that cozy room in the psychology
department where Buford Strange usually held forth, the room that was just
below the special effects room of Professor Timacheff.)
“How did they account for such before the time of modern geology?”
Buford asked. “They didn't. There would be a new boulder one morning that
had not been there the day before. The sheep-herder of the place would say
that the moon had drawn it out of the ground, or that it had fallen from the
sky.”
"You're crazy, Buford,” Adrian Montaigne said with a certain affection.
"
“Why the ice ages then? Why should they have happened, even in times out of count? Why should they have left their footprints in the times within the count?” Adrian had very huge and powerful hands. Why had they not noticed this before? “I believe there was a dynasty of great and muscular prophets and ghost- wrestlers who wanted to call out the terrible days of Fimbul Winter,” Buford said in a hushed voice. “I don’t know why they wanted such things, or why they sweated blood and wrestled prodigies to obtain them. They were men, but they are remembered as the frost giants.” “Oh my grand, grand uncles!” Day-Torch—Helen Hightower, rather, cried out. “Days of snow! Days of ice! Millions of them!” “You are saying that certain archetypes—” Kit-Fox began. “Shook the pillars of Heaven till the snow and ice fell down for a million days, for a million days out of the count,” Buford Strange finished. “Strange Buffalo, ah, Buford, you are crazy,” Christopher Foxx chided much as Adrian had. Christopher was talking, but the queerly smiling Adrian had now become the presence in the room. Adrian had the curious under- rutile of the skin of one who has sweated blood in prayer and buffoonery and passion. Why had they not noticed that of him before? “I could almost believe that you were one of the great challengers yourself, Strange,” Christopher said to Buford, but he was looking at Adrian. “You strike me as with a lance, Kit,” Buford said sadly. “You uncover my mortification. For I failed. I don’t know when it was. It was on a day out of the count. I failed a year ago or ten thousand years ago. I could not make it among the great ones. I was not cast out to my death: I was never in. There was room for me, and an opportunity for the ascent, but I failed in nerve. And one who has aspired to be a champion or prophet cannot fall back to be an ordinary man. So I am less than that: I am short of manhood. But, sadly, I do remember and live in other sorts of days.” “I believe that the aberrant days are simultaneous with the prosaic days,” Adrian Montaigne mused. Adrian was quite a large man. Why had they not noticed that before? “No, no, they are not simultaneous,” Buford was correcting him. “There are the days out of the count and there are the days in the count. Those out of count are outside of time so they cannot be simultaneous with anything. You have to see it that way.”
“You see it your way and I’ll see it mine.” Adrian was stubborn. “Consider some of the aberrant times or countries: St. Garvais’ Springtime, St. Martin’s Summer (the saints in these names were mountain prophets and wrestlers, but some of them were not at all saintly in their violence), Midas March (the very rich need their special season also: it is said that, in their special month, they are superiorly endowed in all ways), Dog Days, Halcyon Days, Dragon Days, Harvest May (what in the world is harvested in May?), All-Hallow Summer, Days of Ivory, Days of Horn, Indian Summer, Wicklow Week, Apricot Autumn, Goose Summer, Giant-Stone Days, Day of the Crooked Mile, the season called Alcedonia by the Latins. I tell you that all these days are happening at the same time!” This man named Adoration on the Mountain, or rather Adrian Montaigne, had a reckless sort of transcendence about him now. “No, they do not all happen at the same time,” Strange Buffalo was saying, “for the aberrant days of them are not in time. They are places and not times.” “Are there no nighttime hours in the times out of time?” Vincent Rue asked. “No. Not in the same sense. They are in another province entirely,” Buford said. There was thunder in the special effects room of Professor Timacheff on the floor just above them, cheerful, almost vulgar thunder. Timacheff taught some sensational (sense response and also melodramatic) courses up there. But how did he get such special effects anyhow? “They do happen at the same time,” Adrian Mountain insisted, and he was laughing like boulders coming together. Quite a few things seemed to be happening to Adrian all at the same time. “They are all happening right now. I am sitting with you here this minute, but I am also on the mountain this minute. The thunder in the room above, it is real thunder, you know. And there is a deeper, more distant, more raffish thunder behind it which primitives call God’s-Laughter Thunder.” “This gets out of hand now,” Vincent Rue protested. “It is supposed to be a serious symposium on spatial and temporal underlays. Several of you have turned it into a silly place and a silly time. You are taking too anthropomorphic a view of all these things, including God. One does not really wrestle with God in a bush or a mist, or ride in wildly on a pony and
count coup on God. Even as an atheist I find these ideas distasteful.” “But we are anthropoi, men,” Adrian proclaimed. “What other view than an anthropomorphic view could we take? That we should play the God-game, that we should wrestle with a God-form and try to wrest lordship of days from him, that we should essay to count coup on God, I as a theist do not find at all distasteful. “Why! One of them is failing now! It happens so seldom. I wonder if I have a chance.” “Adrian, what are you talking about?” Vincent demanded. “How could you do it, Adrian, when I could not?” Buford Strange asked. “Remember me when you come to your place, Adrian,” Day-Torch cried. “Send me a day. Oh, send me a day-fire day.” “And me also, Adrian,” Kit-Fox begged. “I would love to do it myself, but it isn’t given to everyone.” There was a strong shouting in the room above. There was the concussion of bodies, and the roaring of mountain winds. “What in all the crooked days is Professor Timacheff doing up there this evening?” Vincent Sharp-Leaf asked angrily. “And what things are you doing here, Adrian? You look like a man set afire.” “Make room for me! Oh, make room for me!” Adrian of the Mountain cried out in a voice that had its own crackling thunder. He was in the very transport of passion and he glistened red with his own bloody sweat. “One is failing, one is falling, why doesn’t he fall then?” “Help with it, Kit-Fox! And I help also,” Day-Torch yowled. “I help!” Kit-Fox yelped. The room shuddered, the building shuddered, the whole afternoon shuddered. There was a rending of boulders, either on the prophet’s mountain or in the special effects room of Professor Timacheff above them. There was a great breaking and entering, a place turning into a time. There came a roaring like horses in the sky. Then was the multiplex crash (God save his soul, his body is done for) of bloody torso and severed limbs falling into the room from a great height, splintering the table at which the five of them sat, breaking the room, splattering them all with blood. But the ceiling above was unbreached and unharmed and there was no point of entry. “I am not man enough even to watch it,” Buford Strange gurgled, and he slumped sideways unconscious.
“Timacheff, you fool!” Vincent Rue bawled to the space above them. “Watch your damned special effects! You’re wrecking the place!” Unquestionably, that Timacheff was good. He used his special effects in classes on phenomenology that he taught up there. “The head, the head! Don’t let them forget the head!” Day-Torch cried in a flaming voice. “I just remembered that Timacheff is out of town and is holding no classes today,” Kit-Fox muttered in vulpine wonder. “Make room for me! Oh, make room for me!” Adrian Mountain boomed. Then he was gone from the midst of them. He would be a factor, though, “in days to come.” “The head, the head!” Day-Torch flamed and scorched. Christopher and Vincent tried to straighten up the unconscious Buford Strange. They shook him, but he came apart and one arm came off him. He was revealed as a straw-man filled with bloody straw, and no more. “Why, he’s naught but a poorly made scarecrow,” Christopher Foxx said in wonder. “He was right that one who falls back from it cannot become an ordinary man again. He will be less than man.” “That’s funny. He always looked like a man to me,” Vincent Rue said. “The head, the head! You forget the head. Let the head fall down!” Day- Torch cried. And the head fell down. It smashed itself like a bursting pumpkin on the broken floor. 4. Under the town is a woolier town, And the blood splashed up and the head fell down. —Ballads, Henry Drumhead
R. A. Lafferty began selling fiction regularly in the early 1960s and went full-time as a writer in 1971. His novels include Past Master (1968), Fourth Mansions (1969), and the Native American historical Okla Hannali (1972). You can sign up for email updates here.
About the Author
Thank you for buying this
Tom Doherty Associates ebook.
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
Sign Up
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.
TOR.COM
Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe.
And related subjects.
*
More than just a publisher's website, Tor.com
is a venue for original fiction, comics, and
discussion of the entire field of SF and fantasy,
in all media and from all sources. Visit our site
today- and join the conversation yourself.
Contents
Title Page
Copyright Notice
Not to Mention R. A. Lafferty: A Personal Introduction
Neil Gaiman
Slow Tuesday Night
(Introduction by Michael Dirda)
Narrow Valley
(Introduction by Michael Swanwick)
Nor Limestone Islands
(Introduction by Michael Bishop)
Interurban Queen
(Introduction by Terry Bisson)
Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne
(Introduction by Jack Dann)
In Our Block
(Introduction by Neil Gaiman)
Ride a Tin Can
(Introduction by Neil Gaiman)
Nine Hundred Grandmothers
(Introduction by Patton Oswalt / Afterword by Andy Duncan)
Land of the Great Horses
(Introduction by Harlan Ellison / Afterword by Gregory Frost)
Eurema's Dam
(Introduction by Robert Silverberg)
Selenium Ghosts of the Eighteen Seventies
(Introduction by Kelly Robson)
The Primary Education of the Camiroi
(Introduction by Samuel R. Delany)
Continued on Next Rock
(Introduction by Nancy Kress / Afterword by R. A. Lafferty)
Sky
(Introduction by Gwenda Bond)
Cliffs That Laughed
(Introduction by Gregory Feeley)
Seven-Day Terror
(Introduction by Connie Willis)
Boomer Flats
(Introduction by Cat Rambo)
Old Foot Forgot
(Introduction by John Scalzi)
The World as Will and Wallpaper
(Introduction by Samuel R. Delany)
Funnyfingers
(Introduction by Andrew Ferguson)
Thieving Bear Planet
(Introduction by Jeff VanderMeer)
Days of Grass, Days of Straw
(Introduction by Gary K. Wolfe)
About the Author
Copyright Acknowledgments
Copyright
Copyright Acknowledgments
“Seven-Day Terror” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, March 1962. “Slow Tuesday Night” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, April 1965. “In Our Block” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, July 1965. “Nine Hundred Grandmothers” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, February 1966. “Narrow Valley” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, September 1966. “The Primary Education of the Camiroi” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, December 1966. “Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, February 1967. “Land of the Great Horses” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Dangerous Visions, Harlan Ellison ed. “Cliffs That Laughed” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in The Magazine of Horror, March 1969. “Ride a Tin Can” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, April 1970. “Continued on Next Rock” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 7, Damon Knight ed. “Old Foot Forgot” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 7, Damon Knight ed. “Interurban Queen” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 8, Damon Knight ed. “Nor Limestone Islands” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 1, Terry Carr ed. “Sky” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions I, Robert Silverberg ed. “Boomer Flats” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, July-August 1971. “Eurema’s Dam” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions II, Robert Silverberg ed. “The World as Will and Wallpaper” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Future City, Roger Elwood ed.
“Days of Grass, Days of Straw” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions 3, Robert Silverberg ed. “Funnyfingers” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Funnyfingers & Cabrito. “Selenium Ghosts of the Eighteen Seventies” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 8, Terry Carr ed. “Thieving Bear Planet” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 12, Terry Carr ed.
This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in these stories are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
THE BEST OF R. A. LAFFERTY
Copyright © 2019 by The Locus Science Fiction Foundation
All introductions and afterwords are copyright © 2018 by their respective authors and are used with permission.
All rights reserved.
Cover photograph by Danny Xu / Shutterstock.com Cover design by Jamie Stafford-Hill
A Tor Essentials Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates 120 Broadway New York, NY 10271
www.tor-forge.com
® Tor is a registered trademark of Macmillan Publishing Group, LLC.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lafferty, R. A., author. The best of R. A. Lafferty / edited by Jonathan Strahan.—First edition. p. cm. “A Tom Doherty Associates book.” ISBN 978-1-250-79481-9 (hardcover) ISBN 978-1-250-77853-6 (trade paperback) ISBN 978-1-250-77868-0 (ebook) 1. Science fiction, American—Fiction. I. Title. PS3562.A28 813'.54—dc23 2020044266
ISBN 978-1-250-77853-6 (trade paperback) ISBN 978-1-250-79481-9 (paper over board) ISBN 978-1-250-77868-0 (ebook)
eISBN 9781250778680
Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
First published in Great Britain in 2019 by Gollancz, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group Ltd
First U.S. Edition: February 2021
1. I recommend Paul Kincaid’s excellent article in Through the Dark Labyrinth, https://www.google.com.au/amp/s/ttdlabyrinth.wordpress.com/2014/08/01/reprint-thus-we-frustrate- charlemagne/amp/
