08 2$}&=IG08G|JS 37
stories by R. A. LAFFERTY
NINE
HUNDRED
GRAND
MOTHERS
"Lafferty has
the power
which sets
fires behind
your eyeballs.
There is
warmth,
illumination
and a certain
joy attendant
upon the
experience.
He's good."
ROGER ZELAZNY
a
5 8 0 5 1
ISBN 0-441-58051-3
117274 2100 250
0
MASTERS OF SCIENCE FICTION PRAISE ONE
OF THEIR OWN:
1
“R.A. Lafferty is one of the most original writers in sci-
ence fiction. He bends or breaks normal story restric-
tions apparently at will, pokes fun at serious matters and
breaks into a kind of folk-lyricism over grotesqueries.
All this, plus the most unfettered imagination we've en-
joyed in years."
-Terry Carr
“The Lafferty madness ... is peppered with nightmare”
-Samuel R. Delany
wild, subtle, demonic, angelic, hilarious, tragic,
poetic, a thundering melodrama and a quest into the
depths of the human spirit . . . R.A. Lafferty has always
been uniquely his own man."
-Poul Anderson
“Lafferty's stories, like Philip K. Dick's, are not suscept-
ible to being confused with the work of any other
writer."
-Fred Saberhagen
“It is a minor miracle that a serious philosophical and
speculative work should be written so colorfully and so
lyrically.”
-Judith Merril
.
.
"As with everything the man writes, the wind of imagi-
nation blows strongly ... and we can settle back to ap-
preciating the special magic proffered by the madman
Lafferty."
-Harlan Ellison
stories by R. A. LAFFERTY
NINE
HUNDRED
GRAND-
MOTHERS
A
SF
ace books
A Division of Charter Communication, Inc.
A GROSSET & DUNLAP COMPANY
51 Madison Avenue
New York, New York 10010
Nine Hundred Grandmothers
Copyright © 1970 by R. A. Lafferty
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be repro-
duced in any form or by any means, except for the in-
clusion of brief quotations in a review, without permission
in writing from the publisher.
All characters in this book are fictitious. Any resem-
blance to actual persons, living or dead, is purely coin-
cidental.
An ACE Book
This Ace printing: January 1982
Published Simultaneously in Canada
2 4 6 8 0 9 7 5 3 1
Manufactured in the United States of America
“Nine Hundred Grandmothers." Copyright © 1966 by Galaxy Publishing Corp.
From II, February 1966.
“Land of the Great Horses."Copyright © 1967 by Harlan Ellison. From Danger-
ous Visions.
"Ginny Wrapped in the Sun." Copyright © 1967 by Galaxy Publishing Corp.
From Galaxy, August, 1967.
"The Six Fingers of Time." Copyright © 1960 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From
I, September 1960.
"Frog On the Mountain." Copyright © 1970 by R.A. Lafferty. Published here
for the first time anywhere by arrangement with the author.
"All the People." Copyright © 1961 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From Galaxy,
April, 1961.
“Primary Education of the Camiroi." Copyright © 1966 by Galaxy Publishing
Corp. From Galaxy, December 1966.
“Slow Tuesday Night." Copyright © 1965 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From
Galaxy, April 1965.
"Snuffles."Copyright © 1960 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From Galaxy, Decem-
ber 1960.
"Thus we Frustrate Charlemagne." Copyright © 1967 by Galaxy Publishing
Corp. From Galaxy, February 1969.
"Name of the Snake." Copyright © 1964 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From
Worlds of Tomorrow, April 1964.
"Narrow Valley." Copyright © 1966 by Mercury Press, Inc. From Fantasy and
Science Fiction, September 1966.
"Polity and Custom of the Camiroi." Copyright © 1967 by Galaxy Publishing
Corp. From Galaxy, June 1967.
"In Our Block." Copyright © 1965 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From Il, July
1965.
"Hog-Belly Honey." Copyright © 1965 by Mercury Press, Inc. From Fantasy and
Science Fiction, September 1965.
"Seven Day Terror." Copyright © 1962 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From If,
March 1962.
"The Hole On the Comer." Copyright © 1967 by Damon Knight. From Orbit 2.
“What's the Name of That Town?" Copyright © 1964 by Galaxy Publishing
Corp. From Galaxy, October 1964.
“Through Other Eyes." Copyright © 1960 by Columbia Publications, Inc. From
Future, February 1960.
"One at a Time." Copyright © 1969 by Damon Knight. From Orbit 4.
“Guesting Time." Copyright © 1965 by Galaxy Publishing Corp. From II, May
1965.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Nine Hundred Grandmothers....
Land of the Great Horses.
Ginny Wrapped in the Sun....
The Six Fingers of Time....
Frog on the Mountain..
All the People......
Primary Education of the Camiroi.
Slow Tuesday Night......
Snuffles..
Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne.
Name of the Snake..
Narrow Valley......
Polity and Custom of the Camiroi.
In Our Block......
Hog-Belly Honey
Seven Day Terror.
The Hole on the Corner........
What's the Name of that Town.
Through Other Eyes....
One at a Time....
Guesting Time.
7
20
29
43
74
106
119
134
143
171
185
196
..212
228
236
246
.254
269
282
297
310
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
-
а
n
CERAN SWICEGOOD was a promising young Special As-
pects Man. But, like all Special Aspects, he had one
irritating habit. He was forever asking the question:
How Did It All Begin?
They all had tough names except Ceran. Manbreaker
Crag, Heave Huckle, Blast Berg, George Blood, Move
Manion (when Move says “Move," you move), Trouble
Trent. They were supposed to be tough, and they had
taken tough names at the naming. Only Ceran kept his
own-to the disgust of his commander, Manbreaker.
“Nobody can be a hero with a name like Ceran Swice-
good!” Manbreaker would thunder. “Why don't you take
Storm Shannon? That's good. Or Gutboy Bartelhouse or
Slash Slagle or Nevel Knife? You barely glanced at the
suggested list."
"I'll keep my own," Ceran always said, and that is
where he made his mistake. A new name will some-
times bring out a new personality. It had done so for
George Blood. Though the hair on George's chest was
a graft job, yet that and his new name had turned him
from a boy into a man. Had Ceran assumed the heroic
name of Gutboy Barrelhouse he might have been capa-
ble of rousing endeavors and man-sized angers rather
than his tittering indecisions and flouncy furies.
They were down on the big asteroid Proavitus-a
sphere that almost tinkled with the potential profit that
might be shaken out of it. And the tough men of the
Expedition knew their business. They signed big con-
tracts on the native velvet-like bark scrolls and on their
own parallel tapes. They impressed, inveigled and
somewhat cowed the slight people of Proavitus. Here
7
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
was a solid two-way market, enough to make them
slaver. And there was a whole world of oddities that
could lend themselves to the luxury trade.
"Everybody's hit it big but you,” Manbreaker crackled
in kindly thunder' to Ceran after three days there. “But
even Special Aspects is supposed to pay its way. Our
charter compels us to carry one of your sort to give
a cultural twist to the thing, but it needn't be restricted
to that. What we go out for every time, Ceran, is to cut
a big fat hog in the rump-we make no secret of that.
But if the hog's tail can be shown to have a cultural
twist to it, that will solve a requirement. And if that
twist in the tail can tum us a profit, then we become
mighty happy about the whole thing. Have you been
able to find out anything about the living dolls, for in-
stance? They might have both a cultural aspect and a
market value."
"The living dolls seem a part of something much
deeper,” Ceran said. “There's a whole complex of things
to be unraveled. The key may be the statement of the
Proavitoi that they do not die.
“I think they die pretty young, Ceran. All those out
and about are young, and those I have met who do not
leave their houses are only middling old.”
"Then where are their cemeteries?"
"Likely they cremate the old folks when they die.”
"Where are the crematories?”
"They might just toss the ashes out or vaporize the
entire remains. Probably they have no reverence for an-
cestors."
"Other evidence shows their entire culture to be based
on an exaggerated reverence for ancestors.
"You find out, Ceran. You're Special Aspects Man."
Ceran talked to Nokoma, his Proavitoi counterpart as
translator. Both were expert, and they could meet each
other halfway in talk. Nokoma was likely feminine.
There was a certain softness about both the sexes of the
8
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
Proavitoi, but the men of the Expedition believed that
they had them straight now.
“Do you mind if I ask some straight questions?" Ceran
greeted her today.
"Sure is not. How else I leam the talk well but by
talling?"
"Some of the Proavitoi say that they do not die, No-
koma. Is this true?"
"How is not be true? If they die, they not be here to
say they do not die. Oh, I joke, I joke. No, we do not
die. It is a foolish alien custom which we see no reason
to imitate. On Proavitus, only the low creatures die."
"None of you does?"
“Why, no. Why should one want to be an exception in
this?"
“But what do you do when you get very old?”
"We do less and less then. We come to a deficiency
of energy. Is it not the same with you?”
“Of course. But where do you go when you become
exceedingly old?"
"Nowhere. We stay at home then. Travel is for the
young and those of the active years.”
"Let's try it from the other end,” Ceran said. "Where
are your father and mother, Nokoma?”
"Out and about. They aren't really old."
"And your grandfathers and grandmothers?"
"A few of them still get out. The older ones stay
home.”
"Let's try it this way. How many grandmothers do
you have, Nokoma?”
"I think I have nine hundred grandmothers in my
house. Oh, I know that isn't many, but we are the young
branch of a family. Some of our clan have very great
numbers of ancestors in their houses.
"And all these ancestors are alive?"
“What else? Who would keep things not alive? How
would such be ancestors?"
Ceran began to hop around in his excitement.
n
9
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
"Could I see them?" he twittered.
"It might not be wise for you to see the older of them,”
Nokoma cautioned. “It could be an unsettling thing for
strangers, and we guard it. A few tens of them you can
see, of course.
Then it came to Ceran that he might be onto what
he had looked for all his life. He went into a panic of
expectation.
"Nokoma, it would be finding the keyl” he fluted.
"If none of you has ever died, then your entire race
would still be alive!"
"Sure. Is like you count fruit. You take none away,
you still have them all.”
"But if the first of them are still alive, then they
might know their origini They would know how it be-
ganl Do they? Do you?"
"Oh, not I. I am too young for the Ritual.”
"But who knows? Doesn't someone know?"
"Oh, yes, All the old ones know how it began."
"How old? How many generations back from you till
they know?”.
"Ten, no more. When I have ten generations of chil-
dren, then I will also go to the Ritual."
"The Ritual, what is it?"
"Once a year, the old people go to the very old peo-
ple. They wake them up and ask them how it all began.
The very old people tell them the beginning. It is a high
time. Oh, how they hottle and laugh! Then the very old
people go back to sleep for another year. So it is passed
down to the generations. That is the Ritual."
The Proavitoi were not humanoid. Still less were they
monkey-faces,” though that name was now set in the
explorers' lingo. They were upright and robed and
swathed, and were assumed to be two-legged under their
garments
. Though, as Manbreaker said, “They might
go on wheels, for all we know."
They had remarkable flowing hands that might be
10
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
called everywhere-digited. They could handle tools, or
employ their hands as if they were the most intricate
tools.
George Blood was of the opinion that the Proavitoi
were always masked, and that the men of the Expedi-
tion had never seen their faces. He said that those ap-
parent faces were ritual masks, and that no part of the
Proavitoi had ever been seen by the men except for
those remarkable hands, which perhaps were their real
faces.
The men reacted with cruel hilarity when Ceran tried
to explain to them just what a great discovery he was
verging on.
"Little Ceran is still on the how-did-it-begin jag,” Man-
breaker jeered. “Ceran, will you never give off asking
which came first, the chicken or the egg?"
"I will have that answer very soon,” Ceran sang. "I
have the unique opportunity. When I find how the
Proavitoi began, I may have the clue to how everything
I
began. All of the Proavitoi are still alive, the very first
generation of them."
"It passes belief that you can be so simpleminded,"
Manbreaker moaned. "They say that one has finally
mellowed when he can suffer fools gracefully. By God,
I hope I never come to that.”
But two days later, it was Manbreaker who sought
out Ceran Swicegood on nearly the same subject. Man-
breaker had been doing a little thinking and discovering
of his own.
"You are Special Aspects Man, Ceran," he said, "and
you have been running off after the wrong aspect."
"What is that?"
"It don't make a damn how it began. What is impor-
tant is that it may not have to end."
"It is the beginning that I intend to discover,” said
Ceran.
"You fool, can't you understand anything? What do
the Proavitoi possess so uniquely that we don't know
11
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
whether they have it by science or by their nature or
by fool luck?"
"Ah, their chemistry, I suppose.”
"Sure. Organic chemistry has come of age here. The
Proavitoi have every kind of nexus and inhibitor and
stimulant. They can grow and shrink and telescope and
prolong what they will These creatures seem stupid to
me; it is as if they had these things by instinct. But they
have them, that is what is important. With these things,
we can become the patent medicine kings of the uni-
verses, for the Proavitoi do not travel or make many
outside contacts. These things can do anything or undo
anything. I suspect that the Proavitoi can shrink cells,
and I suspect that they can do something else."
“No, they couldn't shrink cells. It is you who talk
nonsense now, Manbreaker."
“Never mind. Their things already make nonsense
of conventional chemistry. With the pharmacopoeia that
one could pick up here, a man need never die. That's
the stick horse you've been riding, isn't it? But you've
been riding it backward with your head to the tail. The
Proavitoi say that they never die.”
"They seem pretty sure that they don't
. If they did,
they would be the first to know it, as Nokoma says.
"What? Have these creatures humor?"
"Some.”
"But, Ceran, you don't understand how big this is."
"I'm the only one who understands it so far. It means
that if the Proavitoi have always been immortal, as they
maintain, then the oldest of them are still alive. From
them I may be able to learn how their" species-and
perhaps every species-began.”
Manbreaker went into his dying buffalo act then. He
tore his hair and nearly pulled out his ears by the roots.
He stomped and pawed and went off bul-bellowing: “It
don't make a damn how it began, you fooll It might not
have to end!” so loud that the hills echoed back:
"It don't make a damn-you fool."
12
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
Ceran Swicegood went to the house of Nokoma, but
not with her on her invitation. He went without her
when he knew that she was away from home. It was a
sneaky thing to do, but the men of the Expedition were
trained in sneakery.
He would find out better without a mentor about the
nine hundred grandmothers, about the rumored living
dolls. He would find out what the old people did do if
they didn't die, and find if they knew how they were
first bom. For his intrusion, he counted on the innate
politeness of the Proavitoi.
The house of Nokoma, of all the people, was in the
cluster on top of the large flat hill, the Acropolis of
Proavitus. They were earthen houses, though finely done,
and they had the appearance of growing out of and be-
ing a part of the hill itself,
Ceran went up the winding, ascending flagstone paths,
and entered the house which Nokoma had once pointed
out to him. He entered furtively, and encountered one
of the nine hundred grandmothers-one with whom no
body need be furtive.
The grandmother was seated and small and smiling
at him. They talked without real difficulty, though it
was not as easy as with Nokoma, who could meet Ceran
halfway in his own language. At her call, there came
a grandfather who likewise smiled at Ceran. These two
ancients were somewhat smaller than the Proavitoi of
active years. They were kind and serene. There was an
atmosphere about the scene that barely missed being
an odor-not unpleasant, sleepy, reminiscent of some-
thing, almost sad.
"Are there those here older than you?" Ceran asked
eamestly
"So many, so many, who could know how many pa
said the grandmother. She called in other grandmothers
and grandfathers older and smaller than herself, these
no more than half the size of the active Proavitoi-small,
sleepy, smiling.
13
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
Ceran knew now that the Proavitoi were not masked.
The older they were, the more character and interest
there was in their faces. It was only of the immature
active Proavitoi that there could have been a doubt.
No masks could show such calm and smiling old age.as
this. The queer textured stuff was their real faces.
So old and friendly, so weak and sleepy, there must
have been a dozen generations of them there back to
the oldest and smallest.
"How old are the oldest?" Ceran asked the first grand-
mother.
"We say that all are the same age since all are per-
petual,” the grandmother told him. “It is not true that
all are the same age, but it is indelicate to ask how old."
"You do not know what a lobster is," Ceran said to
them, trembling, but it is a creature that will boil hap-
pily if the water on him is heated slowly. He takes no
alarm, for he does not know at what point the heat is
dangerous. It is that gradual here with me. I slide from
one degree to another with you and my credulity is not
alarmed. I am in danger of believing anything about
you if it comes in small doses, and it will. I believe that
you are here and as you are for no other reason than
that I see and touch you. Well, Ill be boiled for a lob-
ster, then, before I turn back from it. Are there those
here even older than the ones present?"
The first grandmother motioned Ceran to follow her.
They went down a ramp through the floor into the older
part of the house, which must have been under ground.
Living dolls! They were here in rows on the shelves,
and sitting in small chairs in their niches. Doll-sized
indeed, and several hundred of them.
Many had wakened at the intrusion. Others came
awake when spoken to or touched. They were incredibly
ancient, but they were cognizant in their glances and
recognition. They smiled and stretched sleepily, not as
humans would, but as very old puppies might. Ceran
14
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
spoke to them, and they understood each other sur-
prisingly.
Lobster, lobster, said Ceran to himself, the water has
passed the danger point! And it hardly feels different.
If you believe your senses in this, then you will be boiled
alive in your credulity, .
He knew now that the living dolls were real and that
they were the living ancestors of the Proavitoi.
Many of the little creatures began to fall asleep again.
Their waking moments were short, but their sleeps
seemed to be likewise. Several of the living mummies
woke a second time while Ceran was still in the room,
woke refreshed from very short sleeps and were anxious
to talk again.
"You are incredible" Ceran cried out, and all the
small and smaller and still smaller creatures smiled and
laughed their assent. Of course they were. All good crea-
tures everywhere are incredible, and were there ever so
many assembled in one place? But Ceran was greedy.
A roomful of miracles wasn't enough.
"I have to take this back as far as it will gol" he cried
avidly. "Where are the even older ones?"
"There are older ones and yet older and again older,"
said the first grandmother, and thrice-over older ones,
but perhaps it would be wise not to seek to be too wise.
You have seen enough. The old people are sleepy. Let
us go up again.”
Go up again, out of this? Ceran would not. He saw
passages and descending ramps, down into the heart of
the great hill itself. There were whole worlds of rooms
about him and under his feet. Ceran went on and down,
and who was to stop him? Not dolls and creatures much
smaller than dolls.
Manbreaker had once called himself an old pirate
who reveled in the stream of his riches. But Ceran was
the Young Alchemist who was about to find the Stone
itself.
He walked down the ramps through centuries and
15
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
millennia. The atmosphere he had noticed on the up-
per levels was a clear odor now-sleepy, half-remem-
bered, smiling, sad and quite strong. That is the way
Time smells.
"Are there those here even older than you?" Ceran
asked a small grandmother whom he held in the palm
of his hand.
"So old and so small that I could hold in my hand,"
said the grandmother in what Ceran knew from Nokoma
to be the older uncompounded form of the Proavitus
language.
Smaller and older the creatures had been getting as
Ceran went through the rooms. He was boiled lobster
now for sure. He had to believe it all: he saw and felt it.
The wren-sized grandmother talked and laughed and
nodded that there were those far older than herself, and
in doing so she nodded herself back to sleep. Ceran
returned her to her niche in the hive-like wall where
there were thousands of others, miniaturized generations.
Of course he was not in the house of Nokoma now,
He was in the heart of the hill that underlay all the
houses of Proavitus, and these were the ancestors of
everybody on the asteroid.
"Are there those here even older than youp) Ceran
asked a small grandmother whom he held on the tip
of his finger.
"Older and smaller," she said, “but you come near
the end."
She was asleep, and he put her back in her place. The
older they were, the more they slept.
He was down to solid rock under the roots of the bill.
He was into the passages that were cut out of that solid
rock, but they could not be many or deep. He had a
sudden fear that the creatures would become so small
that he could not see them or talk to them, and so he
would miss the secret of the beginning.
But had not Nokoma said that all the old people knew
the secret? Of course. But he wanted to hear it from
D
16
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
the oldest of them. He would have it now, one way or
the other.
Who is the oldest? Is this the end of it? Is this the
beginning? Wake up! Wake up!” he called when he was
sure he was in the lowest and oldest room.
"Is it Ritual?" asked some who woke up. Smaller than
?
mice they were, no bigger than bees, maybe older than
both.
"It is a special Ritual," Ceran told them. “Relate to
me how it was in the beginning."
What was that sound-too slight, too scattered to be
a noise? It was like a billion microbes laughing. It was
the hilarity of little things waking up to a high time.
Who is the oldest of all?" Ceran demanded, for their
laughter bothered him. “Who is the oldest and first?»
I am the oldest, the ultimate grandmother," one said
gaily. “All the others are my children. Are you also of
.
my children?
"
"Of course,” said Ceran, and the small laughter of
'
unbelief flittered out from the whole multitude of them.
"Then you must be the ultimate child, for you are like
no other. If you be, then it is as funny at the end as it
was in the beginning."
"How was it in the beginning?” Ceran bleated. “You
are the first. Do you know how you came to be?"
“Oh, yes, yes,” laughed the ultimate grandmother, and
the hilarity of the small things became a real noise now.
"How did it begin?" demanded Ceran, and he was
hopping and skipping about in his excitement.
"Oh, it was so funny a joke the way things began that
you would not believe it," chittered the grandmother. "A
joke, a joke!”
"Tell me the joke, then. If a joke generated your
species, then tell me that cosmic joke."
"Tell yourself,“ tinkled the grandmother. “You are a
part of the joke if you are of my children. Oh, it is too
funny to believe. How good to wake up and laugh and
go to sleep again."
a
17
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
Blazing green frustration! To be so close and to be
balked by a giggling beel
"Don't go to sleep again! Tell me at once how it
began!” Ceran shrilled, and he had the ultimate grand-
mother between thumb and finger.
"This is not Ritual,” the grandmother protested. “Ri-
tual is that you guess what it was for three days, and
we laugh and say 'No, no, no, it was something nine times
as wild as that. Guess some more.
"I will not guess for three daysl Tell me at once or I
will crush you,” Ceran threatened in a quivering voice.
"I look at you, you look at me, I wonder if you will
do it,” the ultimate grandmother said calmly.
Any of the tough men of the Expedition would have
done it-would have crushed her, and then another and
another and another of the creatures till the secret was
told. If Ceran had taken on a tough personality and a
tough name he'd have done it. If he'd been Gutboy
Barrelhouse he'd have done it without a qualm. But
Ceran Swicegood couldn't do it.
"Tell me,” he pleaded in agony. "All my life I've tried
to find out how it began, how anything began. And you
knowl”
“We know. Oh, it was so funny how it began. So
jokel So fool so clown, so grotesque thing! Nobody
could guess, nobody could believe."
"Tell mel Tell me!" Ceran was ashen and hysterical.
"No, no, you are no child of mine,” chortled 'the ulti-
mate grandmother. “Is too joke a joke to tell a stranger.
We could not insult a stranger to tell so funny, so un-
believe. Strangers can die. Shall I have it on conscience
that a stranger died laughing?"
“Tell mel Insult mel Let me die laughing!” But
Ceran nearly died crying from the frustration that ate
him up as a million bee-sized things laughed and hooted
and giggled:
"Oh, it was so funny the way it began!"
And they laughed. And laughed. And went on laugh-
2
18
NINE HUNDRED GRANDMOTHERS
ing . . . until Ceran Swicegood wept and laughed to-
gether, and crept away, and retumed to the ship still
laughing. On his next voyage he changed his name to
Blaze Bolt and ruled for ninety-seven days as king of
a sweet sea island in M-81, but that is another and much
more unpleasant story.
19
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
"They came and took our country away from us,” the
people had always said. But nobody understood them.
Two Englishmen, Richard Rockwell and Seruno Smith,
were rolling in a terrain buggy over the Thar Desert. It
was bleak, red country, more .rock than sand. It looked
as though the top had been stripped off it and the naked
underland left uncovered.
They heard thunder and it puzzled them. They looked
at each other, the blond Rockwell and the dark Smith.
It never thundered in the whole country between New
Delhi and Bahawalpur. What would this rainless north
India desert have to thunder with?
“Let's ride the ridges here,” Rockwell told Smith, and
he sent the vehicle into a climb. "It never rains here, but
once before I was caught in a draw in a country where
it never rained. I nearly drowned.”
It thundered again, heavy and rolling, as though to
tell them that they were hearing right.
“This draw is named Kuti Tavdavi-Little River,"
Smith said darkly. “I wonder why."
Then he jerked back as though startled at himself.
“Rockwell, why did I say that? I never saw this draw
before. How did a name like that pop into my mind? ?
But it's the low draw that would be a little river if it
ever rained in this country. This land can't have sig.
nificant rain. There's no high place to tip whatever
moisture goes over.
"I wonder about that every time I come,” said Rock.
well, and raised his hand toward the shimmering heights
-the Land of the Great Horses, the famous mirage.
20
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
a
"If it were really there it would tip the moisture. It
would make a lush savanna of all this.
They were mineral explorers doing ground minutiae
on promising portions of an aerial survey. The trouble
with the Thar was that it had everything-lead, zinc,
antimony, copper, tin, bauxite-in barely submarginal
amounts. Nowhere would the Thar pay off, but every-
where it would almost pay.
Now it was lightning about the heights of the mirage,
and they had never seen that before. It had clouded
and lowered. It was thundering in rolling waves, and
there is no mirage of sound.
“There is either a very large and very busy bird up
there or this is rain," Rockwell said.
And it had begun to rain, softly but steadily. It was
pleasant as they chukkered along in the vehicle through
the afternoon. Rain in the desert is always like a bonus.
Smith broke into a happy song in one of the north-
west India tongues, a tune with a ribald swing to it,
though Rockwell didn't understand the words. It was
full of double rhymes and vowel-packed words such as
a child might make up.
"How the devil do you know the tongues so well?”
Rockwell asked “I find them difficult, and I have a good
linguistic background.”
"I didn't have to learn them,” Smith said, "I just had
to remember them. They all cluster around the boro jib
itself."
"Around the what? How many of the languages do
a
you know?"
"All of them. The Seven Sisters, they're called: Pun-
jabi, Kashmiri, Gujarati, Marathi, Sindhi, Hindi.”
"Your Seven Sisters only number six,” Rockwell jibed.
"There's a saying that the seventh sister ran off with
a horse trader," Smith said. “But that seventh lass is
still encountered here and there around the world.”
Often they stopped to survey on foot. The very color
of the new rivulets was significant to the mineral men,
21
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
and this was the first time they had ever seen water
flow in that country. They continued on fitfully and
slowly, and ate up a few muddy miles.
Rockwell gasped once and nearly fell off the vehicle.
He had seen a total stranger riding beside him, and it
shook him.
Then he saw that it was Smith as he had always
been, and he was dumbfounded by the illusion. And,
soon, by something else.
"Something is very wrong here,” Rockwell said.
"Something is very right here," Smith answered him,
and then broke into another song in an Indian tongue.
"We're lost," Rockwell worried out loud. "We can't
see any distance for the rain, but there shouldn't be
rising ground here. It isn't mapped.
“Of course it is,” Smith sang. “It's the Jalo Char."
"The what? Where did you get a name like that?
The map's a blank here, and the country should be.”
"Then the map is defective. Man, it's the sweetest
valley in the world. It will lead us all the way up. How
could the map forget it? How could we all forget it for
so long?”
“Smith! What's wrong? You're pie-eyed.”
"Everything's right, I tell you. I was reborn just a
minute ago. It's a coming home.”
“Smith! We're riding through green grass.
"I love it. I could crop it like a horse.
"That cliff, Smithl It shouldn't be that closel It's part
of the mir-
"Why, sir, that is Lolo Trusul.”
“But it's not reall It's not on any topography map!”
"Map, sir? I'm a poor kalo man who wouldn't know
about things like that."
"Smith! You're a qualified cartographer!”
"Does seem that I followed a trade with a name like
that. But the cliff is real enough. I climbed it in my
boyhood-in my other boyhood. And that yonder, sir,
is Drapengoro Rez-the Grassy Mountain. And the high
22
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
plateau ahead of us which we begin to climb is Diz
Boro Grai—the Land of the Great Horses.
Rockwell stopped the terrain buggy and leaped off.
Smith followed him in a happy daze.
"Smith, you're wide-eyed crazyl" Rockwell gasped.
”
"And what am I? We're terribly lost somehow. Smith,
look at the log chart and the bearings recorder!"
“Log chart, sir? I'm a poor kalo man who wouldn't
know-
"Damn you, Smith, you made these instruments. If
they're correct we're seven hundred feet too high and
have been climbing for ten miles into a highland that's
supposed to be part of a mirage. These cliffs can't be
here. We can't be here. Smith!”
But Seruno Smith had ambled off like a crazy man.
"Smith, where are you trotting off to? Can't you hear
me?"
"You call to me, sir?" asked Smith. “And by such a
name?"
“Are the two of us as crazy as the country?” Rockwell
moaned. “I've worked with you for three years. Isn't
your name Smith?"
"Why, yes, sir, I guess it might be englished as Horse-
Smith or Black-Smith. But my name is Pettalangro and
I'm going home.”
And the man who had been Smith started on foot
up to the Land of the Great Horses.
"Smith, I'm getting on the buggy and I'm going back,"
Rockwell shouted. "I'm scared liverless of this country
that changes. When a mirage tuns solid it's time to
quit. Come along nowl We'll be back in Bikaner by
tomorrow morning. There's a doctor there, and a whis-
key bar. We need one of them.”
"Thank you, sir, but I must go up to my home," Smith
sang out. “It was kind of you to give me a ride along the
way."
"I'm leaving you, Smith. One crazy man is better than
two.
23
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
"Ashava, Sarishan," Smith called a parting.
"Smith, unriddle me one last thing." Rockwell called,
trying to find a piece of sanity to hold to. "What is the
name of the seventh sister?”
"Deep Romany,” Smith sang, and he was gone up into
the high plateau that had always been a mirage.
In an upper room on Olive Street in St. Louis, Mis.
souri, a half-and-half couple were talking half-and-half.
“The rez has riser’d," the man said. “I can sung it like
brishindo. Let's jal.”
"All right,” the wife said, “if you're awa.”
"Hell, I bet I can riker plenty bano on the bede we
got here. I'll have kakko come kinne it saro."
"With a little bachi we can be jaľd by areat," said
the wife,
"Nashiva, woman, nashiva!"
"All right," the wife said, and she began to pack their
suitcases.
a
In
Camargo in the Chihuahua State of Mexico, a
shade-tree mechanic sold his business for a hundred pe-
sos and told his wife to pack up—they were leaving.
"To leave now when business is so good?" she asked.
"I only got one car to fix and I can't fix that,” the man
said.
"But if you keep it long enough, he will pay you to
put it together again even if it isn't fixed. That's what he
did last time. And you've a horse to shoe.”
"I'm afraid of that horse. It has come back, though.
Let's go."
“Are you sure we will be able to find it?”
"Of course I'm not sure. We will go in our wagon and
our sick horse will pull it."
"Why will we go in the wagon, when we have a car,
of sorts?”
"I don't know why. But we will go in the wagon, and
24
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
we will nail the old giant horseshoe up on the lintel
board.”
A carny in Nebraska lifted his head and smelled the
air.
"It's come back," he said. "I always knew we'd know.
Any other Romanies here?"
"I got a little rart in me," said one of his fellows. "This
narvelengero dives is only a two-bit camival anyhow.
We'll tell the boss to shove it up his chev and we'll be
gone."
In Tulsa, a used-car dealer named Gypsy Red an-
nounced the hottest sale on the row:
“Everything for nothing! I'm leaving. Pick up
the
papers and drive them off. Nine new heaps and thirty
good ones. All free.”
"You think we're crazy?" the people asked. “There's a
catch."
Red put the papers for all the cars on the ground and
put a brick on top of them. He got in the worst car on
the lot and drove it off forever.
“All free,” he sang out as he drove off. “Pick up the
papers and drive the cars away.”
They're still there. You think people are crazy to fall
for something like that that probably has a catch to it?
In Galveston a barmaid named Margaret was asking
merchant seamen how best to get passage to Karachi.
"Why Karachi?” one of them asked her.
“I thought it would be the nearest big port,” she said.
"It's come back, you know.”
"I kind of felt this moming it had come back," he said.
"I'm a chal myself. Sure, we'll find something going
that way."
In thousands of places fawney-men and dukkerin-
women, kakki-baskros and hegedusies, clowns and com-
25
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
mission men, Counts of Condom and Dukes of Little
Egypt parveld in their chips and got ready to roll.
Men and families made sudden decisions in every
country. Athinganoi gathered in the hills above Salonika
in Greece and were joined by brothers from Serbia and
Albania and the Rhodope Hills of Bulgaria. Zingari
of north Italy gathered around Pavia and began to roll
toward Genoa to take ship. Boemios of Portugal came
down to Porto and Lisbon. Gitanos of Andalusia and all
southern Spain came to Sanlúcar and Málaga. Zigeuner
from Thuringia and Hanover thronged to Hamburg to
find ocean passage. Giobogo and their mixed-blood Shel-
to cousins from every cnoc and coill of Ireland found
boats at Dublin and Limerick and Bantry.
From deeper Europe, Tsigani began to travel over-
land eastward. The people were going from two hun-
dred ports of every continent and over a thousand high-
roads-many of them long forgotten.
Balauros, Kalo, Manusch, Melelo, Tsigani, Moro, Ro-
mani, Flamenco, Sinto, Cicara, the many-named peo-
ple was traveling in its thousands. The Romani Rai was
moving
Two million Gypsies of the world were going home.
At the Institute, Gregory Smimov was talking to his
friends and associates.
"You remember the thesis I presented several years
ago,” he said, "that, a little over a thousand years ago,
Outer Visitors came down to Earth and took a sliver of
our Earth away with them. All of you found the proposi-
tion.comical, but I arrived at my conclusion by isostatic
and eustatic analysis carried out minutely. There is no
doubt that it happened.”
"One of our slivers is missing,” said Aloysius Shiplap.
"You guessed the sliver taken at about ten thousand
square miles in area and no more than a mile thick at
its greatest. You said you thought they wanted to run
this sliver from our Earth through their laboratories as
26
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
a sample. Do you have something new on our missing
sliver?"
"I'm closing the inquiry," Gregory said. "They've
brought it back."
It was simple really, jekuesteskero, Gypsy-simple. It
is the gadjo, the non-Gypsies of the world, who give
complicated answers to simple things.
"They came and took our country away from us,” the
Gypsies had always said, and that is what had hap-
pened.
The Outer Visitors had run a slip under it, rocked it
gently to rid it of nervous fauna, and then taken it away
for study. For a marker, they left an immaterial simula-
crum of that high country as we ourselves sometimes
set name or picture tags to show where an object will
be set later. This simulacrum was often seen by humans
as a mirage.
The Outer Visitors also set simulacra in the minds of
the superior fauna that fled from the moving land. This
would be a homing instinct, inhibiting permanent settle-
ment anywhere until the time should come for the re-
settlement; entwined with this instinct were certain
premonitions, fortune-showings, and understandings.
Now the Visitors brought the slice of land back, and
its old fauna homed in on it.
"What will the-ah-patronizing smile on my part-
Outer Visitors do now, Gregory?" Aloysius Shiplap asked
back at the Institute.
"Why, take another sliver of our Earth to study, I
suppose, Aloysius,” Gregory Smirnov said.
Low-intensity earthquakes rocked the Los Angeles area
for three days. The entire area was evacuated of peo-
ple. Then there was a great whistle blast from the sky
as if to say, “All ashore that's going ashore.
,
Then the surface to some little depth and all its
superstructure was taken away. It' was gone. And then
it was quickly forgotten.
27
LAND OF THE GREAT HORSES
From the Twenty-second Century Comprehensive En-
cyclopedia, Vol. 1, page 389:
ANCELENOS. (See also Automobile Gypsies and
Prune Pickers.) A mixed ethnic group of unknown
origin, much given to wandering in automobiles. It
is predicted that they will be the last users of this
vehicle, and several archaic chrome-burdened mod-
els are still produced for their market. These peo-
ple are not beggars; many of them are of superior
intelligence. They often set up in business, usually
as real estate dealers, gamblers, confidence men,
managers of mail-order diploma mills, and promo-
ters of one sort or other. They seldom remain long
in one location.
Their pastimes are curious. They drive for hours
and days on old and seldom-used cloverleafs and
freeways. It has been said that a majority of the
Angelenos are narcotics users, but Harold Freelove
(who lived for some months as an Angeleno) has
proved this false. What they inhale at their frolics
(smog-crocks) is a black smoke of carbon and pe-
troleum waste laced with monoxide. Its purpose is
not clear.
The religion of the Angelenos is a mixture of
old cults with a very strong eschatological element.
The Paradise Motif is represented by reference to
a mystic “Sunset Boulevard.” The language of the
Angelenos is a colorful and racy argot. Their ac-
count of their origin is vague:
“They came and took our dizz away from us,"
they say.
28
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
"I'M GOING to read my paper tonight, Dismas.“ Dr. Min-
den said, “and they'll hoot me out of the hall. The thought
of it almost makes the hair walk off my head."
"Oh well, serves you right, Minden. From the hints
you've given me of it, you can't expect easy acceptance
for the paper; but the gentlemen aren't so bad."
"Not bad? Hauser honks like a gander! That clat-
tering laugh of Goldbeaterl Snodden sniggers so loud
that it echos! Cooper's boom is like barrels rolling down-
stairs, and your own-it'll shrivel me, Dismas. Imagine
the weirdest cacophony ever- Oh no! I wasn't thinking
of one so weird as that!”
- Musical screaming! Glorious gibbering with an under-
tone that could shatter rocks! Hooting of a resonance
plainly too deep for so small an instrument! Yowling,
hoodoo laughing, broken roaring, rhinoceros runting!
And the child came tumbling out of the tall rocks of
Doolen's Mountain, leaping down the flanks of the hill
as though she was a waterfall. And both the men
laughed.
“Your Ginny is the weirdest cacophony I can imagine,
"
Dismas,” Dr. Minden said. “It scares me, and I love it.
"
Your daughter is the most remarkable creature in the
world.
"Talk to us, Ginny! I wish I could fix it that you would
be four years old forever.”
“Oh, I've fixed it myself, Dr. Minden,” Ginny sang as
she came to them with a movement that had something
of the breathless grace of a gazelle and something of
the scuttering of a little wild pig. “I use a trick like the
hoodoo woman did. She ate water-puppy eggs.
She
never got any older, you know.”
29
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
1
"What happened to her, Gin?" Dr. Minden asked
Ginny Dismas.
"Oh, after a while she got gray-headed and wrinkled.
And after another while her teeth and hair fell out,
and then she died. But she never did get any older. She
had everybody fooled. I got everybody fooled too.”
"I know that you have, Ginny, in very many ways.
Well, have you eaten water-puppy eggs to get no olderpa
“No. I can't find out where they lay them, Dr. Min-
"
, .
den. I've got my own trick that's even better."
“Do you know, Ginny, that when you rcally cut loose
you are the loudest little girl in the world?”
"I know it. I won it yesterday, Susanna Shonk said
that she was the loudest. We hollered for an hour. Su-
sanna's home with a sore throat today, but there isn't
anything the matter with me. Hey, has that house ever
been there before?”
"That house? But it's our own house, Ginny,” her fa-
ther, Dr. Dismas, said softly. “You've lived in it all your
life. You're in and out of it a thousand times a day."
"Funny I never saw it before,” Ginny said. "I better
. “I
go see what it looks like on the inside.” And Ginny
hurtled into the house that she was in and out of a
thousand times a day.
*I'll tell you a secret, Dismas," Dr. Minden said.
"Your small daughter Ginny is not really beautiful."
"Everybody thinks that she is, Minden:
"I know. They all believe her the most beautiful child
in the world. So did I till a moment ago. So will I again
in another minute when I see her come out of the house.
But her contemporary, my small son Krios, told me how
to look at her; and I do so. For an instant, out of her in-
cessant movement, I forced myself to see her as stopped
cold, at rest. She is grotesque, Dismas. If ever she pauses,
she is grotesque."
"No, she is like ultimate matter. Existence and mo-
tion are the same thing for her, and there cannot be the
one without the other. But I've never seen her stopped,
a
30
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
even in sleep. She's the liveliest sleeper anyone ever
watched-a laughing and singing sleeper. Her mother
calls her our beautiful goblin."
"Exactly, she's a goblin, a monkey, a kobald. She's
even grown a little pot like one of them. Dismas, she
has a monkey face and bandy legs and a goblin's own
Rot.
"No, she hasn't! There she goes! Out of the house
and up into the rocks again, and she's so beautiful that
it shakes me. Four years old—and she can still look at
the world and say, 'Funny I never saw you beforeľ Yes,
I've got a multidimensional daughter, Minden. Also a
neighbor who is either deep or murky. You keep feed-
ing me snatches of that paper of yours so I
you want to excite my curiosity about it. And the title-
The Contingent Mutation. What is? Who is?”
"We are, Dismas. We are contingent, conditional,
temporary, makeshift and improbable in our species.
Mine is a paper badly conceived and badly put to-
gether, and I shiver at the reception that it will get.
But it is about man, who is also badly conceived and
badly put together. The proposition of my paper is
that man is descended, recently and by incredible muta-
tion, from the most impossible of ancestors, Xauenan-
thropus of Xauen Man. The answer of that descent
suppose that
scares me.
"Minden, are you out of your mind? Where is the
descent? Where is the mutation? The Xauens were al-
ready men. No descent and no mutation was required.
The finds are all fifteen years old. One look at Xauen,
and everybody saw instantly that the Neanderthals and
Grimaldi and Cro-Magnon were all close cousins of the
same species-ourselves. They were the template, the
master key. They unriddled every riddle. We saw why
the chin or lack of chin was only a racial characteristic.
We saw it all. There is nothing to distinguish the Xauens
from ourselves except that their adults were badly made
ganglers, and probably unhealthy. The Xauens are mod-
31
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
ern men. They are ourselves. There is nothing revolu-
tionary about stuttering out fifteen-year-old certainties,
Minden. I thought your paper was to be a giant stride.
But it is only stepping off a two-inch curb.
• "Yes, an abysmal step off a two-inch curb, Dismas,
backward and around the world, and standing on one's
head and turning into a howling monkey in the process.
It isn't a simple step. If I am correct, Dismas, then our
descent from the Xauens was by an incredible, sudden
and single mutation; one that has been misunderstood
both as to effect and direction."
"I've never been quite satisfied with Xauens myself.
There is something misshapen about the whole business.
Of course we know the Xauens only by the skeletons
of ninety-six children, three adolescents, and two adults.
We are bound to find more.
"If we do, we will find them in the same proportion.
Oh, we will not recognize them at all. But does it not
seem an odd proportion to you? How come there were
so many kids? And how come-think about this a long,
long time, will you?-that eighty-six of those kids were
of the same size and apparently of the same age? The
Xauen skeletons came out of nine digs, close together both
in location and age. And of the total of one hundred
and one skeletons, eighty-six of them are of four-year-old
kids. Sure the Xauens are modem man! Sure they are
ourselves chin to chin. But eighty-six four-year-old kids
out of a hundred and one people is not a modern pro-
portion.
"You explain it then, Minden. I suppose that your
paper attempts to. Oh, scatter-boned ancestors! Here
come the religious nuts!"
Drs. Dismas and Minden had been sitting in the open
parkland in campesino chairs, in their own fine neighbor-
hood between Doolen's Mountain and the lower brush-
land. Dr. Dismas drew a hog-nosed pistol from under
his arm at the sight of the nuts who had shuffled up
that way several times before.
32
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
a
"Be offl" Dismas barked as the nuts crowded and
shuffled up closer from the lower brushland. “There's
nothing around here you want. You've been here a dozen
times with your silly questions.
"No, only three times," the nut leader said. He was
clean-shaven and short-haired in the old manner still
affected by fanatics, and he had fool written in every
line of him. “It's a simple thing we seek,” the leader
sniffled. “We only want to find the woman and kill her.
I believe that you could help us find the woman.
"There is no woman here except my wifel” Dr. Dismas
said angrily. "You have said yourselves that she isn't
the woman. Be gone now, and don't come back here
again.”
"But everything that we know tells us that the woman
is somewhere near this place,” the nut leader insisted.
"She is the woman who will bear the weird seed."
"Oh, well, there are some who say that my daughter
Ginny is a weird seed. Be off now.
"We know Ginny. She comes down sometimes to mock
us. Ginny is not the seed, but there is something of it
about her. Ginny is bom and already four years old.
The seed that we are seeking to kill is still in the
womb. Are you sure that your wife
",
“Damnit, do you want a public pregnancy test? No,
my wife is notl"
Dr. Dismas shot a couple of times around the feet of
the nut leader, and the whole gaggle of the nuts shuf-
fled off again. "It is only a little thing we seek, to find
and kill the woman,” they snuffled as they went.
"They may be right, Dismas," Dr. Minden said. “I've
been expecting the weird seed myself. I believe that it
may already have appeared several times, and such
nuts have killed it several times. The contingent muta-
tion can come unhinged at any time. It always could.
And when it does, the human world can well pass away.
But this time they won't be able to find the woman to
kill her."
33
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
as we
"This is fishier than Edward's Ichthyology, as
used to say in school I begin to understand why you're
afraid of the reception that your paper might get. And
you, as well as I, seem to have developed a little weird
seed lately."
“Yes, my young and my older son are both acting
most peculiarly lately, particularly in their relation to
the Dismas family. My son Dall has been jilted by your
daughter Agar, or is it the other way around? Or have
they both been jilted by your small daughter Ginny? As
far as I can arrive at it, Ginny told them that that sort
of stuff is out, no longer necessary, not even wanted on
their parts. She is obsoleting them, she says.
"And my four-year-old son Krios is about out of his
mind over your Ginny. He is so advanced in some ways
and so retarded in others. It seems as though he grew
unevenly and then stopped growing. I worry about him."
“Yes, Ginny has acquired several more small boy-
friends now. She says that you break the fort with a big
ram and you break the ram at the same time and throw it
away. And then you find better tools to take it over. I
don't know what she's talking about. But Krios is jealous
as only a passionate four-year-old can be.”
"Krios says that Ginny is bad and she made him bad.
He says that he doesn't know the words for the way they
were bad, but that he will go to Hell for it.”
“I had no idea that children were still taught about
Hell."
"They aren't. But they have either intuitive knowledge
of the place, or a continuing childhood folk legend of
it. Oh, here comes bad Ginny and her mother, and they
both have that stubbom look on them. You have two
strong women in your house, at least. I wish that Agar
were; for my son Dall isn't, and one of them should be.
Ginny and her mother Sally came hand in hand with
the air of something needing to be settled.
"I want to be fair about this, Father," Ginny called
34
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
solidly. "What I like about me is that I am always so
fair.
a
22
“That's also what I like about you, Ginny,” said Dr.
Dismas, “and what is the argument?"
"All I asked of Mother is that she make me three
thousand seven hundred and eighty peanut butter sand-
wiches. Isn't that a fair requests
"I'm not sure that it is, Ginny,” Dr. Dismas said. “It
would take you a long time to eat that many."
"Of course it will, twelve hundred and sixty days.
But that makes only three a day for the time I have to
stay hidden in my nest up in the rocks. I figured that
out by myself without paper. A lot of kids that have
been to school already can't figure as well as I can.
"I know. A precocious daughter is a mixed blessing,"
her father said.
"Oh, Ginny, you're going to get a paddling,” her mother
said. “I made you three of them, and you said that you
weren't even hungry for them.”
"Father, who is this woman who talks to me so
brusquely?” Ginny demanded.
"She is your mother, Ginny. You have been with her
every day of your life and before. You have just come
out of the house with her, and you still stand hand in
hand with her.”
"Funny I never saw her before," Ginny said. “I don't
believe that this woman is my mother at all. Well, I will
get my servants to make the sandwiches for me. Serpents
kill you, womanl–Oh, no, no, nobody touches me like
that!"
Musical screaming! Wailing of a resonance too deep
for so small an instrument, as Ginny was dragged off by
her mother to get paddled. Howling to high Heaven,
and the plainting of wild hogs and damned goblins!
"She is in good voice," Dr. Minden said. “When she
speaks of her servants, she means your daughter Agar
and my son Dall. It scares me, for I almost know what
she means. It is eerie that two compatible young people
3
35
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
say they will not marry because a four-year-old child
forbids them to do it. It scares me still more when I
begin to understand the mechanism at work.”
“What is the mechanism, Minden?"
“The mutational inhibitions. It's quite a tangled af-
fair. Do you remember the Screaming Monkeys of boon-
docks Rhodesia twenty years ago?"
"Vaguely. Bothersome little destructive monkeys that
had to be hunted down and killed-hunted down by a
sort of religious crusade, as I remember it. Yes, a muta-
tion, I suppose. A sudden wildness appearing in a spe-
cies. What is the connection"
“Dismas, they were the first, the initial probe that
failed. Others are on the way, and one of them will not
fail. The story is that the religious crusaders said that no
human child could be bom while the howling monkeys
flourished for the monkeys themselves were human
children. Well, they were. Well, no they weren't children.
And they weren't human. But, in a way, they had been
both. Or at least-
"Minden, do you know what you do mean?”
“I hardly do, Dismas. Here come the 'servants.'
Dall Minden and Agar Dismas drove up in a little
roustabout car and stopped.
“What is this nonsense I hear that you two are not
going to get married?” Dr. Dismas demanded.
“Not unless Ginny changes her mind, Father,” Agar
said. “Oh, don't ask us to explain it. We don't understand
it either.
“You are a pair of damned useless drones," Dismas
growled.
“Don't say that, Dismas,” Dr. Minden gasped. “Every-
"
thing begins to scare me now. “Drones' has a technical
meaning in this case.
“Ginny has just suffered an ignominy past bearing."
Agar grinned. She was a nice pleasant girl. “Now she
is sulking in her cave up in Doolen's Mountain and has
sent word for us to come at once.
-
36
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
"How has she sent word?” Dr. Dismas demanded.
"You two have just driven up."
"Oh, don't ask us to explain, Father. She sends us
word when she wants us. We don't understand it either.
We'll go up on foot.”
"Where is all this going to end?” Dr. Dismas asked
when the two grinning young drones had left them
and were ambling up the mountain.
“I don't know, Dismas,” Minden told him. “But I be-
lieve it may as well begin with a verse:
Salamanders do it,
Tadpoles and newts do it.
Why can't me and you do it?
you don't
"It's a verse that the four-year-olds have been chant-
ing, and you may not be tuned in on them. And the
peculiar thing is that the salamanders and newts and
tadpoles are doing it now, more than ever before.
It's worldwide. See Higgleton's recent paper if
take my word for it.”
"Oh, great blithering biologists! What are the squig-
glers doing more than ever before?"
“Engaging in neotic reproduction, of course. In many
pocket areas, tadpoles have been reproducing as tad-
poles for several years now, and the adult frog species
is disappearing. There have always been cases of it, of
course, but now it is becoming a pattern. The same is
true of the newts and salamanders. And remember that
all three are, like man, contingent mutations. But how
do the four-year-old children know about it when it is
still one of the best-kept secrets of the biologists?
Here comes my wife. Is it more family trouble, Clarin-
da?"
"Oh, Krios has locked himself in the bathroom, and
he won't come out or answer. He's been acting abomi-
nable all morning. Have you that emergency key you
made?”
37
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
"Here. Now get the boy out, whip him gently but
painfully, then explain to him that we love him very
much and that his troubles are our troubles. Then get
dinner. This family here never eats, unless it is pea-
nut butter sandwiches, and has not thought to ask me
to dine with them. Get back next door and with it,
Clarinda, and stop bubbling."
"There is something really bothering Krios," Clarinda
Minden bubbled yet, but she got herself back next door.
"Where shall we take it up, Dismas?" Doctor Minden
asked. “With the howling monkeys of boondocks Rho-
desia who may once have been human children? But
nobody believes that. With the neotic salamanders and
newts and pollywogs? With the Xauens who were either
our grandparents or our grandchildren? Or with our.
selves?"
“Roost on the Xauens a while," Dr. Dismas said.
“You didn't quite finish your screed on them.”
”
“Humans descend from the Xauens. Australopithecus,
no. Sinanthropus, no. They were creatures of another
line. But Neanderthal, Cro-Magnon, Grimaldi and our.
selves are all of one species, and we descend from the
Xauens. It is not true, however, that we have only one
hundred and one skeletons of the Xauens. We have
more than twenty thousand of them, but most of them
are called Ouezzane monkeys."
"Minden, you're crazy.
"
“I am talking about the three-foot-tall, big-headed
running monkeys who were mature and full grown at
four years of age and very old at fourteen. They threw
a few sports, steers and freemartins, who passed the pu-
berty age without effect and continued to grow. They
were gangling drones, servants of the active species,
and of course sterile. They were the one in one hundred
occurrence and of no importance. And one day they
bred, set up a mutational inhibition against the normal;
and mankind-the privileged mutation-was bom.
"The Quezzane monkeys, of whom the Xauens were
a
38
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
the transitional state, were the same as the howling
monkeys of boondocks Rhodesia-going in the other
direction. They had no speech, they had no fire, and
they made no tools. Then one moming they were the
Xauens, and the next moming they were humans. They
passed all the highly developed apes in an instant.
They were the privileged mutation, which is not, I be-
lieve, permanent.
“Dismas, the one hundred and one recognized Xauen
skeletons that we possess are not of ninety-six children
(eighty-six of them apparent four-year-olds), three ado-
lescents and two adults. They are of ten infants and
children, eighty-six adults, two mutants and three filial-
twos.
"Let's take it from the flank. A few years ago, a
biologist amused himself by making a table of heartbeat
life lengths. All the mammals but one, he found, live
about the same number of heartbeats, the longer-living
species having correspondingly slower heartbeats. But
one species, man, lives four or five times as long as he
should by this criterion. I forget whether the biologist
implied that this makes man a contingent species living
on borrowed time. I do imply it. In any case, since the
biologist was also involved in science fiction, his implica-
tions were not taken seriously.
"From the other flank Even before Freud there were
studies made of false puberty, the sudden hot interest
and activity that appears about age four and then goes
away for another ten years. It's been many times guessed
that back in our ancestry our true puberty was at such
an early age.”
"Minden, no species can change noticeably in less than
fifty thousand years."
“Dismas, it can change in between three and nine
months, depending on the direction traveled. Here they
come back! Well, drones, did you settle Ginny down?
Where are you going now?
39
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
Agar Dismas and Dall Minden had sauntered down
from Doolen's Mountain.
"We're going to get four hundred and seventy-three
loaves of bread and four hundred and seventy-three
jars of peanut butter,” Agar said rather nervously.
“Yes, Ginny says to use Crispy-Crusty bread,” Dall
Minden detailed. “She says it has sixteen slices to a
loaf, so we can make eight sandwiches to a loaf and to
a jar. There will be four sandwiches left over, and
Ginny says we can have them for our work. She's going
to stay in her cave for twelve hundred and sixty days.
She says it will take that long to get her thing going
good so nobody can bust it up. I think she's a numerolo-
gist at heart. This is going to take more than four hun-
dred dollars. That's more than Agar and myself have
saved up together. Ginny says to do it, though, even if
we have to steal the money for it. And she says to be
quick about it."
"Here come the religious nuts again,” Doctor Dismas
said. “I may have to kill one of the fools if they keep
coming back.”
“They won't come here this time,” Agar said. “They'll
prowl Doolen's Mountain from now on. They know it'll
be there. But I don't think they'll kill Ginny. They don't
understand what she is. They didn't understand the first
time either; they didn't guess that it could possibly be
one of the big ones. We are all hoping that they will
kill me and be satisfied and think that they have done
it. They will find me there where they think the woman
should be, and that may fool them. Well, tootle! We have
to hurry with everything or Ginny will be angry.”
"No species can count itself secure that has not en-
dured for ten million years," said Dr. Minden. “We still
hear the old saying that evolution is irreversible. Hog-
wash! I have myself studied seven species of hogs
washed away before one endured. The human race is
so new that it has no stability. The majority of species
do not survive, and we have lived only one tenth of
40
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
the span that would tilt the odds for survival in our
favor. Even the species that finally survive will com-
monly revert several times before acquiring stability.
We could revert at any time."
"Revert to what?"
"To what we were, to what we still are basically, little
three-foot-high, big-headed, howling monkeys, without
tools, and with only a fifth of our present life span.”
"Reversions are like cosmic disasters, Minden. They
take a few thousand years to happen, and by that time
a
we'll be gone.
“No, this can happen instantly, Dismas, by a single
neotic conception. And then it becomes the norn by
the mechanics of mutational inhibition. The reversion
will inhibit the old nornal. We have already seen that
inhibition at work."
The very stones crying out like demented rooks! Bushes
barking like coyotesl Green-colored yowling, and laugh-
ter that sang like a band-saw. And Ginny was in the
middle of them again.
She was the howlingest kid ever pupped.
"I don't think that I will talk any more after today,
Father,” she said solemnly after she had cut off her other
noises. “I think I'll just forget how. I'll just holler and
hoot and carry on. That's more fun anyhow.
“Why aren't my servants back with my provisions?
They've had almost time to get back if they did every-
thing at breakneck speed and had good luck. They might
have had to go to more than one place to get that much
bread and peanut butter, though. I doubt if I'll eat it. I
just want to have it if I need it, and I wanted to teach
them obedience. I'll probably start to eat meadow mice
and ground squirrels tomorrow.
“Here comes Mrs. Minden crying over that Krios.
What's the good of that?"
There was a keening. Clarinda was running and cry.
ing, and Sally Dismas had rushed out of the house and
met her.
41
GINNY WRAPPED IN THE SUN
"Clarinda, what in the world has happened?" Dr. Min-
den cried, rushing to his tearful wife.
"Our baby Krios has killed himself.”
“I told him to,” said Ginny. “I'd gotten everything I
wanted from him. I'll find better ones for the other
times."
“Ginny!" Her mother was horrified. “Ill whip-"
"Don't punish the child, Sally," Clarinda Minden
sobbed. “She's beyond good and evil. Whatever was be-
tween her and my baby Krios, it's better that I never
know."
“Did I say something wrong?" Ginny asked. “The last
thing I ever say, and it should be wrong? Dr. Minden,
you know about things like that. What are you creatures,
anyhow?"
"People, Ginny,” Dr. Minden said miserably.
“Funny I never saw any of you before. I sure don't
intend to get involved with people.”
Raucous rowling! Hound-dog hooting! Hissing of bad-
gers, and the clattering giggle of geesel Shag-tooth shout-
ing, and the roaring of baby bullsi
And a screaming monkey leaped and tunbled up the
rocks like crazy water,
42
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
HE BEGAN by breaking things that moming. He broke
the glass of water on his night stand. He knocked it
crazily against the opposite wall and shattered it. Yet
it shattered slowly. This would have surprised him if he
had been fully awake, for he had only reached out weak-
ly for it.
Nor had he wakened regularly to his alarm; he had
wakened to a weird, slow, low booming, yet the clock
said six, time for the alarm. And the low boom, when
it came again, seemed to come from the clock.
He reached out and touched it gently, but it floated
off the stand at his touch and bounced around slowly on
the floor. And when he picked it up again it had
stopped, nor would shaking start it.
He checked the electric clock in the kitchen. This also
said six o'clock, but the sweep hand did not move. In
his living room the radio clock said six, but the second
hand seemed stationary.
"But the lights in both rooms work,” said Vincent.
"How are the
clocks both stopped? Are the receptacles
on a separate circuit?”
He went back to his bedroom and got his wristwatch.
its sweep hand did not sweep.
It also said six Oy
"Now this could get silly. What is it that would stop
both mechanical and electrical clocksp"
He went to the window and looked out at the ad.
vertising clock on the Mutual Insurance Building. It
said six o'clock, and the second hand did not move.
"Well, it is possible that the confusion is not limited
to myself. I heard once the fanciful theory that a cold
shower will clear the mind. For me it never has, but I
will try it. I can always use cleanliness for an excuse.
43
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
porous wet
The shower didn't work. Yes, it did: the water came
now, but not like water; like very slow syrup that hung
in the air. He reached up to touch it hanging down
there and stretching. And it shattered like glass when
he touched it, and drifted in fantastic slow globs across
the room. But it had the feel of water. It was wet and
pleasantly cool. And in a quarter of a minute or so it
was down over his shoulders and back, and he luxuri-
ated in it. He let it soak on his noggin, and it cleared his
wits at once.
"There is not a thing wrong with me. I am fine. It is
not my fault that the water is slow this morning and
other things are awry."
He reached for the towel and it tore to pieces in his
bands like
paper.
He now became very careful in the way he handled
things. Slowly, tenderly and deftly he took them so that
they would not break He shaved himself without mis-
hap in spite of the slow water in the lavatory also.
Then he dressed himself with the greatest caution
and cunning, breaking nothing except his shoe laces,
and that is likely to happen at any time. .
"If there is nothing the matter with me, then I will
check and see if there is anything seriously wrong with
the world. The dawn was fairly along when I looked
out, as it should have been. Approximately twenty min-
utes have passed; it is a clear moming: the sun should
now have hit the top several stories of the Insurance
Building."
But it had not. It was still a clear moming, but the
dawn had not brightened at all in the twenty minutes.
And that big clock still said six. It had not changed.
Yet it had changed, and he knew it with a queer
feeling. He pictured it as it had been before. But the
sweep second hand had moved. It had swept a third
of the dial.
So he pulled up a chair at the window and watched
it. He realized that, though he could not see it move,
44
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
yet it did make progress. He watched it for perhaps
five minutes. It moved through a space of perhaps five
seconds.
"Well, that is not my problem. It is that of the clock
maker, either a terrestrial or a celestial one."
But he left his rooms without a good breakfast, and
he left them very early. How did he know that it was
early since there was something wrong with the time?
Well, it was early at least according to the sun and
according to the clocks, neither of which institutions
seemed to be working properly.
He left without a good breakfast because the coffee
would not make and the bacon would not fry. And in
plain point of fact the fire would not heat. The gas
flame sprung up from the pilot like a slowly spread-
ing stream or an unfolding flower. Then it bumed far
too steadily. The skillet remained cold when placed over
it; nor would water even heat. It had taken at least five
minutes to get the water out of the faucet in the first
place.
He ate a few pieces of leftover bread and some
scraps of meat.
In the street there was no motion, no real motion. A
truck, first seeming at rest, moved very slowly. There
was no gear in which it could move so slowly. And
there was a taxi which crept along, but Charles Vincent
had to look at it carefully for some time to be sure that
it was in motion. Then he received a shock. He realized
by the early morning light that the driver of it was dead.
Dead with his eyes wide open!
Slow as it was going, and by whatever means it was
moving, it should really be stopped. Vincent walked
over to it, opened the door, and pulled on the brake.
Then he looked into the eyes of that dead man. Was he
really dead? It was hard to be sure. He felt warm. But,
even as Vincent looked, the eyes of the dead man had
begun to close. And close they did and open again in
a matter of about twenty seconds.
45
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
This was weird. The slowly closing and opening
eyes sent a chill through Vincent. And the dead man
had begun to lean forward in his seat. Vincent put a
hand in the middle of the man's chest to hold him up-
right, but he found the forward pressure to be as relent-
less as it was slow. He was unable to keep the dead
man up
So he let him go, watching curiously; and in a few
seconds the driver's face was against the wheel. But it
was almost as if it had no intention of stopping there.
It pressed into the wheel with dogged force. The man
would surely break his face. Vincent took several holds
on the dead man and counteracted the pressure some-
what. Yet the face was being damaged, and if things
were normal blood would have flowed.
The man had been dead so long however, that though
he was still warm his blood must have congealed, for
it was fully two minutes before it began to ooze.
“Whatever I have done, I have done enough damage,”
said Vincent. "And, in whatever nightmare I am in, I am
likely to do further harm if I meddle more. I had better
leave it alone."
He walked on down the street. Yet whatever vehicles
he saw now were moving with an incredible slowness as
though driven by some fantastic gear reduction. And
there were people here and there frozen solid. It was a
chilly moming, but it was not that cold. They were im-
mobile in positions of motion, as though they were play-
ing the children's game of Statues.
"How is it,” said Charles Vincent, "that this young
girl, who I believe works across the street from us, should
have died standing up and in full stride? But, no. She
is not dead. Or if so she died with a very alert ex-
pression. And, oh my God, she's doing it too!"
For he realized that the eyes of the girl were closing,
and in a space of a few seconds they had completed
their cycle and were open again. Also, and this was even
stranger, she had moved, moved forward in full stride.
46
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
He would have timed her if he could. How could he
time her when all the clocks in the world were crazy?
Yet she must have been taking about two steps a minute.
Vincent went into the cafeteria. The early morning
crowd that he had often watched through the window
was there. The girl who made flapjacks in the window
had just flipped one and it hung in the air. Then it
floated over as though caught by a slight breeze, and
sank slowly down as if settling in water.
The early morning breakfasters, like the people in
the street, were all dead in this new way, moving with
almost imperceptible motion. And all had apparently
died in the act of drinking coffee, eating eggs, or munch-
ing toast. And if there was only time enough, there was
an even chance that they would get the drinking, eat-
ing, and munching done with, for there was a shadow
of movement in them all.
The cashier had the register drawer open and money
in her hand, and the hand of the customer was out-
stretched for it. In time, somewhere in the new leisurely
time, the hands would come together and the change be
given. And so it happened. It may have been a minute
and a half, or two minutes, or two and a half. It is al.
ways hard to judge time, and now it had become all but
impossible.
"I am still hungry,” said Charles Vincent, “but it would
be foolhardy to wait on the service here. Should I help
myself? They would not mind if they are dead. And,
if they are not dead, in any case it seems that I am in-
visible to them.”
He wolfed several rolls. He opened a bottle of milk
and held it upside-down over his glass while he ate
another roll. Liquids had all become so perversely slow.
But he felt better for his erratic breakfast. He would
have paid for it, but how?
He left the cafeteria and walked about the town as
it seemed still to be quite early, though one could de-
pend on neither sun nor clock for the time any more.
47
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
)
The traffic lights were unchanging. He sat for a long
time in a little park and watched the town and the big
clock in the Commerce Building tower; but like all the
clocks it was either stopped or the hand would creep
too slowly to be seen.
It must have been just about an hour till the traffic
lights changed, but change they did at last. By picking
a point on the building across the street and watching
what moved by it, he found that the traffic did indeed
move. In a minute or so, the entire length of a car would
pass a given point.
He had, he recalled, been very far behind in his work,
and it had been worrying him. He decided to go to the
office, early as it was or seemed to be.
He let himself in. Nobody else was there. He resolved
not to look at the clock and to be very careful of the
way he handled all objects because of his new propensity
for breaking things. This considered, all seemed nor-
mal here. He had said the day before that he could
hardly catch up on his work if he worked for two days
solid. He now resolved at least to work steadily until
comething happened, whatever it was.
For hour after hour he worked on his tabulations and
reports. Nobody else had arrived. Could something be
wrong? Certainly something was wrong. But today was
not a holiday. That was not it.
Just how long can a stubbom and mystified man work
away at his task? It was hour after hour after hour. He
did not become hungry nor particularly tired. And he
did get through a lot of work.
"It must be half done. However it has happened, I
have caught up at least a day's work. I will keep on."
He must have worked silently for another eight or
ten hours.
He was caught up completely on his back work.
"Well, to some extent I can work into the future. I
can head-up and carry over. I can put in everything but
the figures of the field reports."
48
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
And he did so.
"It will be hard to bury me in work again. I could
almost coast for a day. I don't even know what day it
is, but I must have worked twenty hours straight through
and nobody has arrived. Perhaps nobody ever will ar-
rive. If they are moving with the speed of the people
in the nightmare outside, it is no wonder they have not
arrived."
He put his head down in his arms on the desk. The
last thing he saw before he closed his eyes was the
misshapen left thumb that had always been his and
which he had always tried to conceal a little by the way
he handled his hands.
“At least I know that I am still myself. I'd know my-
self anywhere by that."
Then he went to sleep at his desk.
Jenny came in with a quick click-click-click of high
heels, and he wakened to the noise.
"What are you doing dozing at your desk, Mr. Vin-
cent? Have you been here all night? "
'I don't know, Jenny. Honestly I don't."
"I was only teasing. Sometimes when I get here a lit-
tle early I take a catnap myself."
The clock said six minutes till eight, and the second
band was sweeping normally. Time had returned to the
world. Or to him. But had all that early morning of his
been a dream? Then it had been a very efficient dream.
He had accomplished work he could hardly have done
in two days. And it was the same day that it was sup-
posed to be.
He went to the water fountain. The water now be-
haved normally. He went to the window. The traffic
was behaving as it should. Though sometimes slow and
sometimes snarled, yet it was in the pace of the regular
world.
The other workers arrived. They were not balls of fire,
49
THE SIX. FINGERS OF TIME
but neither was it necessary to observe them for several
minutes to be sure that they weren't dead.
"It did have its advantages," Charles Vincent said. “I
would be afraid to live with it permanently, but it would
be handy to go into the state for a few minutes a day
and accomplish the business of hours. I may be a case
for the doctor. But just how would I go about telling a
doctor what was bothering me?"
Now it had surely been less than two hours from his
first rising till the time that he wakened from his second
sleep to the noise of Jenny. And how long that second
sleep had been, or in which time enclave, he had no
idea. But how account for it all? He had spent a long
time in his own rooms, much longer than ordinary in his
confusion. He had walked the city mile after mile in his
puzzlement. And he had sat in the little park for hours
and studied the situation. And he had sat and worked
at his own desk for an outlandish long time.
Well, he would go to the doctor. A man is obliged to
refrain from making a fool of himself to the world at
large, but to his lawyer, his priest, or his doctor he will
sometimes have to come as a fool. By their callings they
are restrained from scoffing openly.
He went to the doctor at noon.
Dr. Mason was not particularly a friend. Charles Vin-
cent realized with some unease that he did not have any
particular friends, only acquaintances and associates. It
was as though he were of a species slightly apart from
his fellows. He wished a little now that he had a particu-
lar friend.
But Dr. Mason was an acquaintance of some years,
had the reputation of being a good doctor, and besides,
Vincent had now arrived at his office and been shown
in. He would either have to-well, that was as good a
beginning as any.
"Doctor, I am in a predicament. I will either have to
invent some symptoms to account for my visit here, or
to make an excuse and bolt, or tell you what is bothering
50
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
me, even though you will think that I am a new sort of
idiot."
"Vincent, every day people invent symptoms to cover
their visits here, and I know that they have lost their
nerve about their real reason for coming. And every day
people do make excuses and bolt. But experience tells
me that I will get a larger fee if you tackle the third
alternative. And, Vincent, there is no new sort of idiot.”
"It may not sound so silly if I tell it quickly," Vincent
said. “I awoke this morning to some very puzzling in-
cidents. It seemed that time itself had stopped, or that
the whole world had gone into super-slow motion. The
water would neither flow nor boil, and the fire would
not heat food. The clocks, which I at first believed had
stopped, crcpt along at perhaps a minute an hour. The
people I met in the streets appeared dead, frozen in
life-like attitudes. It was only by watching them for a
very long time that I perceived that they did indeed
have motion. One taxi I saw creeping slower than the
most backward snail, and a dead man at the wheel of it.
I went to it, opened the door, and put on the brake. I
realized after a time that the man was not dead. But
he bent forward and broke his face on the steering
wheel: It must have taken a full minute for his head to
travel no more than ten inches, yet I was unable to
prevent him from hitting the wheel. I then did other
bizarre things in a world that had died on its feet. I
walked many miles through the city, and then I sat for
countless hours in the park. I went to the office and let
myself in. I accomplished work that must have taken
me twenty hours. I then took a nap at my desk. When
I awoke on the arrival of others it was six minutes till
eight in the morning of the same day, today. Not two
hours had passed from my rising, and time was back to
normal. But there were things that happened in that
time that could never be compressed into two hours.”
"One question first, Vincent. Did you actually ac-
complish the work, the work of many hours?"
51
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
"I did. It was done and done in that time. It did not
become undone on the retum of time to normal.”
“A second question: had you been worried about your
work, about being behind in your work?”
??
“Yes. Emphatically."
"Then here is one explanation. You retired last night.
But very shortly afterward you arose in a state of som-
nambulism. There are facets of sleep-walking which we
do not at all understand. The time-out-of-focus inter-
ludes were parts of a walking dream of yours. You
dressed and went to your office and worked all night.
It is possible to do routine tasks. while in a somnam-
bulistic state, rapidly and even feverishly, to perform
prodigies. You may have fallen into a normal sleep
there when you had finished, or you may have been
awakened directly from your somnambulistic trance on
the amival of your co-workers. There. That is a plausible
and workable explanation. In the case of an apparently
bizarre happening it is always well to have a rational
explanation to fall back on. This will usually satisfy a
patient and put his mind to rest. But often the explana-
tion does not satisfy me.
"Your explanation very nearly satisfies me, Dr. Mason,
and it does put my mind considerably at rest. I am sure
that in short while I will be able to accept it completely.
But why does it not satisfy you?”
"One reason is a man, a taxi-driver, whom I treated
very early this morning. He had his face smashed, and
he had seen-or almost seen-a ghost: a ghost of in-
credible swiftness that was more sensed than seen. The
ghost opened the door of his car while it was going at
full speed, jerked on the brake, and caused him to crack
his head. This man was dazed and had a slight con-
cussion. I have convinced him that he did not see any
ghost at all, that he must have dozed at the wheel and
run into something. As I say, I am harder to convince
than my patients. But it may have been coincidence.”
52
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
“I hope so. But you also seem to have another reserva-
tion as to mv case.
“After quite a few years in practice, I seldom see or
hear anything new. Twice before I have been told a
happening or a dream on the line of what you experi-
enced.”
“Did you convince your other patients that they were
only dreams?”
"I did. Both of them. That is, I convinced them the
first few times it happened to them.”
"Were they satisfied?"
“At first they were. Later not entirely. But they both
died within a year of their coming to me.
"Of nothing violent, I hope.”
“Both had the most gentle deaths. That of senility
extreme.”
“Oh. Well I'm too young for that.”
"Vincent, I would like you to come back in a month
1
or so.
“I will, if the delusion or the dream returns. Or if I
do not feel well.”
After this Charles Vincent began to forget about the
incident. He only recalled it with humor sometimes when
again he was behind in his work.
"Well, if it gets bad enough I may do another sleep-
walking jag and catch up. But if there is another aspect
of time and I could enter it at will, it might often be
handy."
Charles Vincent never saw the man's face at all. It is
very dark in some of those clubs and the Coq Bleu is
like the inside of a tomb. Vincent went to the clubs only
about once a month, sometimes after a show when he
did not want to go home to bed, sometimes when he
was just plain restless.
Citizens of the more fortunate states may not know
of the mysteries of the clubs. In Vincent's the only bars
are beer bars, and only in the clubs can a person get a
53
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
a
drink, and only members are admitted. It is true that
even such a small club as the Coq Bleu had thirty
thousand members, and at a dollar a year this is a nice
sideline. The little numbered membership cards cost a
penny each for the printing, and the member wrote in
his own name. But he was supposed to have a card or
a dollar for a card to gain admittance.
But there could be no entertainment in the clubs.
There was nothing there but the little bar room in the
near darkness. The near darkness of the clubs was cus-
tom only but it had the force of the law.
The man was there, and then he was not, and then
he was there again. And always where he sat it was too
dark to see his face.
“I wonder," he said to Vincent (or to the bar at large,
though there were no other customers and the bartender
was asleep), “I wonder if you have read Zubarin on
the relationship of extradigitalism to genius?”
"I have never heard of the work nor of the man,” said
Vincent. “Doubt if either exist."
"I am Zubarin,” said the man.
Vincent instinctively hid his misshapen left thumb.
Yet it could not have been noticed in that light, and he
must have been crazy to believe that there was any
connection between it and the man's remark. It was not
truly a double thumb. He was not an extradigital, nor
was he a genius.
"I refuse to become interested in you,” said Vincent.
"I am on the verge of leaving. I dislike waking the
bartender, but I did want another drink.”
“Sooner done than said."
"What is?”
“Your glass is full.”
"It is? So it is. Is it a trick?"
"Trick is a name for anything either too frivolous or
too mystifying for us to comprehend. But on one long
early morning a month ago you also could have done
the trick, and nearly as well.”
>
54
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
"Could I have? How do you know about my long
early moming-assuming there to have been such?”
"I watched you for a while. Few others have the
equipment with which to watch you when you're in the
aspect.”
So they were silent for some time, and Vincent
watched the clock and was ready to go.
"I wonder,” said the man in the dark, “if you have
,
read Schimmelpenninck on the sexagintal and the duo-
decimal in the Chaldee Mysteries.”
"I have not, and I doubt if anyone else has. I would
guess that you are also Schimmelpenninck, and that you
have just made up the name on the spur of the moment. "
"I am Schimm, it is true, but I made up the name
on the spur
of the moment many years ago."
"I am a little bored with you,” said Vincent, "but I
would appreciate it if you'd do your glass-filling trick
once more."
>
“I have just done so again. And you are not bored;
you are frightened.”
"Of what?" asked Vincent, whose glass had in fact
filled again.
“Of reentering a dream that you are not sure was a
dream. But there are often advantages to being both
invisible and inaudible.”
"Can you be invisible?”
"Was I not so when I went behind the bar just now and
fixed you a drink?”
"How?
"A man in full stride goes at the rate of about five
miles an hour. Multiply that by sixty, which is the num-
ber of time. When I leave my stool and go behind the
bar I go at the rate of three hundred miles an hour. So
I am invisible to you, particularly if I move while you
blink.”
"One thing does not match. You might have got
around there and back. But you could not have poured.”
"Shall I say that mastery over liquids and other ob-
55
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
jects is not given to beginners? But for us there are
many ways to outwit the slowness of matter."
"I believe that you are a hoaxer. Do you know Dr.
Mason?
"I know of him, and that you went to see him. I know
of his futile attempts to penetrate a certain mystery. But
I have not talked to him of you."
“I still believe that you are a phony. Could you put
me back into the state of my dream of a month ago?"
“It was not a dream. But I could put you again into
that state."
“Prove it."
"Watch the clock. Do you believe that I can point my
finger at it and stop it for you? It is already stopped
no
n
for me.
"No, I don't believe it. Yes, I guess I have to, since
I see that you have just done it. But it may be another
trick. I don't know where the clock is plugged in.”
“Neither do I. Come to the door. Look at every clock
you can see. Are they not all stopped?”
"Yes. Maybe the power has gone off all over town.'
"You know it has not. There are still a few lighted
windows in those buildings, though it is quite late.”
“Why are you playing with me? I am neither on the
inside nor the outside. Either tell me the secret or say
that you will not tell me.”
“The secret isn't a simple one. It can only be arrived
at after all philosophy and learning has been assimilated."
"One man cannot arrive at that in one lifetime.”
"Not in an ordinary lifetime. But the secret of the
secret, if I may put it that way, is that one must use part
of it as a tool in learning. You could not learn all in one
lifetime but, by being permitted the first step, to be
able to read, say, sixty books in the time it took you to
read one, to pause for a minute in thought and use up
only one second, to get the day's work accomplished in
eight minutes and so have time for other things-by
56
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
such ways one may make a beginning. I will warn you,
though. Even for the most intelligent it is a race.”
"A race? What race?"
"It is a race between success, which is life, and fail-
ure, which is death."
"Let's skip the melodrama. But how do I get into the
state and out of it?"
“Oh, that is simple, so easy that it seems like a gadget.
Here are two diagrams I will draw. Note them care-
fully. This first-invision it in your mind, and you are
in the state. Now the second one-invision, and you
are out of it.
“That easy?"
"That deceptively easy. The trick is to leam why it
works—if you want to succeed, meaning to live."
So Charles Vincent left him and went home, walking
the mile in a little less than fifteen seconds. But he still
had not seen the face of the man.
-
»
-
There are advantages intellectual, monetary, and amo-
rous in being able to enter the accelerated state at will.
It is a fox game. One must be careful not to be caught
at it, nor to break or harm that which is in the normal
state,
Vincent could always find eight or ten minutes un-
observed to accomplish the day's work. And a fifteen-
minute coffee break could turn into a fifteen hour romp
around the town.
There was this boyish pleasure in becoming a ghost:
to appear and stand motionless in front of an onrushing
train and to cause the scream of the whistle, and to
be in no danger, being able to move five or ten times
as fast as the train; to enter and to sit suddenly in the
middle of a select group and see them stare, and then
virtually to disappear from the middle of them; to in-
terfere in sports and games, entering the prize ring
and tripping, hampering, or slugging the unliked fight-
er; to blue-shot down the hockey ice, skating at fifteen
,
57
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
a
hundred miles an hour and scoring dozens of goals at
either end while the people only know that something
odd is happening.
There was pleasure in being able to shatter windows
by chanting little songs, for the voice (when in the
state) will be to the world at sixty times its regular
pitch, though normal to oneself. And for this reason also
he was inaudible to others.
There was fun in petty thieving and tricks. He could
take a wallet from a man's pocket and be two blocks
away
when the victim turned at the feel. He could come
back and stuff it into the man's mouth as he bleated to
a policeman.
He could come into the home of a lady writing a let-
ter, snatch up the paper and write three lines on it and
vanish before the scream got out of her throat.
He could take shoe and sock off a man's foot while
he was in full stride. No human face since the begin-
ning of time ever showed such a look of pure astonish-
ment as that of the man to whom this first happened.
Discovering oneself half barefoot of a sudden in a
crowded street has no parallel in all experience.
Vincent could paint the eyeglasses of a man dark
green, and this would somehow alter the man's whole
personality. He'd gulp and wave his arms and develop
new mannerisms. Or as a victim took the first puff of a
cigarette Vincent would take it from his mouth, smoke
it quickly down to the hot nub, and replace it.
He would take food off forks on the way to mouths,
put baby turtles and live fish into bowls of
soup
between
spoonfuls of the eater. And, as a cook cracked an egg
over the griddle, he would scoop up the soft contents
in midair, and set down a full-grown quacking duck to
the discomfort of both cook and bird,
He would lash the hands of hand-shakers tightly to-
gether with stout cord, and tie together the shoe laces
of dancing partners. Or he would remove the strings
of guitars while they were being played, or steal the
58
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
mouthpiece of a hom while the operator paused for
breath. He unzippered persons of both sexes when they
were at their most pompous, and it was on his account
(probably) that Feldman was not elected mayor. This
was something that happened on the public platform,
and Feldman was completely undone.
This thing can remain a pleasant novelty for some
time. There was, of course, the difficulty of moving
large objects. Vincent always wanted to intrude a horse
into the midst of a certain assembly. But a horse is too
large to be moved in an accelerated time. Vincent
drew out the diagram that the faceless man had given
him, and presented it to the only horse he knew. But
the horse did not get the idea. It would not go into the
accelerated state.
"I will either have to find a smarter horse or a new
method of moving heavy objects," said Charles Vincent,
Vincent would sometimes handcuff two strangers to-
gether as they stood waiting for a traffic light to change.
He would lash leaners to lamp posts, and steal the
the teeth from the mouths of those afflicted with den-
tures.
He would write cryptic and frightening messages in
grease pencil on a plate just as a diner began to fill it.
He changed cards from one player's hands to another's
while play was in progress, and he interfered perverse
ly with billard balls.
He removed golf balls from tees during the back
swing, and left notes written large "YOU MISSED ME"
pinned to the ground with the tee.
He stole baseballs from catchers' mitts at the instant
if impact, and left instead small unfledged live spar.
rows. It was found that there is nothing in the rule book
to cover this.
Or he shaved moustaches and heads. Retuming re-
peatedly to one woman he disliked, he clipped her
bald and gilded her pate.
With tellers counting their money he interfered out-
59
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
rageously and enriched himself. He snipped cigarettes
in two with a scissors and blew out matches and
lighters, so that one frustrated man actually broke down
and cried at his inability to get a light.
He removed the weapons from the holsters of police-
men and put cap pistols and water guns in their places.
And he liked to rip off one sleeve only from the coat
of a walking gentleman. There is something funnier
about one sleeve missing than two.
He unclipped the leashes of dogs and substituted lit-
tle toy dogs rolling on wheels. He put frogs in water
glasses and left lighted firecrackers on bridge tables. He
reset wristwatches on wrists; and played cruel tricks in
mens' rooms, causing honest gentleman to wet them-
selves.
'I was always a boy at heart," said Charles Vincent.
Also during those first few days of the controlled new
state, he established himself materially, acquiring wealth
by devious ways, and opening bank accounts in various
cities under various names, against a time of possible
need.
Nor did he ever feel any shame for the tricks that he
played on unaccelerated humanity. For the people, when
he was in the state, were as statues to him, hardly liv-
ing, barely moving, unseeing, unbearing. And it is no
shame to show disrespect to such comical statues.
And also, and again because he was a boy at heart, he
had fun with the girls.
'I am one mass of black and blue marks,” said Jenny.
one day. “My lips are sore and my front teeth are
loosened. I don't know what in the world is the matter
with me
Yet he had not meant to bruise or harm her. He was
rather fond of her and he resolved to be much more
careful. Yet it was fun, when he was in the state and so
invisible to her because of his speed, to kiss her bere
and there in out-of-the-way places and show her other
60
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
small marks of affection. She made a nice statue and
it was good sport And there were others.
"You look suddenly older,” said one of his co-workers
one day. “Are you taking care of yourself? Are you wor-
ried?"
"I am not,” said Vincent. “I was never happier in my
life.”
But now there was time for so many things, in fact,
everything. There was no reason why he could not
master anything in the world, when he could take off for
fifteen minutes and gain fifteen hours. Vincent was a
rapid but careful reader. He could now read from a
hundred and twenty to two hundred books in an eve-
ning and night; and he slept in an accelerated state
and could get a full night's sleep in eight minutes.
He first acquired a knowledge of the languages. A
quite extensive reading knowledge of a language can be
acquired in three hundred hours of world time, or three
hundred minutes (five hours) of accelerated time. And
if one takes the tongues in order, from the most familiar
to the most remote, there is no real difficulty. He ac-
quired fifty for a starter, and could always add another
any evening that he found he had a need for it.
And at the same time he began to assemble and con-
solidate knowledge. Of literature, properly speaking,
,
there are no more than ten thousand books that are
really worth reading and falling in love with. These
were gone through with high pleasure, and two or three
thousand of them were important enough to be reserved
for future rereading.
History, however, is very uneven. It is necessary to
read texts and sources that for form are not worth read.
ing. And the same with philosophy. Mathematics and
science, pure or physical, could not, of course, be cov.
ered with the same speed. Yet, with time available, all
could be mastered. There is no concept ever expressed
by any human mind that cannot be comprehended by
61
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
any other normal human mind, if time is available, and
if it is taken in the proper order and context and with
the proper preparatory work.
And often, and now more often, Vincent felt that he
was touching the fingers of the secret. And always, when
he came near it, it had a little bit of the smell of the Pit.
For he had pegged out all the main points of the
history of man; or rather most of the tenable, or at least
possible, theories of the history of man. It was hard to
hold the main line of it: that double road of rationality
and revelation that should lead always to a fuller and
fuller development, to an unfolding and growth and
perfectability. Sometimes he felt that he was trespassing
on the history of something other than man.
For the main line of the account was often obscure
and all but obliterated, and traced through fog and
miasma. Vincent had accepted the Fall of Man and the
Redemption as the cardinal points of history. But he
began to feel now that neither had happened only once,
that both were of constant recurrence; that there was a
hand reaching up from that old Pit with its shadow over
man. And he had come to picture that hand in his dreams
--for his dreams were especially vivid when in the state
-as a six-digited monster reaching out. He began to
realize that the thing he was caught in was dangerous
and deadly.
Very dangerous.
Very deadly.
One of the weird books that he often returned to and
which continually puzzled him was The Relationship of
Extradigitalism to Genius, written by the man whose
face he had never seen, in one of his manifestations.
It promised more than it delivered, and it intimated
more than it said. Its theory was tedious and tenuous,
bolstered with undigested mountains of doubtful data.
It left Vincent unconvinced that persons of genius-even
if it could be agreed who or what they were-had often
the oddity of extra fingers or toes, or the vestiges of
62
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
them. And it puzzled him what possible difference it
could make.
Yet there were hints here of a Corsican who common-
ly kept a hand hidden; of an earlier and more bizarre
commander who always wore a mailed glove; of an-
other man with a glove between the two; hints that
the multiplex adept, Leonardo himself, who sometimes
drew the hands of men and more often those of mon-
sters with six fingers, had had the touch. There was a
comment on Caeser, not conclusive, to the same effect.
It is known that Alexander had a minor deformity. It
is not known what it was. This man made it seem that
this was it. And it was averted of Gregory and Augustine,
of Benedict and Albert and Aquinas. Yet a man with
a deformity could not enter the priesthood; if they had
it, it must have been in vestigial form.
There were cases for Charles Magnus and Mahmud,
for Saladin the horseman and for Akhnaton the king; for
Homer--a Seleucid-Greek statuette shows him with six
fingers strumming an unidentified instrument while re-
citing; cases for Pythagoras, for Buonottoti, Santi, Theo
tokopolous, van Rijn, Robusti. And going farther back in
time, and less subject to proof, they became much more
numerous.
Zurbarin cataloged eight thousand of them. He main-
tained that they were geniuses. And that they were
extradigitals.
Charles Vincent grinned and looked down at his mis-
shapen or double thumb.
“At least I am in good though monotonous company.
But what in the name of triple time is he driving at?"
And it was not long afterward that Vincent was ex-
amining cuneiform tablets in State Museum. These were
a broken and not continuous series on the theory of
numbers, tolerably legible to the now encyclopedic
Charles Vincent. And the series read in part:
63
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
On the divergence of the basis itself and the
confusion caused by--for it is Five, or it is Six,
or Ten or Twelve, or Sixty or One Hundred, or
Three hundred and Sixty or the Double Hun-
dred, the Thousand. The reason, not clearly under-
stood by the People, is that Six and the Dozen are
First, and Sixty is a compromise in condescending
to the people.
For the Five, the Ten are late, and are no older
than the People themselves. It is said, and credited,
that the People began to count by Fives and Tens
from the number of fingers on their hands. But
before the People the, for the reason that they
had, counted by Sixes and Twelves. But Sixty
is the number of time, divisible by both, for both
must live together in Time, though not on the same
plane of time-
Much of the rest was scattered. It was while trying
to set the hundreds of unordered clay tablets in proper
sequence that Charles Vincent created the legend of
the ghost in the museum.
For he spent his multi-hundred-hour nights there
studying and classifying. Naturally he could not work
without light, and naturally he could be seen when he
sat still at his studies. But as the slow-moving
guards
attempted to close in on him, he would move to avoid
them, and his speed made him invisible to them. They
were a nuisance and had to be discouraged. He be-
labored the soundly and they became less eager to
try to capture him.
His only fear was that they would sometime try to
shoot him to see if he were ghost or human. He could
avoid a seen shot which would come at no more than
two and a half times his own greatest speed. But an
unperceived shot could penetrate dangerously, even fa-
tally, before he twisted away from it.
Vincent had fathered legends of other ghosts, that of
64
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
the Central Library, that of the University Library, that
of the John Charles Underwood Jr. Technical Library.
This plurality of ghosts tended to cancel out each other
and bring believers into ridicule. Even those who had
seen him as a ghost did not admit that they believed in
ghosts.
u
Charles Vincent had gone back to Dr. Mason for his
monthly checkup.
"You look terrible," said the doctor. "Whatever it is,
you have changed. If you have the means you should
take a long rest.
"I have the means," said Vincent, "and that is just
what I will do. I'll take a rest for a year or two."
He had begun to begrudge the time that he must
spend at the world's pace. From this time on he was
regarded as a recluse. He was silent and unsociable, for
he found it a nuisance to come back to the common state
to engage in conversation, and in his special state the
voices were too slow-pitched to intrude on his conscious-
a
a
ness.
Except that of the man whose face he had never
seen.
"You are making very tardy progress," said the man.
Once more they were in a dark club. "Those who do not
show more progress we cannot use. After all, you are
only a vestigial. It is probable that you have very little
of the ancient race in you. Fortunately those who do
not progress destroy themselves. You had not imagined
that there were only two phases of time, had you?"
“Lately I have come to suspect that there are many
more,” said Charles Vincent.
"And you understand that one step only cannot suc-
ceed?"
“I understand that the life that I have been living
is in direct violation of all that we know of the laws of
mass, momentum and acceleration, as well as those of
conservation of energy, the potential of the human per-
65
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
son, the moral compensation, the golden mean, and the
capacity of human organs. I know that I cannot multiply
energy and experience sixty times without increase of
food intake, and yet I do it. I know that I cannot live
on eight minutes of sleep in twenty-four hours, but I
do that also. I know that I cannot reasonably crowd
four thousand years of experience into one lifetime, yet
unreasonably I do not see what will prevent it. But you
say that I will destroy myself?”
"Those who take only the first step will destroy them-
selves."
"And how does one take the second step?"
"At the proper moment you will be given the choice."
“I have the most uncanny feeling that I will refuse
the choice.”
“Yes, from present indications you will refuse it. You
are fastidious.
"You have a smell about you, Old Man without a
Face. I know now what it is. It is the smell of the Pit.”
"Are you so slow to learn that? But that is its name."
"It is the mud from the Pit, the same from which the
clay tablets were formed, from the old land between the
rivers. I've dreamed of the six-fingered hand reaching
up from that Pit and overshadowing us all. From that
slime!"
"Do not forget that according to another recension
Another made the People from that same slime."
"And I have read, old Man: "The People first counted
by Fives and Tens from the number of fingers on their
hands. But before the People the for the reason
that they had--, counted by Sixes and Twelves.' But
time has left blanks on those tablets.
"Yes. Time, in one of its manifestations, has deftly
and with a purpose left those blanks."
"I cannot discover the name of the thing that goes
into one of those blanks. Can you?"
"I am part of the name that goes into one of those
blanks."
>
66
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
"And you are the Man without a Face. But why is it
that you overshadow and control people? And to what
purpose?"
"It will be long before you know those answers. "
"When the choice comes to me, it will bear very care-
ful weighing. But tell me, Man without a Face who
comes from the Pit, are not pits and men without faces
very nineteenth-century Gothic?"
"There was a temper in that century that came very
close to uncovering us.
After that a chill descended on the life of Charles
Vincent, for all that he still possessed his exceptional
powers. And now he seldom indulged in pranks.
Except with Jennifer Parkey.
It was unusual that he should be drawn to her. He
knew her only slightly in the common world, and she
was at least fifteen years his senior. But she now ap-
pealed to him for her youthful qualities, and all his
pranks with her were gentle ones.
For one thing this spinster did not frighten, nor did
she begin the precaution of locking her doors, never
having bothered with such things before. He would
come behind her and stroke her hair, and she would
speak out calmly with that sort of quickening in her
voice:
Who are you? Why won't you let me see you? You
are a friend, aren't you? Are you a man, or are you some-
thing else? If you can caress me why can't you talk to
me? Please let me see you. I promise I won't hurt you.”
It was as though she could not imagine that anything
strange would hurt her. Or again when he hugged her
or kissed her on the nape, she
would call: “You must be
“
a little boy, or very like a little boy, whoever you are.
You are good not to break my things when you move
about. Come here and let me hold you."
It is only very good people who have no fear at all of
the unknown.
67
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
When Vincent met Jennifer in the regular world, as
he now more often found occasion to do, she looked at
him appraisingly, as though she guessed some sort of
connection.
She said one day, “I know it is an impolite thing to
say, but you do not look well at all. Have you been to
a doctor?”
"Several times. But I think it is my doctor who should
go to a doctor. He was always given to peculiar re-
marks, but now he is becoming a little unsettled."
"If I were your doctor, I believe that I would also
become a little unsettled. But you should find out what
is wrong. You look terrible.”
He did not look terrible. He had lost his hair, it is
true, but many men lose their hair by thirty, though
not perhaps as suddenly as he had. He thought of at-
tributing it to air resistance. After all, when he was in
the state he did stride at some three hundred miles an
hour. And enough of that is likely to blow the hair right
off your head. And might that not also be the reason for
his worsening complexion and the tireder look that ap-
peared in his eyes? But he knew that this was nonsense.
He felt no more air pressure when in his accelerated
state than when in his normal state.
He had received his summons. He chose not to an-
swer it. He did not want to be presented with the
choice; he had no wish to be one with those in the Pit.
But he had no intention of giving up the great advan-
tage which he now held over nature.
"I will have it both ways," he said. “I am already a
contradiction and an impossibility. You can't have your
confection and eat it too. The proverb was only the
early statement of the law of moral compensation. “You
can't take more out of a basket than it holds. But for
a long time I have been in violation of the laws and
the balances. "There is no road without a tuning,' 'Those
who dance will have to pay the fiddler,' 'Everything
that goes up comes down.' But are proverbs really uni-
68
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
versal laws? Certainly. A sound proverb has the force of
universal law, is but another statement of it. But I have
contradicted the universal laws. It remains to be seen
whether I have contradicted them with impunity.
‘Every action has its reaction.' If I refuse to deal
with them, I will provoke a strong reaction. The Man
without a Façe said that it was always a race between
full knowing and destruction. Very well, I will race
them for it.
They began to persecute him then. He knew that
they were in a state as accelerated from his as his was
from the normal. To them he was the abnost motionless
statue, hardly to be told from a dead man. To him they
were by their speed both invisible and inaudible. They
hurt him and haunted him. But still he would not answer
their summons.
When the meeting took place, it was they who had
to come to him, and they materialized there in his room,
men without faces.
"The choice," said one. "Well, you force us to be so
clumsy as to have to voice it."
"I will have no part of you," said Charles Vincent.
You all smell of the Pit, of that old mud of the cunei-
forms of the land between the rivers, of the people who
were before the People."
"It has endured a long time,” one of them said, "and
we consider it as enduring forever. But the Garden,
which was quite in the neighborhood-do you know how
long the Garden lasted?
"I don't know."
"Not even a day. It all happened in a single day, and
before nightfall they were outside. You want to throw
in with something more permanent, don't you?”
"No. I don't believe that I do."
"What have you to lose?”
"Only my hope of eternity.”
69
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
"
"But you don't believe in that. No man has ever really
believed in eternity.”
“No man has ever either entirely believed or entirely
disbelieved in it,” said Charles Vincent.
"At least it can never be proved," said one of the
faceless men. “Nothing is proved until it is over with.
And in this case, if it is ever over with, then it is dis-
proved. And all that time would one not be tempted
to wonder 'What if, after all, it ends in the next minute?
"I imagine, if we survive the flesh, we will receive
some sort of surety,” said Vincent.
“But you are not sure either of surviving or receiving,
nor could you accept the surety as sure. Now we have
a very close approximation of eternity. When Time is
multiplied by itself, and that repeated again and again,
does that not approximate eternity?"
"I don't believe that it does. But I will not be of you.
One of you has said that I am too fastidious. So now
will you say that you'll destroy me?"
"No. We will only let you be destroyed. By yourself,
you cannot win the race with destruction."
After that Charles Vincent somehow felt more mature.
He knew he was not really meant to be a poltergeist or
a six-fingered thing out of the Pit. He knew that in
some way he would have to pay for every minute and
hour that he had gained. But what he had gained he
would use to the fullest. And whatever could be ac-
complished by sheer acquisition of human knowledge,
he would try to accomplish.
And he now startled Dr. Mason by the medical knowl-
edge he had picked up, the while the doctor amused
him by the concern he showed for Vincent. For he felt
fine. He was perhaps not as active as he had been, but
that was only because he had become dubious of aimless
activity. He was still the ghost of the libraries and
museums, but was puzzled that the published reports
,
intimated that an old ghost had replaced a young one.
He now paid his mystic visits to Jennifer Parkey less
70
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
often. For he was always dismayed to hear her exclaim
to him in his ghostly form, "Your touch is so changed.
You poor thing Is there anything at all I can do to help
you?"
He decided that somehow she was too immature to
ever understand him, though he was still fond of her.
He transferred his affections to Mrs. Milly Maltby, a
widow at least thirty years his senior. Yet here it was a
sort of girlishness in her that appealed to him. She was
a woman of sharp wit and real affection, and she also
accepted his visitations without fear, following a little
initial panic.
They played games, writing games, for they com-
municated by writing. Milly would scribble a line, then
hold the paper up in the air whence he would cause
it to vanish into his sphere. He would return it in half
a minute, or half a second of her time, with his retort.
He had the advantage of her in time with greatly more
opportunity to think up responses, but she had the ad-
vantage over him in natural wit and was hard to top.
They also played checkers, and he often had to re-
tire apart and read a chapter of a book on the art be-
tween moves; and even so she often beat him. For
natural talent is likely to be a match for accumulated
lore and codified procedure.
But to Milly also he was unfaithful in his fashion, be-
ing now interested–he no longer became enamored
or entranced-in a Mrs. Roberts, a great-grandmother
who was his elder by at least fifty years. He had read
all the data extant on the attraction of the old for the
young, but he still could not explain his successive at-
tachments. He decided that these three examples were
enough to establish a universal law: that a woman is
simply not afraid of a ghost, though he touches her and
is invisible, and writes her notes without hands. It is
possible that amorous spirits have known this for a long
time, but Charles Vincent had made the discovery him-
self independently.
71
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
>
When enough knowledge is accumulated on any sub-
ject, the pattern will sometimes emerge suddenly, like
a forin in a picture revealed where before it was not
seen. And when enough knowledge is accumulated on
all subjects, is there not a chance that a pattem govern-
ing all subjects will emerge?
Charles Vincent was caught up in his last enthusiasm.
On one long vigil, as he consulted source after source
and sorted them in his mind, it seemed that the pattem
was coming out clearly and simply, for all its amazing
complexity of detail.
"I know all that they know in the Pit,” said Vincent,
"and I know a secret that they do not know. I have not
lost the race-I have won it. I can defeat them at the
point where they believe themselves invulnerable. If
controlled hereafter, we need at least not be controlled
by them. It is all falling together now. I have found the
final truth, and it is they who have lost the race. I hold
the key. I will now be able to enjoy the advantage with-
out paying the ultimate price of defeat and destruction,
or of collaborating with them.
"Now I have only to implement my knowledge, to
publish the fact, and one shadow at least will be lifted
from mankind. I will do it at once. Well, ncarly at once.
It is almost dawn in the norinal world. I will sit here a
very little while and rest. Then I will go out and begin
to make contact with the proper persons for the dis-
position of this thing. But first I will sit here a little
while and rest.
And he died quietly in his chair as he sat there.
Dr. Mason made an entry in his private journal:
Charles Vincent, a completely authenticated case
of premature aging, one of the most clear-cut in all
gerontology. This man was known to me for many
years, and I here aver that as of one year ago he
was of normal appearance and physical state, and
72
THE SIX FINGERS OF TIME
that his chronology is also correct, I having also
known his father. I examined the subject during
the period of his illness, and there is no question
at all of his identity, which has also been established
for the record by fingerprinting and other means.
I aver that Charles Vincent at the age of thirty is
dead of old age, having the appearance and or-
ganic state of a man of ninety.
Then the doctor began to make other notes: “As in
two other cases of my own observation, the illness was
accompanied by a certain delusion and series of dreams,
so nearly identical in all three men as to be almost un-
believable. And for the record, and no doubt to the
prejudice of my own reputation, I will set down the
report of them here.”
But when Dr. Mason had written that, he thought
about it for a while.
"No, I will do no such thing," he said, and he struck
out the last lines he had written. “It is best to let sleep-
ing dragons lie."
And somewhere the faceless men with the smell of
the Pit on them smiled to themselves in quict irony.
a
73
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
HE WOKE TO mountains, as the poet says. Really, there
is nothing like it. The oceans and the lowlands were
made long ago, according to legend. But the mountains
are made new every morning.
It took some doing. His name was Garamask, and he
had done it.
"I hate space,” Garamask had said when he decided
on it, and the crewmen had been surprised.
"Why do you, Mr. Garamask?" the Captain had asked
him. “You've logged more time in space than I have.
You've been to many more regions. And you've made
more money in the space business than anyone I know.
I never saw a man so eager for voyages or for new
worlds as you. You're so expansive a person that I
thought you were in love with the
expanse of
space.”
“I love movement and travel,” Garamask said. “I love
worlds! But in space, the feel of movement and the
sense of travel is quickly lost. And space is not expan-
sive. It is shriveling.
"I have, let us say, a passion for a certain unkempt
and mountainous world, but space comes near to de-
stroying that passion in me; for I have seen that world
appear on the scope like a microbe, and I will watch it
disappear like a microbe again. I have studied epic and
towering things under the microscope. And when I put
away the microscope, I know that the towering things
are really too small to see. From the aspect of space,
all the towering and wild worlds that I love are things
too small to see or to believe in. I love a big world, and
I hate space for spoiling that bigness.”
"Paravata isn't so big a world, Mr. Garamask,” the
Captain told him.
>
74
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
"It is! It's big! It's huge!" Garamask insisted. “And
I'll not have it spoiled. It is the largest possible world
on the man-scale, and I will not let that scale suffer by
comparison. It's a world as large as a man can get
around on with ease, without becoming less than a man.
It's half again Earth's gravity, so it calls out our strength
It has an atmosphere that keeps one on an oxygen binge,
so it gives the strength something to draw on. It has
mountains that rise ten thousand meters, the highest
mountains anywhere that a man can climb in his proper
body and without apparatus.
“And I won't have it spoiled for me! I'm rich enough
that
you can't regard me as a nuisance. I've given my
instructions. So, follow them as regards me.'
"Mr. Garamask, weren't you ever young?" the Captain
asked him.
"I am young yet, Captain. I am physically the fittest
man on this ship. And this is a very young and aspiring
idea that I am effecting now."
"Ah, were you never something else, Mr. Garamask,
not quite so young, and much more awkward?"
"I don't know what you mean, Captain, but I suspect
that I never was. Follow my instructions.
The instructions of Garamask were that he be sent
into a sustaining sleep, and that he be landed and
lodged on Paravata of the Mountains while he slept. He
did not know when Paravata was picked up microbe-
sized, nor when it grew a hundred million times to the
size of a pea. He did not see the planet grow to twice
the size of Earth He missed the landing.
He was taken from the ship at Paravata Landing and
transported a hundred kilometers to the mountain lodge.
He was installed there as befitted a man of means. He
slept a determined number of hours, as he had planned
it, and he woke in the very early morning. He woke to
mountains.
He went out into the keen air of Paravata or Paravath,
finding himself in the middle of the small town of Moun-
75
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
tain-Foot. He had a warrant for arrest and death in his
wallet; and he had a singing curiosity about this world
whose vital civilization had suddenly been frozen in mo-
tion, whose people, the Rogha (the elites, the excellent
ones), had disappeared or very nearly disappeared and
whose place had been taken by the oafish Oganta, and
this alınost within living memory. He was on a hunting
trip in depth: he would hunt on the three-stage moun-
tain to kill Sinek the cat-lion, Riksino the bear, Shasos the
eagle-condor, and Bater-Jeno the crag-ape or the frog-
man (depending on the translation). This was said to
be the most challenging hunt in the galaxy. And most
likely he would die on the triple mountain, for no
human hunter had ever bagged all four of the creatures
and survived the thing; though Oganta hunters were
said to have done the trick.
On the second level, Garamask was hunting for the
answer to the riddle: what had happened to the Rogha
elites? Could those few who were left not be strength-
ened in their hold? Could their civilization not be un-
frozen? Might it not be discovered what queer hold the
oafish Oganta had over this Rogha remnant? How had
the excellent ones fallen (willingly, it was said) to their
inferiors?
On the third level, Garamask was hunting for a mur-
derer, the Oganta, Rogha, Animal, or Man who had
killed Allyn. Allyn had been a close friend, but Garamask
had not realized how close until after the event. It had.
been given out that Allyn, on the same hunt, had been
killed by the Bater-Jeno, the crag-ape or the frog-man.
Allyn, however, had newly appeared to Garamask in a
rhapsody-dream and said that this was not so. He had
been killed, said Allyn, by his guide and hunting com-
panion, who had been an Oganta named Ocras, but
who might not now be in Oganta form.
'I believe that we have been close,” Allyn had said,
'though we never spoke of our closeness. Avenge me,
Garamask, and take the lid off the mystery of Paravath.
76
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
»
I was so very close to uncovering the mystery myself.”
"What had you found, Allyn?" Garamask had asked; but
appearances in dreams often seem hard of hearing; they
speak but they do not listen.
“Uncover it, Garamask,” Allyn had repeated, "and
avenge me. I was so close to it. He ate into the base of
my
skull and so killed me. He ate my very brains as I
died.” “But what did you find when you came so close,
Allyn?” Garamask had asked once more. “Tell me what
you had going, so I will know what to look for." "I was so
close to it when I died,” Allyn said.
Apparitions are as stone-deaf. They speak their mes-
sage, but they do not hear. You may have noticed this
yourself.
Garamask was not a great believer in dreams, but he
had desired this hunt for a long time; he had, in fact,
intended to accompany Allyn on his hunt, but had been
prevented by affairs. And he had known at the time of
the dream, had not known till he had gone carefully
,
over the report, that Allyn had indeed been killed by
having his skull eaten into. Now Garamask tested it a
little.
“My guide, will he be Ocras?” he asked the gangling
Oganta who was manager of the hunting lodge.
“Ocras? No, he is no longer. a guide. He has been
translated out of this life.”
“But there was a guide named Ocras?"
"There was one time a guide named Ocras, who is
no more. Your guide will be Chavo."
But there had been a guide named Ocras, and Gara-
mask hadn't known the name except in the rhapsody-
dream. Then Garamask saw one of the Rogha survivors
walking proudly in the early keen air. He went to him
at once, meeting him on a rocky slope.
"I have an intense interest in you and all your kind,"
Garamask began. "You yourself are the face of the mys-
tery. You are imposing in a way that I could never be;
I can see why you are called the elite, the excellent ones.
n
7
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
You are so startlingly in contrast to the Oganta here that
everyone for worlds around is puzzled over it. You are
kings. They are oaks. Why do they take you
over?"
"I
suppose it is the day of the oafs, pilgrim-man,” the
Rogha said easily. "I am Treorai, and you are the man
Garamask who made preparations to wake to moun-
tains. You have taken up the challenge of the three-
stage mountain. It's a high aspiration to kill the four
creatures there. One who has done it will experience a
deep change."
"As Allyn did?"
I knew him when he was here. He did not kill the
four creatures. He was killed by the fourth.”
"He has told me, outside the lines as it were, that he
was killed by something other.
"Allyn would not lie, even outside the lines. You have
misunderstood him. Did he say that he completed the
hunt and killed the fourth creature?"
“He said that he had killed Sinek the lion, Riksino
the bear, Shasos the eagle; but, no, he did not say that
he had killed the Bater-Jeno. He said, however, that he
was murdered by something else."
"No, Garamask, be was killed by the fourth prey. A A
creature is often fuzzy in his mind about his own man-
ner of dying. He was a wonderful fellow, though, for a
man.
"Treorai, why has your civilization come to a grotesque
halt? Why have you Rogha, in your manifest superiority,
all but died out? Why have the rough rampant Oganta
taken over? A dozen of them couldn't take one of you.
You have the presence that would dumbfound any at-
tack. I can feel it like magnetism. Is it a genetic thing
that has happened?"
"A genetic thing, a ghostly thing, a sundering thing
really, Garamask. But it isn't finished, and there is no
apathy here. What we Rogha have lost, we will re-
gain, by any means whatsoever. This eclipse will pass
from us."
78
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
a
"Why don't you simply annihilate the Oganta, Tre-
orai?"
"You are an educated man, Garamask, but your speak-
.
ing of the Paravath language is imperfect. I simply do
not understand your question. I have some World-Eng-
lish, if that would help."
"Treorai, why do you Rogha not simply annihilate the
Oganta?* Garamask asked the excellent Rogha in World-
English.
"No, Garamask, I have not so much of the idiom as
I thought," said Treorai. "Your question is simply in-
comprehensible in. whatever language it is put. Ah, your
guide has peeped out to see if you are ready. Grab
him quickly, or he will go in and be back to sleep again.
The Oganta are not morning types. And the sun should
not find you still at Mountain-Foot. It should find you
at least two hundred meters aloft. See that ledge therel
It is a wonderful place to catch first sun."
"I see that it will be," said Garamask. "And it will
take some inspired climbing to get there in time. If I
live I will see you again, excellent one."
"High hunting, Garamask! A very strong hunter with
a very good guide may kill the first three creatures. To
kill the fourth, the hunter must transcend himself."
Garamask started up the Mountain Domba (the first
mountain of the three-mountain complex) with Chavo
his booming Oganta guide. The Oganta are rangy and
solid creatures, and strength and endurance is their birth-
right. Say what you will about the loud oafs, they are
strong climbers And Garamask was a very strong man
who had climbed on heavier-than-World worlds before.
And, ah, there is sometimes an advantage in know-
ing the Paravath language imperfectly. Garamask could
tune Chavo out. It took all his attention to follow the
language, and his attention was mercifully on many other
things as they went up. And yet Chavo laughed and
boomed incessantly, like boulders clashing together.
A queer and unfinished looking creature was this
79
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
a
Chavo, were all the Oganta. (Climbing, climbing hard
and high, they'd catch first sun on the fine ledge yet.)
A queer creaturel "The male European moor frog (Rana
Arvalis) is covered with a light blue bloom like a plum,"
the anthropologist-naturalist Wendt had written two hun-
dred years ago, but Wendt had never heard of the world
of Paravata, nor of a blue-blooming moor frog two meters
tall. (Climbing hard and high, there was another shade of
blue bloom in the morning light, and the keen air was
like World brandy.) “Those naked goblins with human
hands and infant bodies, "old Wendt had written again,
but Wendt never visioned an infant body that would
weigh two hundred kilograms here, and two-thirds that
much on Earth. Chavo the Oganta was a lot of oafl
It was all moss-covered rocks, and tiger grass grow-
ing between them. It was nowhere difficult to get foot-
or handhold, but it was steep and it was heavy. They
came to the fine ledge and took it just at first sun.
They rested there.
"You do not like me, Papa Garamask," Chavo was
booming. "But I will make you like me. We Oganta like
to be liked. We will go to any lengths to be liked.”
"You go too far for it, I believe,” said Garamask.
"When will we meet the Sinek?”
We will meet sineks and sineks from here on up,
but they will bound away from us and will not stand.
Then we will meet Sinek himself, and he will stand.”
"You talk as though there were only one of the species
who would be dangerous. And yet, surely, a dozen of
these very dangerous sineks have been killed."
"There is only one at a time, Papa Garamask. Whether
it is always the same one that is translated back to live
on the mountain, or whether one inherits from another,
we do not know. But always there are many sineks,
and there is Sinek himself. It is time to arm before we
go up higher."
Chavo broke the stuff out of his pack. No shot-weapon
might be used on the mountain hunt; even bow and
80
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
spear-thrower and sling were ruled out. The animals had
them not, so the hunters might not have them. It
made for a harder hunt. The hunting and killing must
be by direct confrontation and intimate encounter. Gara-
mask clipped the claw-gauntlets over the backs of his
hands, binding them by wrist and palm straps. He had
been proud of his crushing grip, of his massive hands
and forearms; but could be with these deliver lion blows
on the lion himself? He bound on the elbow and knee
and toe and heel daggers, needle-pointed, double-bladed,
curiously curved. He bound on the crotch and throat
armor. He slipped the casing fangs over his own dog
teeth. He bound on the cap with the skull saber. Chavo
similarly equipped himself. Well, the animals of Para-
vath had such claws and fangs (not all of them having
the same ones), so the hunters could have such also.
'It will be much harder to climb in this," Garamask
grumbled
"It will be, Papa Garamask," Chavo said, “and the
chimb itself becomes much harder. Some hunters take the
spikes and claws off and hook them ready in their belts,
and they are surprised by Sinek or Riksino or Shasos,
and die for it. Some climb, clawed and daggered, and
alip and fall to their deaths."
Which is best, guide?"
Whichever way you would rather die, Papa Gara-
mask, so select it. That will be the best for you."
"I do not intend to die on the mountain.
"Shall we turn back now, Papa Garamask? You make
twelve World-men who have come to hunt. All die on
the mountain. None goes all the way through the full
hunt.
"One man, Allyn, went all the way, Chavo. And then
he was murdered. I have climbed with him and hunted
with him, and I'm as good a man. I intend to go all the
way, and I do not intend to be murdered.”
They climbed strongly, Garamask silent, Chavo boom-
ing and croaking with incessant talk that Garamask
81
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
tuned out. The Oganta climbed, clawed and daggered
and fanged and armored. That was the best way then.
Garamask did likewise. He didn't envy the Oganta his
youth and towering strength. Garamask had his own
strength and he enjoyed testing it. But he envied the
Oganta, a little, his fangs. Garamask had no such giant
canine teeth to support the giant saber-fangs. He had no
such bull-bowed neck, nor skull-massif, nog, buttressed
and ridged upper jaw to support such sabers. But he had
donned a pretty good set of fangs himself and he be-
lieved he would know how to use them.
From one jagged turning, Garamask caught a dizzy
view 'of Daingean City far away. The excellent Rogha
had been builders at least equal to men. Now their
cities were almost emptied of them, and the oafish
Oganta lived in them like animals denning. Then the
jagged tuming became even more jagged, and Garamask
could not afford another glance at the city.
They ate aran-moss and cobble-moss, and pods of
tiger grass. They chewed green coill-nuts for water.
They climbed high and hard. Then Garamask caught
the whiff and the spoor of the spool animals, and he
knew it out of the cellar of his mind.
"Ah, this is the world you live on," he breathed, "and
you are not imaginary at all. Animal who is no animal,
I know what you are." Garamask slavered when he called
out because of the great fangs capped to his dog teeth.
"The old Greeks called you the all-animal
, and pictured
you as made out of parts of many. And men said you
were the Asian lion, or leopard, or tiger, or rock-lion,
or American puma. And all the time you were yourself,
the legend animal."
"Who do you talk to, Papa Garamask?" Chavo asked
in some alarm. “Do you talk to the grandfather of Sinek?"
"To the great-great-grandfather of Sinek, oaf. In the
rain forests, they told poor men that your name was
jaguar, but the poor men knew better. In the old South
of the Conglomerate States on World, they told that
82
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
your name was puma or cougar, but the poor cracker-
men always knew your real species. Spook animal, I come
in after you!"
"Papa Garamask, throw but a rock into the thicket
and it will slink off. It is only one of the sineks, it is not
Sinek himself. He seldom hunts so low or so early. And
do not talk to the grandfather of Sinek, or he will come
in your dreams and eat through your live throat and
kill you.”
"Damn you, oaf, it is Sinek himself! He hunts low and
early today. Grandfather of all the animals, I fight you
nowl Panther)"
And Garamask charged upward, across a slide of moss-
covered rocks, into a tall thicket of tiger-grass and coill-
bush, to fight panther, the animal who exists only in
legend and misnomer. On Paravath he used the name
Sinek.
It was a long black male. This was no sinek who
would bound away, who would not stand. This was
Sinek himself, and now Garamask understood why there
could be only one of him at a time. The spook, the
spirit filled this animal completely, with nothing left
over for any other.
Garamask drew first blood, clawing the black panther
half blind, getting his elbow dagger inside the panther's
mouth, trying always to stay inside the animals fore-
olaws. Panther got one side of Garamask's head, above
the throat armor, inside his mouth, failed to hold, slid
bloodily along it, popped it out, and took an ear off
neatly. The animal would weigh a hundred and fifty
kilograms here, a hundred on Earth, just about Gara-
mask's own weight. Panther, Sinek, knocked Garamask
loose, and he slid on the loose rocks and moss, very
nearly off the mountain to his death. Then they were
in confrontation.
Sinek was upground of Garamask on the edge of the
firm rock; and Garamask was on the loose-rock fringe
that slipped and cascaded and was now flowing over
83
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
n
the edge like water. Chavo, the Oganta oaf, was chew-
ing a blade of tiger-grass and laughing.
It was with amazement that Garamask saw intel.
ligence, almost total intelligence, in the eyes of Sinek
the panther. This was a person and a personage, what-
ever the species. The intelligent look was almost friend.
ly to Garamask, and the two understood each other.
They would fight to the death, but they recognized
each other for what they were, excellent ones, superior
ones, Panther, Man, Rogha, firstlings, not to be compared
to Oganta or Swine or Sloths.
Garamask made the attempt to break out of his sliding
strip. He exchanged terrific clawing blows with Sinek,
got the worse of it, and came much nearer to going off
the mountain as he slid reeling back.
"Fear you nothing, Papa Garamask,” the Oganta Chavo
called from where he had scrambled higher. “I will roll
boulders down on Sinek and kill him." And Chavo did
roll boulders, badly, inaccurately, dangerously. Then
Garamask understood from the oafish laughter that
Chavo was trying to kill him and not Sinek; trying to
knock the man off the mountain with the rolling boulders,
or to induce a rockslide that would carry him inevocably
down.
With a mixture of stark terror and upsurging courage
that was peculiar to himself in moments of deep crisis,
Garamask battled up the sliding rocks, greatly impeded
by his arms, and closed with Sinek the panther again.
"I am as large, I am as strong, I am as armed, dam-
mit, I am as animal!” Garamask gibbered. “We close to-
gether, good comrade. If I go off the mountain, you go
off it too.
But Garamask was wrong. The panther was more
animal than he. It was doing him to death in the close
fighting, though puzzled by the throat and crotch armor.
Who waits below to eat out my skull, Chavo?” Gara-
mask howled out furiously. "Who waits below to crack
my skull and eat my brains? That is not Sinek here. It
84
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
is scavengers below me, and a scavenger above me,
you!"
“Papa Garamask," Chavo chortled in a booming gig-
“
gle from above, “fear you nothing. I will roll boulders
down on Sinek and kill him.” And Chavo was rolling
boulders down on them both, grappled together, to kill
them both.
Garamask was losing, slipping. He broke off his cap-
ping fangs and his own canine teeth under them tried
to slash through the sinews of panther; and he was
choked on his own sudden blood. He raked the animal
with elbow, knee, toe, and heel daggers, and was nearly
disemboweled by a back foot of Sinek that equaled all
the dagger functions. For the last time he broke free
from the slashing, smashing panther and rolled in a
stream of scree, trying to keep himself on the moun-
tain,
Chavo set a large boulder at him to help him over
the edge. Sinek the panther came lithely for the kill,
and caught the boulder amidships as he flicked himself
sly-footed along the edge of firm rock. And Sinek could
not halt himself when he was knocked heavily into the
sliding rock stream. Sinek the panther flowed off the
mountain and fell into gaping space.
"Papa Garamask, I save your life," Chavo the Oganta
chortled from above. "Now I must make certain that
Sinek is really dead where he has fallen so far below. I
will roll yet more boulders down on him, and down on
him till I am sure that he is dead."
And Chavo rolled boulders down at Garamask to
knock him off the mountain; and the man scrambled in
the sliding scree to avoid them. Three, six, nine boulders
Chavo rolled down at Garamask, and then he had
trouble in getting a fine boulder loose from its em-
bedment. Garamask found a hidden spur of solid rock
and went up quickly. Chavo turned, and they were on
a level face to face: Garamask bloody and crippled and
earless, and full of muskiness and ghostliness, for part
85
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
a
of the spook of Sinek, falling to death, had passed into
Garamask. And Chavo, what can you say of the oaf
Chavo of the species Oganta? Could he meet Garamask's
eyes? No, but he never could have; all Oganta are
;
wall-eyed. Did he blanch at the encounter? How can
you tell with an Oganta? But the light blue bloom that
was his complexion had lost a little of its sheen.
“Why do you pause, guide Chavo?" Garamask asked
as a waiting volcano might ask. “We go up, we go up!
We have not yet reached the top of the first mountain
of Three-Mountain. We have killed only one of the four
prey. We go up, we go upl"
They went up. They wore out the day with their climb-
ing. They saw sineks and sineks who bounded away from
them and would not stand. But they did not meet Sinek
himself again that day. Sinek was dead for the while.
Garamask took off his weapons and armor pieces and
hooked them into his belt. Thereafter he climbed more
easily. And just at last sun they came to the top of
Domba Mountain, the first mountain of Three-Mountain.
It was a high plateau; it was another mountain-foot,
for out of it rose the Mountain Giri, the second moun-
tain of Three-Mountain. They ate bitter mountain ra.
tions and chewed green coill-nuts for water. They
bedded down for the night, so Garamask thought.
But Chavo brought a stringed instrument from his
pack and began some of the twangingest and most
nauseating noise ever heard. He mixed his bumptious
booming voice with it in a curdling cry, and Garamask
understood that he would not be able to sleep with this.
"You have convinced me, pup,” he growled. “You have
established one of the universal ultimates-the most
raucous noise ever. But is it necessary that you belabor
the point?"
"You do not like it?" Chavo was surprised. "I pride
myself on my music and my singing. We consider such
to be dynamic perfection and cosmic looseness of sound.”
"I consider it something else. The Rogha are said to
-
86
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
a
be the most musical creatures in the universes. How
could their co-dwellers here, you'Oganta, be the least?”
"I had hoped you would like my music," Chavo sor-
rowed. "I still hope that you will like me. Really, we
are likable creatures. Even some of the Rogha have
said so, with a certain exasperation, it is true.”
You are crude unlicked calves, Chavo, and I under-
stand your world less and less. Why, and how, are you
killing the Rogha? For I believe that to be the case.
But there are so few of them left, Papa Garamask!
And they become fewer and fewer. So is it not impera-
tive that we kill them, much as we respect and love
them?"
"If there were millions of them left, would you kill
them?
"No, certainly not. That would be an abomination.
Why should we kill them if there were many of them?
They are so greatly above us that we will do anything
for them."
"Even kill them, Chavo, to show how much you love
them? And why did you try to kill me during my battle
with Sinek?"
"For mixed reasons. First, you have a dignity of as-
pect, and you seemed almost like a Rogha to me as you
were embattled there. I respect and love you almost as
much as I do any of the Rogha. And then, it has been
discovered that World-men will do as well as the Rogha
for us, and companions of mine were waiting below the
aag to tear you apart if you should fall there. And
also, we Oganta have an impulse to kill those whom we
find in a position to be killed. Very often we kill other
Oganta simply because we find them in a vulnerable
position. And this, I believe, is irrational of us.
"I think so too, Chavo. Several small rocks are danc-
ing there on the slope. Do my eyes deceive me? Are
they small animals frisking that look so much like rocks?"
"No, they are rocks dancing, Papa Garamask. Your
eyes do not deceive you. Here, I will play my hittur
87
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
again and they dance to it. Hearl Seel Is that not nimble
music, Papa Garamask?"
"I'd call it something else. Dammit, Chavo, must I
ask the obvious question? What makes the rocks danceps
"I make the rocks dance, Papa Garamask, or my dark
companion does. Why are you surprised? The same thing
is done on World?”
“If it is, I have not heard of it.”
“But it is. On World, so I have been told, one young
person in ten has a dark companion, and a World
German name is given to this. But in both cases, the
dark companion is a satellite of self. On World, I am
told, the fact is often hidden or denied. But here, where
the majority of us are capable of projecting the dark
satellite, there is no way to hide it. Besides, it is fun.
Watch me rock and sway that bush as if I were a wind
Seel"
"Weird oaf, you have a poltergeistl" Garamask was
interested in this thing.
“Yes, that is your World-word. No, I am a poltergeist.
And I am also a visible creature. It used to be that,
with time, we would give up one form or the other:
stand clear of the dark body and be visible creatures
only; or decay the body and be spook only. But now,
in
the time of waiting of the Oganta, we have both forms,
and we are not able to go beyond these forms."
"This is a time of waiting for you, 'Chavo? What do
you wait for?
"To see what will happen to us. It is a very uneasy
time of waiting. It's so narrow a ladder, and so few of
us can climb it at one time. And at the top, it is not
what it once was, not what it should be."
"I am going to sleep now, Chavo, and I do not want
to hear your damnable instrument or your voice again
this night,” Garamask said evenly. “But how do I know
that you will not kill me while I sleep?"
“Papa Garamask, would an Oganta violate the night?"
"Hell, I don't know what you'd do! I'm going to sleep."
88
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
And he did sleep, angrily and rapidly and deeply. And
in the deepest part of Garamask's sleep, Allyn loomed
up there, standing a slight distance up on Giri Mountain.
"Watch the raw cub Chavo," the looming Allyn called
down to Garamask. "He is not so clever as was Ocras,
bui you are not so clever as was I." "I am every bit as
clever as you, Allyn,” Garamask told the appearance.
"Now tell me what it was that you were so close to
finding out when you died. Give me something to go
on.” But Allyn did not hear Garamask. He had come to
speak and not to listen. “I was so very close to it then,
Allyn called again. "Avenge me on Ocras, Garamask,
whatever he is now. I'd do as much for you." "I will
continue my sleep, Allyn,” Garamask told him, “and I
do not want to hear any more dead-man talk from you
tonight unless you have something new to tell me.” And
Garamask continued his sleep.
He woke eagerly and easily at first gray light. "First
sun should not find me at this mountain-foot either,"
Garamask told himself silently. "I see the ledge where I
should catch first sun. There is always the ledge above;
mountaining would not be mountaining without it. Tre-
orai the Rogha told me that the Oganta are not morning
types. Let me see.”
Garamask hooted and hollered at Chavo, then kicked
him awake. Amused, he watched the oaf fall back to
leep again, then kicked him awake the second time.
"It must be my dark companion, it could not be myself
who does this.” Garamask laughed. “But it is fun.” He
finally roused the sleepy Chavo. They ate bitter moun-
tain rations.
Clawed and taloned and spiked and armored, they
climbed up the Mountain Giri. They took first sun at that
ledge above. They rested. Then they climbed again.
Not entirely unpleasant, not so to a man with a strong
and traveled nose, not really repugnant; but stark, tall,
penetrating, slavering, rampant, murderous, challenging,
of a grave-like putridity, of a life-terininal gagging, was
89
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
n
the odor, the strong stench that began to pervade the
climb on Giri Mountain. There was a person here mak-
ing himself known. It was Riksino, the cave-bear, the
musk-bear, the lord of this middle-mountain. He was at
home and he had his flag out.
"No need for me to ask what it is,” Garamask said.
"He's declared himself. Did I not already know it, I
believe that I could guess his very name from his coded
stench. He'll be easily found, and I didn't come on a
hunt to bypass such a prey. How is the best way? To
go to him directly as he waits, and attack him?"
"Papa Garamask, there isn't any best way to fight
Riksino," Chavo quaked. “I am afraid of this person
and have always been. He is much rougher and stronger
than Sinek or Shasos, or even than Bater-Jeno. He can
be killed, he has been killed, I have had a piece of his
killing before. But each time it is a great wonder that
he can be killed at all, and each time I go in fear and
trembling."
"It's catching, oaf,” said Garamask. "I feel a little fear
and trembling myself. We'll skirt above, and we'll hunt
down on him from above."
But Garamask was very uneasy himself, and his ex-
citement for this part of the hunt was of a sinking sort.
He was sick and fevered today. The breaking off of his
fang-sheathed eyeteeth in his yesterday's battle with
Sinek had swollen his face from eyes to throat. His
whole face and head ached, his throat was sore, and he
was slobbering through the unaccustomed gaps. More-
over, his shredded ear was bothering him. Even a very
strong man suffers under heavy gravity if he is sick.
And they would have difficulty skirting above Riksino
and hunting down on him from above. Riksino was
shuffling upward, keeping pace with them. His personal
stench rose higher and higher. They had his location
from it pretty well
, though they could not yet see him.
So they wore out a few tiring hours and ascended most
of the mountain.
90
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
"This will have to be the Big Riksino, the King Rik-
sino,” said Chavo. “None other ever dens so high, and
no Riksino will fight except in the mouth of his den.
This is the first time that the Big Riksino has returned
since he was last killed more than two equivalent years
ago.
"You really believe that the same animals retum to
life?” Garamask asked him.
"The Rogha do not believe it, Papa Garamask, but
we Oganta believe it. And yet, it may be that when a
Riksino grows larger and stronger than any of the others,
he will go up and occupy the old den of the Big Riksino
as a sign that he is now the king. I have fought with
riksinos before, but never with the Big Riksino, and I
am afraid. Be assured that he will be very large and
fierce.”
"I see him," said Garamask when they had climbed
a while further," and he is big. I'll go after him, since he
doesn't seem to make up his mind.”
"What you see is not Big Riksino,” said Chavo, “and
none other will fight while the big one is on the moun-
tain. Besides, as you notice, he has not the full stench."
"It's full enough for me," Garamask gawked out of
,
his sore throat. "111 have himn.”
Garamask rushed the animal It reared up roaring,
half again the man's height. It batted big paws around
in the air and opened a big mouth. Garamask went in
low, knifing the back legs of the animal with toes and
knees knives, ripping its belly with his skull saber, de-
livering terrible blows on its loins with his hand claws.
The animal toppled over backward, rolled, scrambled
up, and ran away howling. And Garamask shambled
after it, not at all able to catch it unless it should slow,
"It is no good that you chase it, Papa Garamask,“
Chavo called. “That is not Big Riksino. It is only a pup
that runs away like a pup. Do not waste the day chasing
a callow pup.
“I seem to spend several days climbing the mountains
91
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
with one,” Garamask panted. He was tired, and he had
been a fool. The real stench, the king stench was still
high above him, and he had only blooded a whimpering
whelp. He climbed, he climbed. Then the stench stood
and prevailed. The riksino person was waiting, quite
near.
"We are almost to the top of Giri Mountain,” said
Garamask, "and his den cannot be any higher. We will
reach that ridge, and we will follow it to the left till
we are above him. It's all clear rock above. His den
will have to be in that jumble somewhere just below
the ridge."
They were onto a fearful and crumbling ledge, crawl-
ing along it, Garamask in the lead. It is an awkward
sort of crawl with toe and knee sabers in place. Gara-
mask began to sight in on the very large animal. He
could hear it panting and gnashing now, and he smelled
it overpoweringly. He could hear it scratching big claws
on the rocks; he could even hear the blood pounding in
it, the strong pulse. But when he first saw it, paralyzing-
ly close, it was the inside of it that he saw.
He was looking into the open mouth of it, a meter
across, two meters below. him. Then, in a flick, half of
Garamask's nose was gone as he peered, fascinated, too
close. The animal was in a strain with its forepaws
extended as high as he could reach; and one of its high-
traveling claws had caught the leaning-over Garamask
in the face.
Garamask had claws of his own Angrily he raked
the backs of Riksino's paws with his own hand talons
when the big bear was extended on the rock as high
as he could reach Using his own bloody face for bait,
Garamask counter-clawed every time the bear struck up
at him. He found the animal slow and witless. The
animal closed its gaping mouth once, drew back its great
front limbs, and licked its bleeding paws. Garamask let
himself half over the ledge and raked the animals muz-
zle terribly with his heel saber. He half-blinded it with
92
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
a
the slash, either cutting one of its eyes out or filling it
so full of blood that the animal could not use it. And
Garamask was back on the ledge. before Riksino could
slash out at him again.
The riksino bear crouched low on four feet, gathered
himself, and leaped up toward the ledge. He got his
great forepaws over it and hung on. Garamask slashed
the big paws pulpy with his foot sabers, and then gashed
the animal full in the face again and again and again as
it hung there. The paws slipped off, and the animal
slipped back to the lower level. And yet it was of such
great size, had so much blood and meat in it, that this
little whittling that Garamask had done could have very
Little effect on it.
"Bear, you're a stumble-bum, but a big stumble-bum,"
Garamask talked. “What? What? You're turning some-
thing else on? Have you more exudations than your
stench? What do you do, bear?"
The riksino bear had reared up again and opened its
great mouth. And now it reeked with an influence on
another level from its stench.
“Papa Garamask, do not falll" Chavo called "Do
“
not fall into the open mouth of the Riksino."
"You fool! Why should I fall into the bear's mouth?”
Garamask asked in amazement. "Bear, bear, you tum
it on, do you? What are you, an amateur hypnotist? It
might get you the birds and the small game, not a man.
Turn it on, bear, tum it on as strong as you can! The
Garamask will never be so fascinated as to fall into a
bear's mouth.”
And Garamask fell head-first into the mouth of the
riksino bear.
From above there was another roaring, terrified and
hysterical, and a third weight came down heavily. From
the bowels of the riksino came an agonizing groan; and
Garamask was being crushed to death, but not instantly.
His skull spike aided him. His elbow sabers, for he was
into the maw of the animal beyond them, did slashing
93
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
service. Then he was crushed in together in spite of
them and his head began to split open. And then he
was crushed no more, as his enveloping cosmos went
limp.
a
D
And after a while he was climbing again, up to the
top of Giri Mountain. He was alive, more or less, and
be was dazed and gagging. Had it all been a bloody
dream, the fight with Riksino? Chavo was booming as
offensively as ever, but the thing had not been a dream.
"I save your life, Papa Garamask,” Chavo boomed.
"Am I not wonderful? I kill the Big Riksino in the throat
while he is straining there to crush you in his gullet.
The Big Riksino can think of only one thing at a time,
and the Big Chavo can knife through even the thickest
strained sinews very rapidly when he is given a free way
to it. There is no other way that Riksino can be killed
but by two hunters similarly; but the bait-hunter in the
mouth almost always dies.
You tried to kill me after Sinek had fallen off the
mountain to his death, Chavo," Garamask panted. "Why
.
did you not let the Riksino kill me, since you want me
dead?
The way the Riksido kills, you would be of no use
"
to us dead," said Chavo. “He devours too rapidly."
"And otherwise I would be of some use to you dead,
Chavo?"
“Dead, very freshly dead, or still dying, you would
be of greatest use to us,” Chavo said blandly. “Dying,
or new dead, you will represent our ultimate hope."
Just at last sun they came to the top of Giri Mountain,
the second mountain of Three-Mountain. They ate bit-
ter mountain rations, and Chavo dabbled medicaments
on Garamask's wounds.
"Were you to survive the mountain hunt (and you
will not) you could get a new nose made and be beauti.
ful again,” said Chavo. “Now, I suppose, you must live
noseless until your death the tomorrow sun-fall. Or shall
94
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
I attempt to make you a surrogate nose from the wood
of this thor-bush here?"
“Don't bother, Chavo. I'm going to sleep.”
But Garamask was not going to sleep. Chavo took his
stringed hittur from his pack and played his damnable
music and sang.
"Chavol” Garamask spoke sharply. “Do you know why
Spain on World fell from the highest nation in Europe
to the lowest within one generation?"
"Perhaps they offended the frog-god.”
“No. No, we have no frog-gods on World.”
What? What? Are you sure? No frog.gods on World?
You dash me down.”
“A devilish Arab, angered by the expulsion of the
Arabs from Spain, brought a guitar into that unfortunate
country. It was adopted. So that unfortunate country
fell, its once noble soul shriveled into a miserable whiney-
a
ness.
a
"I understand, Papa Garamask," said Chavo, still
strumming. "They fell, as though the noble Rogha should
fall to become ourselves Oganta."
“A good parallel, Chavo. And once in the Pacific
Ocean on World, there was a noble kingdom of Hawaii.
A sea-faring man introduced the guitar there, and the
noble kingdom soon begged to be accepted into servi-
tude by a land-nation.”
"Yes, of course that would be the effect, Papa Gara-
mask. We Oganta would accept such servitude gladly,
but there is no longer anyone to accept us into it.
"My own land, the Conglomerate States, fell similar.
ly," said Garamask sadly. "And once it had been a noble
land.”
“The noble Rogha, of course, despise the instrument,"
Chavo mourned. “But to us it is the Shetra, the holy
instrument. It is our religion. It is our love."
"It is the noise of accepted inferiority in all things."
“Of course it is, Papa Garamask. And who are more
inferior than ourselves, the Oganta? But we will give
A
95
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
"
it up, we promise this, if we are ever able to give up
being Oganta."
"Oh, go to sleep, Chavol”
“But you say that you have no frog-gods on your
world, and yet you have frogs? And we have our frog-
gods, and have no frogs except those introduced from
World. And these are small frogs that have been im-
ported. The largest of them can be held in the two
hands. I dream about the frogs of World. How big are
they, Papa Garamask? As big as the King Riksino?"
"Oh no. You've a completely mistaken idea, Chavo.
The frogs on World are the same as the frogs imported
here from World. The most of them you could hold in
one hand."
*Are you sure? They are not as big as myself? They
are not even as big as yourself?
No, no, Chavo. They are quite small
. I've often won-
dered about the frog-cult on Paravath. What is the mean-
ing of it?
"You dash me down again, Papa Garamask. There
should be frogs of great size. Why, the frog is the most
wonderful of all areatures! It is the only one that is able
to make the frog-leap easily. Oh, may that thing come
back to us!"
"Go to sleep, you damnable oaf.”
Chavo sighed deeply. “I dream about frogs," he mur-
mured. Then he did seem to go to sleep.
Allyn cane then, but he was a thinner and more
vapory Allyn than in his previous appearances to Gara-
mask,
The Shasos, the eagle-condor, isn't very hard to kill,"
,
said Allyn. “He will attack you when you are roping up
the cliff face, of course; for there is no other time he will
fight. If you can belay yourself on the rope, and if you
,
are not overpowered with fear, you have a chance. Wring
his neck like a chicken if you can, for he is a chicken.
"But he will rip you apart to get to your kidneys and
spleen if he can. Prevent him in this! He will gobble your
a
96
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
u
eyes out of your head. Let him not do this! Let him not
do it with both of them, at least, or you are at a dis-
advantage.”
"Allyn, I will go as far as you went,” said Garamask.
"I'm as good a man as you ever were. Tell me now, what
is the mystery at the end of it that you didn't find out till
you died? What is peculiar about the final prey, the
Bater-Jeno? What were you on to, Allyn?"
But wraiths are notoriously hard of hearing.
"You will do well, to weaken the bridge after you
have crossed over it, and to keep your gaze always fixed
on the back of your head," the dead-man Allyn said.
Then he became thinner, and he was gone.
.
Garamask again woke eagerly and easily at first gray
light. His face and his throat were not as sore as they
had been. Though bereaved in ear and nose, he was
happy. He lifted up his heart to the morning. Enjoyably,
he kicked Chavo the Oganta awake, for the Oganta
are not moming types.
They ate bitter mountain rations, donned sabers and
claws and spikes and armor, and began to climb Bior
Mountain, the third and highest mountain of Three-
Mountain. Here it was steep and sheer, Bior a saber
mountain rising out of its sheath which was Giri Moun-
tain. It was a different sort of hunt now, and a climb
in a different element.
There were the slanting slick shields of rock, and
the slanting slick grass and cobble-moss. There were the
rodents and poke-snakes that ate the grass and the moss
and slithered over the rocks. There were the great birds
that stood in from the tall skies and ate the rodents and
poke-snakes. The greatest of these birds was the Shasos,
the eagle-condor.
"Is it with Shasos as it was with the first two prey:
that there are many of them, and that there is one
special one?" Garamask asked Chavo.
"Yes, it is Shasos himself who will attack, and the
a
97
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
others will not. It is the big Shasos himself whom we
have to fear, he who nests on the third moon.”
"Moon-brained muggledoon! Where do the other Sha-
sos nest, Chavo?"
*On the second moon. The less noble of the large
birds nest on first moon, and small birds nest on Para-
vath itself. I am told that you do not have such large
birds as Shasos on World."
"There are no birds on World so large as those three
swooping there now, Chavo. Are they Shasos?”
"
"No, Papa Garamask, they are of the less noble of
the big birds, Geier-Birds. When we are a little higher
in the sky we will come to the hunting cliffs of Shasos.
Now I will climb up here dangerously, and then I will
run a line down. We will be running many of these lines.
The oafish Chavo could climb. He oozed up the over-
hanging rock like slightly viscous oil. He climbed with
all his armor, and he seemed sure of his grip on these
rocks that were slick with cobble-moss.
From forty meters above he let down a line, and
Garamask climbed it-very tiring work.
"What was to keep you from letting me fall with the
line?' Garamask asked Chavo when they were up to
that next hint of a ledge in the rocks.
Would an Oganta violate the sanctity of the linepo
Chavo asked him
It was a very long hard day. Garamask went up long
lines a dozen times, terrifying over hangs out over noth-
ingress. Slate-gray clouds were below them, and Para-
vath could no longer be seen below. The grass and cob-
ble-moss became stronger, shattering the rocks with their
growth and making them all very soft and dangerous.
The rodents and poke-snakes became larger; and there
were larger birds that stood in from the stark sky to prey
on them. This was fearful exaltation here, stunning height
without support First moon, cragged and misshapen in
the day-sky, seemed nearer than the glimpses of Para-
98
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
vath below. Indeed, the little first moon was only eight
times the distance from Mountain-Foot.
"There is shasos, and there, and there,” said Chavo
as they were resting on an imaginary ledge, actually
,
only a band of discoloration on the rock. “But it is not
yet Shasos himself. Quite soon he, though.”
Garamask followed Chavo up several quite difficult
stretches, refusing to let a line be strung. And then
there loomed above them a very long and very difficult
overhang that Garamask knew he would never be able
to climb.
"It is the line again here, Chavo,” he said, “and I hate
to be dependent on you. Can even you climb this?”
“I can climb this, and it is the hardest of the climbs.
But first I will tell you something here. It is at this
place, on the line that I will drop, that you will have
your encounter with Shasos. He is out there now, the
black dot in the sky, sleeping on furled wings, motion-
less. But he sleeps with one eye open, and watches.
.
He will attack you midway in your climb up the line.
He will rip you apart to get to your kidneys and spleen.
He will gobble the eyes out of your head.”
“So I've been told by another, Chavo. Yes, I remem-
ber birds in legend eating the spleen and liver of a cer-
tain one forever."
“I suppose that World-birds and World-gods eat the
spleen, Papa Garamask, to bring them through their
time of change. Here we require a different food. I
climb.”
Chavo the amazing Oganta climber went up the long-
est and most dangerous climb, flowing like oil up the
cliff. He disappeared and reappeared to Garamask four
different times, following the contours of the cliffs, and
then he seemed to achieve a real base. Soon the very
thin line, one hundred meters of it, came down; and
Garamask began the very tiring climb up it.
Halfway up he was arm and leg weary and sick, and
he heard the sky-whistle. It was the wings of big Shasos
99
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
powering toward him. Garamask wrapped his legs in
the line, having achieved at that point a slope that
supported him slightly, and waited the attack with fist,
elbow, and skull knives flashing.
"Like Prometheus bound to the rock for the attack
of the great birds!” he said. “And why did I never
realize that it had to be a high rock in the sky he was
bound to?”
Shasos had a wingspan of perhaps twenty meters, and
a great head with sickle jaws. In actual body the bird
as about the same size as Garamask.
Shasos was in fast, slashed Garamask deeply over the
groin, and Garamask jagged the bird still more deeply
in the back of the head. The line twisted with Garamask.
On the second swoop Shasos got Garamask in the small
of the back, and Garamask countered effectively again
into the bird-head. Again, and Shasos gaped open Gara-
mask's lower side, held there, had bim now ripped open
fore and aft; and perhaps he did eat somewhat of the
spleen. But Garamask smote half through the head of
the creature, and Shasos staggered in the air.
"I have you now," Garamask reveled. "You die a-wing-
ing. But now you come the last time, and you come for
the eyes. You'll gobble them out of my head, will you?
'Do not let him do it to both of them or you will be at
a disadvantage,' the dead man Allyn told me. Have at
me, chicken! It's the end of you."
Shasos did slash Garamask over his eye, and some-
thing was hanging down the man's cheek. Whether it
was a fold of flesh or the eye itself Garamask did not
know. He had fist claws into the throat of Shasos, into
the long stringy neck that was sinewed like a cable. He
strained, and the sinews gave a little. Then they gave
up completely. He wrung Shasos' neck like a chicken,
for he was a chicken. And the big broken bird fell like
a leaf toward the slate-gray clouds below.
"I'm ripped up pretty gapingly," Garamask said, “but
nothing is looping out of me. I was always a sound man
100
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
in my entrails. It's up the weary climb again, and to
find the fourth prey that is the mystery to me and was
the death of Allyn.”
So Garamask completed the very tiring climb up the
line. He was met by the oafish grinning face of Chavo.
They were on top of Bior Mountain, the third mountain
of Three-Mountain.
“I have a nice surprise for you,” Chavo boomed. “I
will ready it for you while you rest.
“I have two surprises for you,” said Garamask, “and
I will have them ready in due time.
You will do well to weaken the bridge after you have
crossed it, and to keep your gaze fixed on the back of
your head, the dead man Allyn had said. Chavo was
busy with his surprise. Garamask weakened the bridge
he had just crossed, the line he had climbed, gashing
it with heel saber. He didn't cut it through. It would
still, he believed, support his weight going down, if he
had guessed wrong, and if he would not have to seek
another way down. But the line would not now support
.
a weight several times greater than Garamask's.
“I am soldering a device to a deep boulder,” Chavo
said. “You from World do not understand rock-solder-
ing, but you will not be able to get this device loose to
fling it off the mountain; and you will not be able to
silence it.
“And I am doing a thing of my own,” said Garamask,
and he had cut a small teleor tree with his heel saber
and was trimming it with his fist claws. "We are on top
of Bior Mountain, Chavo, and it is a small flat top; and
there is nobody here but ourselves. Where is the fourth
prey, the Bater-Jeno, called either the crag-ape or the
frog-man?”
“Bater-Jeno is here,” said Chavo. “He sets his signa-
ture, as surely as Riksino set his own below."
Garamask had hurriedly sliced a length of line from
Chavo's pack as the sound began, a stronger thing than
even the stench of Riksino. With the line, Garamask
2
101
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
a
lashed the teleor pole to one of his elbow sabers that he
had removed. Then it was over him like putrid waves,
the gagging cacophony of hittur music and Oganta sing-
ing. It was a recorder that Chavo had soldered to the
rock, but Garamask had a good long spear now.
"You will not be able to silence the playing, Papa
Garamask," Chavo chortled. “It will drive you bugs in
your last moments. And Bater-Jeno is here. He is my-
self. Or he is yourself. Come and face me and we will
find out which,
Garamask knocked Chavo down with the butt-end
of the teleor-tree spear. Chavo had not even noticed it.
Then Garamask put the blade to the Oganta's chest, just
below the throat armor.
"You have violated the weapon code," Chavor com-
plained.
"Not really, Cbavo. I'll give up my edge and fight
the fourth prey even, after we have talked. If I do go
to my death now, I do not want to go fuzzy in my facts
as Allyn did. Quick now, Chavo. Talk! Where is the
person Ocras who killed Allyn? Is he really dead?”
"Dead? No, Papa Garamask, he is translated. Ocras
(the hunger) has become Treorai, a noble Rogha: You
have talked to this Treorai. It was he who ate the back-
brains of your friend Allyn, and so was transformed.”
"Chavo, that hellish music and wailing will burst my
brains! What wildness are you saying? The Oganta be-
come Rogha? You are the same species?
"Pop your head like a pippin, Papa Garamask, drive
you bugs. We are the same species, the noble Rogha and
the unnoble us. We turn into the Rogha, but now we can
no longer tum into them. We have lost the ability to
make the frog-leap, except under special stimulus.”
"Seventh Helll It's the same noise they have down
there. May I never fall so low. What is the frog-mystic,
oaf? Talk.
“The frog-leap, it is our transformation from Oganta
to Rogha. What other creature, except the holy frog,
>
102
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
changes from a form so unbelievable so suddenly? Stran-
gers believe that we are two different species, as they
would believe the tadpole and the frog were two dif-
ferent species. We worship the frog as the high sign of
ourselves.”
"What went wrong, oaf? What happened to the trans-
formations? What is the difficulty now? Fill it all in.
Nice spear, isn't it?”
“Nice spear, Papa Garamask, but I cry foul. The dif.
ficulty-perhaps a cosmic difficulty. For one hundred
equivalent years no Oganta has tumed into a Rogha
without special stimulus. We generate as Oganta, and
we live out our lives as Oganta, and we are not able
to maintain the high civilization of the Rogha. We have
lost our adult form, and we try to regain it."
"How, Chavo? What does the murder of Allyn have
to do with this? How did the Oganta Octas become
the Rogha Treorai? What was his special stimulus?"
"To eat the back-brains of a Rogha will transform
an Oganta into a Rogha, if both are strong and capable.
We calculate that there is enough there to transform
four Oganta. We have also discovered (Ocras discov-
ered it in becoming Treorai) that eating the back-brains
of certain fully-charged World-men will bring on this
transformation in us--those of such World-men who
might be able to stay with a mountain-hunt till the
fourth prey.”
"
“Lie still, oaf. I'll spear you through. What now will
happen to Treorai who was Ocras the murderer of
Allyn?"
"What will happen to Chavo, the sun-fall murderer
of Papa Garamaski Treorai's time is up, as mine will be
after a like period. Treorai has had two equivalent
years to grow in wisdom as a Rogha. This very week
(he will not know the time) he will be set on and
killed, and his back-brains eaten.”
'And to keep your gaze fixed on the back of your
head,' the dead-man Allyn told me," Garamask mused.
-
>
103
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
"But the Ocras-Treorai will not die so. I will finish the
business up here, and then I will go down and arrest
the fellow regularly for the murder.
“And in place of one Rogha there will be four,“ Chavo
continued as though he had not heard Garamask. "In
this way we will reestablish the Rogha and shorten our
time of waiting. When there are again enough Rogha,
they in their wisdom will be able to find what went
wrong with the transformations; and they will find a less
grotesque way to bring them about.
“And you yourself, Papa Garamask, do a good deed
in your death this sun-fall. From your death there will
spring four new Rogha.”
"You violate a code yourself, Chavo. Dying, or freshly
dead, I would be good for you. And for four of you? I
hear your three companions coming up the line now, so
you think you'll have me fresh? Will the line bold, do
you think, Chavo?”
"It will hold. Papa Garamask, you have not violated
the code of the line also?"
"Lie still, oaf. Call it what you will. Oh, it will be
close, and I will not slash it again. I stand by my bet.
It frays, Chavo, it gives a little, and the highest one of
them is so near the top! It gives morel It parts! It breaks!
They have fallen, Chavol”
The Oganta was sobbing and crying noisily on the
ground for the death of his friends, and the deathly
ineptitude of the recording seemed to give a fitting
dirge. Garamask laughed with black amusement, with-
drew the spear, unlashed the elbow saber from it and
put it on himself again. He looked at the Oganta.
"Get up, Chavo. What is the name of the fourth prey
again?"
"It is you, the crag-ape, Papa Garamask, for World
men do look funny to us, and we call you so. Or it is my,
self, the frog-man, if I can kill you here and now and
eat and make the frog-leap. We fight, Papa Garamask,
and I eat your back-brains! Hear my battle-cry on the
104
FROG ON THE MOUNTAIN
recorder that you cannot turn offl Does it not twang
beautifully?"
“Damnable eternal teenagers\" Garamask howled as
they closed in bloody battle. "There is enmity between
us from the beginning of the worlds! I'll break you down!
I'll choke you to death with the strings of your own
hittur."
"Papa Garamask, you lie about frogs' size. I be a very
big frog here very soon.
They fought in the late day on the top of the needle
in the sky, gnashing and knifing in their eschatological
fury. And one of them would be dead by sun-fall
105
ALL THE PEOPLE
ANTHONY TROTZ WENT first to the politician, Mike De-
lado.
"How many people do you know, Mr. Delado?"
"Why the question?"
"I am wondering just what amount of detail the mind
can hold."
"To a degree I know many. Ten thousand well, thirty
thousand by name, probably a hundred thousand by
face and to shake hands with.
"And what is the limit?"
"Possibly I am the limit.” The politician smiled frost.
ily. "The only limit is time, speed of cognizance, and
retention. I am told that the latter lessens with age. I
am seventy, and it has not done so with me. Whom I
bave known I do not forget."
"And with special training could one go beyond you?"
"I doubt if one could-much. For my own training
bas been quite special. Nobody has been so entirely
with the people as I have. I've taken five memory
courses in my time, but the tricks of all of them I had
already come to on my own. I am a great believer in
the commonality of mankind and of near equal inherent
ability. Yet there are some, say the one man in fifty,
who in degree if not in kind does exceed his fellows
in scope and awareness and vitality. I am that one man
in fifty, and knowing people is my specialty.”
"Could a man who specialized still more—and to the
exclusion of other things-know a hundred thousand
men well?"
"It is possible. Dimly."
"A quarter of a million?"
106
ALL THE PEOPLE
0
"I think not. He might learn that many faces and
names, but he would not know the men.”
Anthony went next to the philosopher, Gabriel Min-
del.
“Mr. Mindel, how many people do you know?"
"How know? Per se? A se? Or In se? Per suam es-
sentiam, perhaps? Or do you mean ab alio? Or to know
as hoc aliquidi There is a fine difference there. Or do
you possibly mean to know in substantia prima, or in
the sense of comprehensive noumena?"
"Somewhere between the latter two. How many per-
sons do you know by name, face, and with a degree of
intimacy?"
"I have learned over the years the names of some of
my colleagues, possibly a dozen of them. I am now
sound on my wife's name, and I seldom stumble over
the names of my offspring-never more than momen-
tarily. But you may have come to the wrong man for
whatever you have come for. I am notoriously poor at
names, faces, and persons. I have even been described
(vox faucibus haesit) as absentminded.”
“Yes, you do have the reputation. But perhaps I have
not come to the wrong man in seeking the theory of
the thing. What is it that limits the comprehensive
capacity of the mind of man? What will it hold? What
restricts??
"The body."
"How is that?
"The brain, I should say, the material tie. The mind
is limited by the brain. It is skull-bound. It can accumu-
late no more than its cranial capacity, though not one-
tenth of that is ordinarily used. An unbodied mind would
(in esoteric theory) be unlimited
"And how in practical theory?"
"If it is practical, a pragma, it is a thing and not a
theory."
"Then we can have no experience with the unbodied
mind, or the possibility of it?"
u
107
ALL THE PEOPLE
“We have not discovered any area of contact, but we
may entertain the possibility of it. There is no paradox
here. One may rationally consider the irrational."
Anthony went next to see the priest.
“How many people do you know?” he asked him.
"
"I know them all."
"That has to be doubted,” said Anthony after a mo-
ment.
"I've had twenty different stations. And when you
hear five thousand confessions a year for forty years,
you by no means know all about people, but you do
know all people.”
"I do not mean types. I mean persons.”
“Oh, I know a dozen or so well, a few thousands some.
what less."
“Would it be possible to know a hundred thousand
people, a half million?”
“A mentalist might know that many to recognize; I
don't know the limit. But darkened man has a limit set
on everything."
"Could a somehow emancipated man know more?"
"The only emancipated man is the corporally dead
man. And the dead man, if he attains the beatific vision,
knows all other persons who have ever been since time
began.”
*All the billions?"
“All.”
"With the same brain?"
"No. But with the same mind."
"Then wouldn't even a believer have to admit that
the mind which we have now is only a token mind?
Would not any connection it would have with a com-
pletely comprehensive mind be very tenuous? Would
we really be the same person if so changed? It is like
saying a bucket would hold the ocean if it were ful-
filled, which only means filled full. How could it be
the same mind?”
"I don't know."
а
108
ALL THE PEOPLE
Anthony went to see the psychologist.
“How many people do you know, Dr. Shirm?”
“I could be crabby and say that I know as many as
I want to;- but it wouldn't be the truth. I rather like
people, which is odd in my profession. What is it that
you really want to know?"
“How many people can one man know?"
"It doesn't matter very much. People mostly over-
estimate the number of their acquaintances. What is it
that you are trying to ask me?"
"Could one man know everyone?"
“Naturally not. But unnaturally he might seem to.
There is a delusion to this effect accompanied by eu-
phoria, and it is called-”
“I don't want to know what it is called. Why do
specialists use Latin and Greek?"
"One part hokum, and two parts need; there simply
not being enough letters in the alphabet of exposition
without them. It is as difficult to name concepts as
children, and we search our brains as a new mother
does. It will not do to call two children or two concepts
by the same name.
"Thank you. I doubt that this is delusion, and it is
I
not accompanied by euphoria."
Anthony bad a reason for questioning the four men
since (as a new thing that bad come to him) he knew
everybody. He knew everyone in Salt Lake City, where
he had never been. He knew everybody in Jebel Shah,
where the town is a little amphitheater around the
harbor, and in Batangas and Weihai. He knew the
loungers around the end of the Galata bridge in Istan-
bul, and the porters in Kuala Lumpur. He knew the
tobacco traders in Plovdiv, and the cork cutters of Portu.
gal. He knew the dock workers in Djibouti, and the
glove makers in Prague. He knew the vegetable farmers
around El Centro, and the muskrat trappers of Bar-
rataria Bay. He knew the three billion people of the
109
ALL THE PEOPLE
a
world by name and face, and with a fair degree of in-
timacy.
"Yet I'm not a very intelligent man. I've been called
a bungler. And they've had to reassign me three dif-
ferent times at the filter center. I've seen only a few
thousands of those billions of people, and it seems un-
usual that I should know them all. It may be a delusion,
as Dr. Shirm says, but it is a heavily detailed delusion,
and it is not accompanied by euphoria. I feel like green
hell just thinking of it.”
He knew the cattle traders of Letterkenny Donegal;
he knew the cane cutters of Oriente, and the tree climb-
ers of Milne Bay. He knew the people who died every
minute, and those who were bom.
"There is no way out of it. I know everybody in the
world. It is impossible, but it is so. And to what pur-
pase? There aren't a handful of them I could borrow a
dollar from, and I haven't a real friend in the lot. I don't
know whether it came to me suddenly, but I realized
it suddenly. My father was a junk dealer in Wichita,
and my education is spotty. I am maladjusted, intro-
verted, incompetent and unhappy, and I also have weak
kidneys. Why should a power like this come to a main
like me?"
The children in the streets hooted at him. Anthony
had always had a healthy hatred for children and dogs,
those twin harassers of the unfortunate and the malad-
justed. Both run in packs, and both are cowardly at-
tackers. If either of them spots a weakness he will never
let it go. That Anthony's father had been a junk dealer
was no reason to hoot at him. And how did the children
even know about that? Did they possess some fraction
of the power that had come on him lately?
But he had strolled about the town for too long. He
should have been at work at the filter center. Often
they were impatient with him when he wandered off
from his work, and Colonel Peter Cooper was waiting
for him when he came in now.
110
ALL THE PEOPLE
"Where have you been, Anthonypa
"Walking. I talked to four men. I mentioned no sub-
ject in the province of the filter center."
“Every subject is in the province of the filter center.
And you know that our work here is confidential.”
"Yes, sir, but I do not understand the import of my
work here. I would not be able to give out information
that I do not have.
"A popular misconception. There are others who might
understand the import of it, and be able to reconstruct
it from what you tell them. How do you
feel?"
"Nervous, unwell, my tongue is furred, and my kid-
neys,"
“Ah yes, there will be someone here this afternoon
"
to fix your kidneys. I have not forgotten. Is there any-
thing that you want to tell me pa
"No, sir.
Colonel Cooper had the habit of asking that of his
workers in the manner of a mother asking a child if he
wants to go to the bathroom. There was something em-
barrassing in his intonation.
Well, he did want to tell him something, but he didn't
know how to phrase it. He wanted to tell the colonel
that he had newly acquired the power of knowing
everyone in the world, that he was worried how he
could hold so much in a head that was not noteworthy
for its capacity. But he feared ridicule more than be
feared anything and he was a tangle of fears.
But he thought he would try it a little bit on his ca
workers.
"I know a man named Walter Walloroy in Galveston,"
he said to Adrian. "He drinks beer at the Gizmo bar,
and is retired
"What is the superlative of so what?
"But I have never been there,” said Anthony.
"And I have never been in Kalamazoo."
"I know a girl in Kalamazoo. Her name is Greta
111
ALL THE PEOPLE
Harandash. She is home today with a cold. She is prone
to colds."
But Adrian was a creature both uninterested and un-
interesting. It is very hard to confide in one who is un-
interested,
"Well, I will live with it a little while,” said Anthony.
*Or I may have to go to a doctor and see if he can
give me something to make all these people go away.
But if he thinks my story is a queer one, he may report
me back to the center, and I might be reclassified again.
It makes me nervous to be reclassified."
So he lived with it a while, the rest of the day and
the night. He should have felt better. A man had come
that afternoon and fixed his kidneys; but there was no-
body to fix his nervousness and apprehension. And his
skittishness was increased when the children hooted at
him as he walked to work in the morning. That hated
epithet! But how could they know that his father had
been a dealer in used metals in a town far away?
He had to confide in someone.
He spoke to Wellington, who also worked in his room.
"I know a girl in Beirut who is just going to bed. It is
evening there now, you know.”
"That so? Why don't they get their time straightened
out? I met a girl last night that's cute as a correlator key,
and kind of shaped like one. She doesn't know yet that
I work in the center and am a restricted person. I'm not
going to tell her. Let her find out for herself.”
It was no good trying to tell things to Wellington.
Wellington never listened. And then Anthony got a sum-
mons to Colonel Peter Cooper, which always increased
his apprehension.
"Anthony,” said the colonel, “I want you to tell me if
you discem anything unusual. That is really your job,
to report anything unusual. The other, the paper shuf-
fling, is just something to keep your idle hands busy.
Now tell me clearly if anything unusual has come to
your notice."
112
ALL THE PEOPLE
P
"Sir, it has." And then he blurted it out. "I know
everybody. I know everybody in the world. I know
them all in their billions, every person. It has me wor-
ried sick.
"Yes, yes, Anthony. But tell me, have you noticed
anything odd? It is your duty to tell me if you have.”
“But I have just told youl In some manner I know
every person in the world. I know the people in Trans-
vaal, I know the people in Guatemala. I know every-
body."
"Yes, Anthony, we realize that. And it may take a
little getting used to. But that isn't what I mean. Have
you, besides that thing that seems out of the way to
you, noticed anything unusual, anything that seems out
of place, a little bit wrong?"
'Ah, besides that and your reaction to it, no, sir.
Nothing else odd. I might ask, though, how odd can a
thing get? But other than that, no, sir."
"Good, Anthony. Now remember, if you sense any.
thing odd about anything at all, come and tell me. No
matter how trivial it is, if you feel that something is just
a little bit out of place, then report it at once. Do you
understand that?”
Yes, sir."
But he couldn't help wondering what it might be that
the Colonel would consider a little bit odd.
Anthony left the center and walked. He shouldn't
have. He knew that they became impatient with him
when he wandered off from his work.
“But I have to think. I have all the people in the
world in my brain, and still I am not able to think.
This power should have come to someone able to take
advantage of it."
He went into the Plugged Nickel Bar, but the man
on duty knew him for a restricted person from the
filter center, and would not serve him.
He wandered disconsolately about the city. “I know
the people in Omaha and those in Omsk. What queer
113
ALL THE PEOPLE
names have the towns of the earthl I know everyone
in the world, and when anyone is bom or dies. And
Colonel Cooper did not find it unusual. Yet I am to be
on the lookout for things unusual. The question rises,
would I know an odd thing if I met it?"
And then it was that something just a little bit un-
usual did happen, something not quite right, a small
thing. But the Colonel had told him to report anything
about anything, no matter how insignificant, that struck
him as a little queer.
It was just that with all the people in his head, and
the arrivals and departures, there was a small group
that was not of the pattem. Every minute hundreds left
by death and arrived by birth. And now there was a
small group, seven persons; they arrived into the world,
and they were not bom into the world.
So Anthony went to tell Colonel Cooper that some
thing had occurred to his mind that was a little bit odd
But damn-the-dander - headed-two-and-four-legged
devils, there were the kids and the dogs in the street
again, yipping and hooting and chanting:
"Tony the tin man, Tony the tin man.
He longed for the day when he would see them fall
like leaves out of his mind, and death take them
"Tony the tin man. Tony the tin man.”
How had they known that his father was a used
metal dealer?
Colonel Peter Cooper was waiting for him.
"You surely took your time, Anthony. Tell me at once
what it is and where. The reaction was registered, but
it would take us hours to pinpoint its source without
your help. Now then,' explain as calmly as you can
what you felt or experienced. Or, more to the point,
where are they?"
"No. You will have to answer certain questions first."
“I haven't the time to waste, Anthony. Tell me at
once what it is and where."
114
ALL THE PEOPLE
"No. There is no other way. You have to bargain with
me.
“One does not bargain with restricted persons.”
"Well, I will bargain till I find out just what it means
that I am a restricted person."
"You really don't know? Well, we haven't time to fix
that stubborn streak in you now. Quickly, just what is
it that you have to know?"
"I have to know what a restricted person is. I have to
know why the children hoot 'Tony the tin man’ at me.
How can they know that my father was a junk dealer?”
"You had no father. We give to each of you a basic
collection of concepts and the vocabulary to handle
them, a sufficient store of memories, and a background
of a distant town. That happened to be yours, but there
is no connection here. The children call you Tony the
Tin Man because, like all really criel creatures, they
have an instinct for the truth that can hurt; and they
will never forget it.”
"Then I am a tin man?”
"Well, no. Actually only seventeen percent metal.
.
And less than a third of one percent tin. You are com-
pounded of animal, vegetable, and mineral fiber, and
there was much effort given to your manufacture and
programming. Yet the taunt of the children is essential-
ly true.'
“Then, if I am Tony the Tin Man, how can I know
all the people of the world in my
mind?"
"You have no mind.”
“In my brain then. How can all that be in one small
brain?"
“Because your brain is not in your head, and it is not
small. The longest way around may take the shortest
time here. Come, I may as well show it to you. I've
told you enough that it won't matter if you know a little
more. There are few who are taken on personally con-
ducted sightseeing tours of their own brains. You should
be grateful."
115
ALL THE PEOPLE
a
"Gratitude seems a little tardy."
They went into the barred area, down into the bowels
of the main building of the center. And they looked at
the brain of Anthony Trotz, a restricted person in its
special meaning
"It is the largest in the world,” said Colonel Cooper.
"How larger
"A little over twelve hundred cubic meters."
"What a brainl And it is mine?"
"You share it with others. But, yes, it is yours. You
have access to its data. You are an adjunct to it, a runner
for it, an appendage, inasmuch as you are anything at
all."
"Colonel Cooper, how long bave I been alive?"
"You are not.
“How long have I been as I am now
"It is three days since you were last reassigned, since
you were assigned to this. At that time your nervous-
ness and apprehensions were introduced. An apprehen-
sive unit will be more inclined to notice details just a
little out of the ordinary.”
"And what is my purpose?”
They were now walking back to the office work area, ,
and Anthony had a sad feeling at leaving his brain be
hind him.
"This is a filter center,” said Colonel Cooper, “and
your purpose is to serve as a filter, of a sort. Every per-
son has a slight aura about him. It is a characteristic of
his, and is part of his personality and purpose. And it
can be detected, electrically, magnetically, even visual.
ly under special conditions. The accumulator at which
we were looking (your brain ) is designed to maintain
contact with all the auras in the world, and to keep
running and complete data on them all. It contains a
multiplicity of circuits for each of its three billion and
some subjects. However, as aid to its operation, it was
necessary to assign several artificial consciousnesses to
it. You are one of these.
116
ALL THE PEOPLE
Anthony looked out the window as the Colonel con-
tinued his explanation.
The dogs and the children had found a new victim
in the streets below, and Anthony's heart went out to
him.
"The purpose,” said Colonel Cooper, "was to notice
anything just a little peculiar in the auras and the per-
sons they represent, anything at all odd in their comings
and goings. Anything like what you have come here to
report to me.
“Like the seven persons who recently arrived in the
world, and not by way of birth?"
"Yes. We have been expecting the first of the aliens
for months. We must know their area, and at once. Now
tell me.
"What if they are not aliens at all? What if they are
restricted persons like myself?” "
"Restricted persons have no aura, are not persons, are
not alive. And you would not receive knowledge of
them.”
"Then how do I know the other restricted persons
here, Adrian and Wellington, and such?”
"You know them at first hand. You do not know them
through the machine. Now tell me the area quickly. The
center may be a primary target. It will take the ma-
chine hours to ravel it out. Your only purpose is to serve
as an intuitive shortcut.”
But Tin Man Tony did not speak. He only thought
in his mind-more accurately, in his brain a hundred
yards away. He thought in his fabricated consciousness:
The area is quite near. If the Colonel were not bur-
dened with a mind, he would be able to think more
clearly. He would know that cruel children and dogs
love to worry what is not human, and that all the re-
stricted persons for this area are accounted for. He
would know that they are worrying one of the aliens in
the street below, and that is the area that is right
for my consciousness.
117
ALL THE PEOPLE
I wonder if they will be better masters? He is an im-
posing figure, and he would be able to pass for a man.
And the Colonel is right: the center is a primary target.
Why! I never knew you could kill a child just by
pointing a finger at him like that! What opportunities
I have missedi Enemy of my enemy, you are my friend.
And aloud he said to the Colonel:
“I will not tell you.”
"Then we'll have you apart and get it out of you
mighty quick."
"How quick?"
"Ten minutes."
"Time enough," said Tony.
For he knew them now, coming in like snow. They
were arriving in the world by the hundreds, and not
arriving by birth.
118
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
ABSTÁACT FROM JOINT REPORT TO THE GENERAL DUBUQUE
PTA CONCERNING THE PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CA-
MIROI, Subtitled Critical Observations of a Parallel Culo
ture on a Neighboring World, and Evaluations of THE
OTHIER WAY OF EDUCATION.
Extract from the Day Book:
Where," we asked the Inforination Factor at Camiroi
City Terininal, “is the office of the local PTA?"
"Isn't any,” he said cheerfully.
"You mean that in Camiroi City, the metropolis of the
planet, there is no PTA?" our chainnan Paul Piper asked
with disbelief.
“Isn't any office of it. But you're poor strangers, so
you deserve an answer even if you can't frame your
questions properly. See that elderly man sitting on the
bench and enjoying the sun? Go tell him you need a
PTA. He'll make you one.
"Perhaps the initials convey a different meaning on
Camiroi,” said Miss Munch, the first surrogate chairman.
"By them we mean-
“Parent Teachers Apparatus, of course. Colloquial
English is one of the six Earthian languages required
here, you know. Don't be abashed. He's a fine person,
and he enjoys doing things for strangers. He'll be glad
to make you a PTA.
We were nonplussed, but we walked over to the man
indicated.
“We are looking for the local PTA, sir," said Miss
Smice, our second surrogate chainnan. “We were told
that you might help us.
"Oh, certainly,” said the elderly Camiroi gentleman.
119
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
"One of you arrest that man walking there, and we'l
get started with it.
“Do what?" asked our Mr. Piper.
“Arrest him. I have noticed that your own words some-
times do not convey a meaning to you. I often wonder
how you do communicate among yourselves. Arrest, take
into custody, seize by any force physical or moral, and
bring him here.
“Yes, sir," cried Miss Hanks, our third surrogate chair-
man. She enjoyed things like this. She arrested the walk-
ing Camiroi man with force partly physical and partly
moral and brought him to the group.
"It's a PTA they want, Meander," the elder Camiroi
said to the one arrested. "Grab three more, and we 11
get started. Let the lady help. She's good at it.
Our Miss Hanks and the Camiroi man named Mean-
der arrested three other Camiroi men and brought them
to the group
“Five. It's enough,” said the elderly Camiroi. “We
,
are hereby constituted a PTA and ordered into random
action. Now, how can we accommodate you, good Earth
people?"
“But are you legal? Are you five persons competent
to be a PTA?" demanded our Mr. Piper.
“Any Camiroi citizen is competent to do any job on
the planet of Camiroi,” said one of the Camiroi men (we
learned later that his name was Talarium), “otherwise
Camiroi would be in a sad shape."
"It may be,” said our Miss Smice sourly. “It all seems
very
ry informal. What if one of you had to be World
President?"
"The odds are that it won't come to one man in ten,
said the elderly Camiroi (his name was Philoxenus).
.
"I'm the only one of this group ever to serve as president
of this Planet, and it was a pleasant week I spent in
the Office. Now to the point. How can we accommodate
you?"
“We would like to see one of your schools in session,"
a
120
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
a
said our Mr. Piper. "We would like to talk to the
teachers and the students. We are here to compare the
two systems of education."
"There is no comparison," said old Philoxenus,
-meaning no offense. Or no more than a little. On
Camiroi, we practice Education. On Earth, they play
a game, but they call it by the same name. That makes
the confusion. Come. We'll go to a school in session.
"And to a public school," said Miss Smice suspicious-
ly. "Do not fob off any fancy private school on us as
typical."
"That would be difficult," said Philoxenus. "There is
no public school in Camiroi City and only two remain-
ing on the planet. Only a small fraction of one percent
of the students of Camiroi are in public schools. We
maintain that there is no more reason for the majority
of children to be educated in a public school than to
be raised in a public orphanage. We realize, of course,
that on Earth you have made a sacred buffalo of the
public school."
"Sacred cow," said our Mr. Piper.
"Children and Earthlings should be corrected when
they use words wrongly,” said Philoxenus. "How else
will they leam the correct forms? The animal held
sacred in your own near Orient was of the species bos
bubalus rather than bos bos, a buffalo rather than a cow.
Shall we go to a school?
"If it cannot be a public school, at least let it be a
typical school," said Miss Smice.
"That again is impossible," said Philoxenus. "Every
school on Camiroi.is in some respect atypical.”
We went to visit an atypical school
INCIDENT: Our first contact with the Camiroi students
was a violent one. One of them, a lively little boy about
eight years old, ran into Miss Munch, knocked her down,
and broke her glasses. Then he jabbered something in
an unknown tongue.
"Is that Camiroir" asked Mr. Piper with interest.
121
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
a
"From what I have heard, I supposed the language to
have a harsher and fuller sound.”
"You mean you don't recognize it?" asked Philoxenus
with amusement. "What a droll admission from an edu.
cator. The boy is very young and very ignorant. Seeing
that you were Earthians, he spoke in Hindi, which is
the tongue used by more Earthians than any other. No,
no, Xypete, they are of the minority who speak English.
You can tell it by their colorless texture and the narrow
beads on them."
"I
say you sure do have slow reaction, lady," the little
boy Xypete explained. “Even subhumans should react
faster than that. You just stand there and gape and
let me bowl you over. You want me analyze you and
see why you react so slowpo
“Nol No!”
"You seem unhurt in structure from the fall,” the little
boy continued, “but if I hurt you I got to fix you. Just
strip down to your shift, and I'll go over you and make
sure you're all right.”
“Nol Nol Nol"
"It's all right,” said Philoxenus. "All Camiroi children
leam primary medicine in the first grade, setting bones
and healing contusions and such.”
"Nol Nol I'm all right. But he's broken my glasses."
"Come along, Earthside lady, Ill make you some
others," said the little boy. “With your slow reaction
time you sure can't afford the added handicap of de-
fective vision. Shall I fit you with contacts?"
"No. I want glasses just like those which were broken.
Ob heavens, what will I dopº
"You come, I do," said the little boy. It was rather
revealing to us that the little boy was able to test Miss
Munch's eyes, grind lenses, make frames and have her
fixed up within three minutes. "I have made some im-
provements over those you wore before, the boy said,
"to belp compensate for your slow reaction time."
122
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
»
"Are all the Camiroi students so talented?” Mr. Piper
asked. He was impressed
"No. Xypete is unusual,” Philoxenus said. “Most stu-
dents would not be able to make a pair of glasses so
quickly or competently till they were at least nine."
RANDOM INTERVIEWS: "How rapidly do you read?” Miss
Hanks asked a young girl.
"One hundred and twenty words a minute,” the girl
said.
"On Earth some of the girl students your age have
leamed to read at the rate of five hundred words a
minute,” Miss Hanks said proudly.
"When I began disciplined reading, I was reading
at the rate of four thousand words a minute,” the girl
said. “They had quite a time correcting me of it. I had
to take remedial reading, and my parents were ashamed
of me. Now I've learned to read almost slow enough.”
“I don't understand,” said Miss Hanks.
a
“Do you know anything about Earth History or Geog-
raphy?” Miss Smice asked a middle-sized boy.
"We sure are sketchy on it, lady. There isn't very
much over there, is there?"
"Then you have never heard of Dubuque?”
"Count Dubuque interests me. I can't say as much
for the city named after him. I always thought that the
Count handled the matters of the conflicting French
and Spanish land grants and the basic claims of the Sauk
and Fox Indians very well. References to the town now
carry a humorous connotation, and 'School-Teacher from
Dubuque' has become a folk archetype."
"Thank you,” said Miss Smice, Cor do I thank you?"
"What are you taught of the relative humanity of the
Earthians and the Camiroi and of their origins?” Miss
Munch asked a Camiroi girl
"The other four worlds, Earth (Gaea), Kentauron
Mikron, Dahae and Astrobe were all settled from Ca-
123
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
miroi. That is what we are taught. We are also given
the humorous aside that if it isn't true we will still hold
it true till something better comes along. It was we who
rediscovered the Four Worlds in historic time, not they
who discovered us. If we did not make the original
settlements, at least we have filed the first claim that
we made them. We did, in historical time, make an
additional colonization of Earth. You call it the Incursion
of the Dorian Greeks."
"Where are their playgrounds?" Miss Hanks asked
Talarium.
"Oh, the whole world. The children have the run of
everything. To set up specific playgrounds would be
like setting a table-sized aquarium down in the depths of
the ocean. It would really be pointless.
CONFERENCE: The four of us from Earth, specifically
from Dubuque, Iowa, were in discussion with the five
members of the Camiroi PTA.
"How do you maintaip discipline?" Mr. Piper asked.
"Indifferently,” said Philoxenus. “Oh, you mean in de-
tail. It variés. Sometimes we let it drift, sometimes we
pull them up short. Once they have leamed that they
must comply to an extent, there is little trouble. Small
children are often put down into a pit. They do not eat
or come out till they know their assignment."
"But that is inhuman,” said Miss Hanks.
"Of course. But small children are not yet entirely
human. If a child has not learned to accept discipline
by the third or fourth grade, he is hanged."
"Literally?" asked Miss Munch.
"How would you hang a child figuratively? And what
effect would that have on the older children?”
"By the neck?" Miss Munch still was not satisfied.
"By the neck until they are dead. The other children
always accept the example gracefully and do better.
Hanging isn't employed often. Scarcely one child in a
hundred is hanged."
124
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
"What is this business about slow reading?” Miss Hanks
asked. “I don't understand it at all.”
"Only the other day there was a child in the third
grade who persisted in rapid reading," Philoxenus said.
"He was given an object lesson. He was given a book
of medium difficulty, and he read it rapidly. Then he
had to put the book away and repeat what he had read.
Do you know that in the first thirty pages he missed
four words? Midway in the book there was a whole
statement which he had understood wrongly, and there
were hundreds of pages that he got word-perfect only
with difficulty. If he was so unsure on material that he
had just read, think how imperfectly he would have
recalled it forty years later."
"You mean that the Camiroi children learn to recall
everything that they read?"
"The Camiroi children and adults will recall for life
every detail they have ever seen, read or heard. We on
Camiroi are only a little more intelligent than you on
Earth. We cannot afford to waste time in forgetting or
reviewing or in pursuing anything of a shallowness that
lends itself to scanning.
“Ah, would you call your schools liberal?" Mr. Piper
"
asked.
"I would. You wouldn't," said Philoxenus. "We do not
on Camiroi, as you do on Earth, use words to mean
their opposites. There is nothing in our education or on
our world that corresponds to the quaint servility which
you
call liberal on Earth"
"Well
, would you call your education progressive?"
"No. In your argot, progressive, of course, means in-
fantile.”
"How are the schools financed?" asked Mr. Piper.
"Oh, the voluntary tithe on Camiroi takes care of
everything, government, religion, education, public
works. We don't believe in taxes, of course, and we
never maintain a high overhead in anything."
“Just how voluntary is the tithing?" asked Miss Hanks.
125
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
Do
you sometimes hang those who do not tithe volun-
tarily?"
"I believe there have been a few cases of that sort,"
said Philoxenus.
“And is your government really as slipshod as your
education pu Mr. Piper asked. “Are your high officials
really chosen hy lot and for short periods?"
"Oh yes. Can you imagine a person so sick that he
would actually desire to hold high office for any great
period of time? Are there any further questions?"
"
"There must be hundreds,” said Mr. Piper, “But we
find difficulty putting them into words."
"If you cannot find words for them, we cannot find
answers. PTA disbanded."
CONCLUSION A: The Camiroi system of education is in-
ferior to our own in organization, in buildings, in fa-
cilities, in playgrounds, in teacher conferences, in fund.
ing, in parental involvement, in supervision, in in-group
out-group accommodation adjustment motifs. Some of
the school buildings are grotesque. We asked about one
particular building which seemed to us to be flam-
boyant and in bad taste. "What do you expect from
second-grade children?" they said. “It is well built even
if of peculiar. appearance. Second-grade children are not
yet complete artists of design."
"You mean that the children designed it themselves?
we asked.
"Of course,” they said. “Designed and built it. It isn't
a bad job for children.”
Such a thing wouldn't be permitted on Earth.
CONCLUSION B: The Camiroi system of education some-
how produces much better results than does the educa-
tion system of Earth. We have been forced to admit
this by the evidence at hand.
CONCLUSION C: There is an anomaly as yet unresolved
between Conclusion A and Conclusion B.
126
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
APPENDIX
TO JOINT REPORT
We give here, as perhaps of some interest, the cur.
riculum of the Camiroi Primary Education.
FIRST YEAR COURSE:
Playing one wind instrument.
Simple drawing of objects and numbers.
Singing. (This is important. Many Earth people sing
who cannot sing. This early instruction of the Camiroi
prevents that occurrence.)
Simple arithmetic, hand and machine.
First acrobatics.
First riddles and logic.
Mnemonic religion.
First dancing
Walking the low wire.
Simple electric circuits.
Raising ants. (Eoempts, not Earth ants).
SECOND YEAR COURSE:
Playing one keyboard instrument
Drawing, faces, letters, motions.
Singing comedies.
Complex arithmetic, hand and machine.
Second acrobatics.
First jokes and logic.
Quadratic religion.
Second dancing.
Simple defamation. (Spirited attacks on the character
of one fellow student, with elementary falsification and
simple hatchet-job programming.)
Performing on the medium wire.
Project electric wiring.
Raising bees. (Galelea, not Earth bees.)
THIRD YEAR COURSE:
Playing one stringed instrument.
Reading and voice. It is here that the student who
may have fallen into bad habits of rapid reading is
compelled to read at voice speed only.)
127
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
1
Soft stone sculpture.
Situation comedy.
Simple algebra, hand and machine.
First gymnastics.
Second jokes and logic.
Transcendent religion.
Complex acrobatic dancing.
Complex defamation.
Performing on the high wire and the sky pole.
Simple radio construction.
Raising, breeding and dissecting frogs. (Karakoli, not
(
Earth frogs.)
FOURTH YEAR COURSE:
History reading, Camiroi and galactic, basic and geologi-
cal.
Decadent comedy.
Simple geometry and trigonometry, hand and machine.
Track and field.
Shaggy people jokes and hirsute logic.
Simple obscenity.
Simple mysticism.
Patterns of falsification.
Trapeze work.
Intermediate electronics.
Human dissection.
FIFTH YEAR COURSE:
History reading, Camiroi and galactic, technological.
Introverted drama.
Complex geometries and analytics, hand and machine.
Track and field for fifth form record
First wit and logic.
First alcoholic appreciation.
Complex mysticism.
Setting intellectual climates, defamation in three di-
mensions.
Simple oratory
Complex trapeze work
Inorganic chemistry.
128
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
Advanced electronics.
Advanced human dissection.
Fifth Form Thesis.
The child is now ten years old and is half through his
primary schooling. He is an unfinished animal, but he
has learned to learn.
SDXTE YEAR COURSE:
Reemphasis on slow reading.
Simple prodigious memory.
History reading, Camiroi and galactic, economic.
Horsemanship (of the Patrushkoe, not the Earth horse.)
Advance lathe and machine work for art and utility.
Literature, passive.
Calculi, hand and machine pankration
Advanced wit and logic.
Second alcoholic appreciation.
Differential religion.
First business ventures.
Complex oratory.
Building-scaling. (The buildings are higher and the grav-
ity stronger than on Earth; this climbing of build-
ings like human flies calls out the ingenuity and dar.
ing of the Camiroi children.)
Nuclear physics and post-organic chemistry.
Simple pseudo-human assembly.
SEVENTH YEAR COURSE:
History reading, Camiroi and galactic, cultural.
Advanced prodigious memory,
Vehicle operation and manufacture of simple vehicle.
Literature, active.
Astrognosy, prediction and programming.
Advanced pankration.
Spherical logic, band and machine.
Advanced alcoholic appreciation.
Integral religion.
Bankruptcy and recovery in business.
Conmanship and trend creation.
Post-nuclear physics and universals.
129
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
Transcendental athletics endeavor.
Complex robotics and programming.
EIGHTH YEAR COURSE:
History reading, Camiroi and galactic, seminal theory.
Consummate prodigious memory,
Manufacture of complex land and water vehicles.
Literature, compenduous and terminative. (Creative
book-burning following the Camiroi thesis that noth-
ing ordinary be allowed to survive.)
Cosmic theory, seminal.
Philosophy construction
Complex hedonism.
Laser religion.
Conmanship, seminal.
Consolidation of simple genius status.
Post-robotic integration.
NINTH YEAR COURSE:
History reading, Camiroi and galactic, future and con-
tingent
Category invention.
Manufacture of complex light-barrier vehicles.
Construction of simple asteroids and planets.
Matrix religion and logic.
Simple human immortality disciplines.
Consolidation of complex genius status.
First problems of post-consciousness humanity.
First essays in marriage and reproduction
TENTH YEAR COURSE:
History construction, active.
Manufacture of ultra-light-barrier vehicles.
Panphilosophical clarifications.
Construction of viable planets.
Consolidation of simple sanctity status.
Charismatic humor and pentacosmic logic.
Hypogyroscopic economy.
Penentaglossia. (The perfection of the fifty languages
that every educated Camiroi must know including six
Earthian languages. Of course the child will already
130
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
have colloquial mastery of most of these, but he will
not yet have them in their full depth.)
Construction of complex societies.
World government. (A course of the same name is some-
times given in Earthian schools, but the course is not
of the same content. In this course the Camiroi stu.
dent will govem a world, though not one of the first
aspect worlds, for a period of three or four months.)
Tenth form thesis.
COMMENT ON CURRICULUM:
The child will now be fifteen years old and will have
completed his primary education. In many ways he will
be advanced beyond his Earth counterpart. Physically
more sophisticated, the Camiroi child could kill with
his hands an Earth-type tiger or a cape buffalo. An Earth
child would perhaps be reluctant even to attempt such
feats. The Camiroi boy (or girl) could replace any pro-
fessional Earth athlete at any position of any game, and
could surpass all existing Earth records. It is simply a
question of finer poise, strength and speed, the result
of adequate schooling.
As to the arts (on which Earthlings sometimes place
emphasis) the Camiroi child could produce easy and
unequaled masterpieces in any medium. More impor-
tant, he will have learned the relative unimportance of
such pastimes.
The Camiroi child will have failed in business once,
at age ten, and have leamed patience and perfection
of objective by his failure. He will have acquired the
techniques of falsification and conmanship. Thereafter
he will not be easily deceived by any of the citizens of
any of the worlds. The Camiroi child will have become a
complex genius and a simple saint; the latter reduces
the index of Camiroi crime to near zero. He will be
married and settled in those early years of greatest en-
joyment.
The child will have built, from materials found around
131
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
any Camiroi house, a faster-than-light vehicle. He will
have piloted it on a significant journey of his own plot-
ting and programming. He will have built quasi-human
robots of great intricacy. He will be of perfect memory
and judgment and will be well prepared to accept solid
learning.
He will have learned to use his whole mind, for the
vast reservoirs which are the unconscious to us are not
unconscious to him. Everything in him is ordered for use.
And there seems to be no great secret about the ac-
complishments, only to do everything slowly enough
and in the right order: thus they avoid repetition and
drill which are the shriveling things which dull the quick
apperception.
The Camiroi schedule is challenging to the children,
but it is nowhere impossible or discouraging. Every-
thing builds to what follows. For instance, the child is
eleven years old before he is given post-nuclear physics
and universals. Such subjects might be too difficult for
him at an earlier age. He is thirteen years old before
he undertakes category invention, that intricate course
with the simple name. He is fourteen years old when
he enters the dangerous field of panphilosophical clarifi-
cation. But he will have been constructing comprehensive
philosophies for two years, and he will have the back-
ground for the final clarification.
We should look more closely at this other way of educa-
tion. In some respects it is better than our own. Few
Earth children would be able to construct an organic
and sentient robot within fifteen minutes if given the
test suddenly; most of them could not manufacture a liv-
ing dog in that time. Not one Earth child in five could
build a faster-than-light vehicle and travel it beyond
our galaxy between now and midnight. Not one Earth
child in a hundred could build a planet and have it
a going concern within a week. Not one in a thousand
would be able to comprehend pentacosmic logic.
RECOMMENDATIONS: a.) Kidnapping five Camiroi at
132
PRIMARY EDUCATION OF THE CAMIROI
random and constituting them a pilot Earth PTA. b.) A
little constructive book-burning, particularly in the edu-
cation field. c.) Judicious hanging of certain malinger-
ing students.
133
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
A PANHANDLER intercepted the young couple as they
strolled down the night street.
"Preserve us this night,” he said as he touched his hat
to them, "and could you good people advance me a
thousand dollars to be about the recouping of my for-
tunes?"
"I gave you a thousand last Friday,” said the young
man.
“Indeed you did," the panhandler replied, "and I paid
you back tenfold by messenger before midnight."
"That's right, George, he did,” said the young wom-
an. “Give it to him, dear. I believe he's a good sort.
So the young man gave the panhandler a thousand
dollars, and the panhandler touched his hat to them in
thanks and went on to the recouping of his fortunes.
As he went into Money Market, the panhandler
passed Ildefonsa Impala, the most beautiful woman in
the city
"Will
you marry me this night, Ildy?” he asked cheer-
fully.
"Oh, I don't believe so, Basil,” she said. “I marry you
pretty often, but tonight I don't seem to have any plans
at all. You may make me a gift on your first or second,
however. I always like that.”
But when they had parted she asked herself: “But
whom will I inarry tonight?"
The panhandler was Basil Bagelbaker, who would be
the richest man in the world within an hour and a half.
He would make and lose four fortunes within eight
hours; and these not the little fortunes that ordinary
men acquire, but titanic things.
134
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
When the Abebaios block had been removed from
human minds, people began to make decisions faster,
and often better. It had been the mental stutter, When
it was understood what it was, and that it had no useful
function, it was removed by simple childhood meta-
surgery.
Transportation and manufacturing had then become
practically instantaneous. Things that had once taken
months and years now took only minutes and hours. A
person could have one or several pretty intricate careers
within an eight-hour period.
Freddy Fixico had just invented a manus module.
Freddy was a Nyctalops, and the modules were char-
acteristic of these people. The people had then divided
themselves according to their natures and inclinations
-into the Auroreans, the Hemerobians, and the Nycta-
lops-or the Dawners, who had their most active hours
from four A.M. till noon; the Day-Flies, who obtained
from noon to eight P.M.; and the Night-Seers, whose
civilization thrived from eight P.M. to four A.M. The cul-
tures, inventions, markets and activities of these three
folk were a little different. As a Nyctalops, Freddy had
just begun his working day at eight P.M. on a slow Tues-
day night.
Freddy rented an office and had it furnished. This
took one minute, negotiation, selection and installation
being almost instantaneous. Then he invented the manus
module; that took another minute. He then had it manu-
factured and marketed; in three minutes it was in the
hands of key buyers.
It caught on. It was an attractive module. The flow
of orders began within thirty seconds. By ten minutes
after eight every important person had one of the new
manus modules, and the trend had been set. The raodule
began to sell in the millions. It was one of the most in-
teresting fads of the night, or at least the early part of
the night.
Manus modules had no practical function, no more
135
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
than had Sameki verses. They were attractive, of a
psychologically satisfying size and shape, and could be
held in the hands, set on a table, or installed in a
module niche of any wall. .
Naturally Freddy became very rich. Ildefonsa Impala,
the most beautiful woman in the city, was always in-
terested in newly rich men. She came to see Freddy
about eight-thirty. People made up their minds fast,
and Ildefonsa had hers made up when she came. Freddy
made his own up quickly and divorced Judy Fixico in
Small Claims Court. Freddy and Ildefonsa went honey-
mooning to Paraiso Dorado, a resort
It was wonderful. All of Ildy's marriages were. There
was the wonderful floodlighted scenery. The recircu-
lated water of the famous falls was tinted gold; the
immediate rocks had been done by Rambles; and the
hills had been contoured by Spall. The beach was a per-
fect copy of that at Merevale, and the popular drink
that first part of the night was blue absinthe.
But scenery-whether seen for the first time or re-
visited after an interval—is striking for the sudden in-
tense view of it. It is not meant to be lingered over.
Food, selected and prepared instantly, is eaten with swift
enjoyment; and blue absinthe lasts no longer than its
own novelty. Loving, for Ildefonsa and her paramours,
was quick and consuming; and repetition would have
been pointless to her. Besides, Ildefonsa and Freddy
had taken only the one-hour luxury honeymoon.
Freddy wished to continue the relationship, but Ilde-
fonsa glanced at a trend indicator. The manus module
would hold its popularity for only the first third of the
night. Already it had been discarded by people who mat-
tered. And Freddy Fixico was not one of the regular
successes. He enjoyed a full career only about one night
a week.
They were back in the city and divorced in Small
Claims Court by nine thirty-five. The stock of manus
modules was remandered, and the last of it would be
136
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
disposed to bargain hunters among the Dawners, who
will buy anything.
"Whom shall I marry next?” Ildefonsa asked herself.
"It looks like a slow night."
“Bagelbaker is buying,” ran the word through Money
Market, but Bagelbåker was selling again before the word
had made its rounds. Basil Bagelbaker enjoyed mak-
ing money, and it was a pleasure to watch him work
as he dominated the floor of the Market and assembled
runners and a competent staff out of the comer of his
mouth. Helpers stripped the panhandler rags off him
and wrapped him in a tycoon toga. He sent one runner
to pay back twentyfold the young couple who had
advanced him a thousand dollars. He sent another with
a more substantial gift to Ildefonsa Impala, for Basil
cherished their relationship. Basil acquired title to the
Trend Indication Complex and had certain falsifica-
tions set into it. He caused to collapse certain industrial
empires that had grown up within the last two hours,
and made a good thing of recombining their wreckage.
He had been the richest man in the world for some
minutes now. He became so money-heavy that he could
not maneuver with the agility he had shown an hour
before. He became a great fat buck, and the pack of
expert wolves circled him to bring him down.
Very soon he would lose that first fortune of the eve-
ning. The secret of Basil Bagelbaker is that he enjoyed
losing money spectacularly after he was full of it to the
bursting point.
A thoughtful man named Maxwell Mouser had just
produced a work of actinic philosophy. It took him seven
minutes to write it. To write works of philosophy one
used the flexible outlines and the idea indexes; one
set the activator for such a wordage in each subsection;
an adept would use the paradox feed-in, and the strik-
ing-analogy blender; one calibrated the particular-slant
and the personality-signature. It had to come out a good
a
137
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
work, for excellence had become the automatic mini-
mum for such productions.
"I will scatter a few nuts on the frosting," said Max-
well, and he pushed the lever for that. This sifted hand-
fuls of words like chthonic and heuristic and prozymeides
through the thing so that nobody could doubt it was a
work of philosophy.
Maxwell Mouser sent the work out to publishers, and
received it back each time in about three minutes. An
analysis of it and reason for rejection was always given
-mostly that the thing had been done before and better.
Maxwell received it back ten times in thirty minutes,
and was discouraged. Then there was a break.
Ladion's work had become a hit within the last ten
minutes, and it was now recognized that Mouser's mono-
graph was both an answer and a supplement to it. It
was accepted and published in less than a minute after
this break. The reviews of the first five minutes were
cautious oncs; then real enthusiasm was shown. This
was truly one of the greatest works of philosophy to
appear cluring the carly and medium hours of the night.
There were those who said it might be one of the en-
during works and even have a holdover appeal to the
Dawncrs the next moming.
Naturally Maxwell became very rich, and naturally
Ildefonsa came to see him about midnight. Being a
revolutionary philosopher, Maxwell thought that they
might make some free arrangement, but Ildefonsa in-
sisted it must be marriage. So Maxwell divorced Judy
Mouser in Small Claims Court and went off with
Ildefonsa.
This Judy herself, though not so beautiful as Ildefonsa,
was the fastest taker in the city. She only wanted the
men' of the moment for a moment, and she was always
there before even Ildefonsa. Ildefonsa believed that she
took the men away from Judy; Judy said that Ildy had
her leavings and nothing else.
138
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
'I had him first,” Judy would always mock as she
raced through Small Claims Court.
"Oh that damned urchin!” Ildefonsa would moan.
"She wears my very hair before I do."
I
Maxwell Mouser and Ildefonsa Impala went honey-
mooning to Musicbox Mountain, a resort. It was won-
derful. The peaks were done with green snow by Dun-
bar and Fittle. (Back at Money Market Basil Bagel-
baker was putting together his third and greatest for-
tune of the night, which might surpass in magnitude
even his fourth fortune of the Thursday before.) The
chalets were Switzier than the real Swiss and had live
goats in every room. (And Stanley Skuldugger was
emerging as the top Actor-Imago of the middle hours
of the night.) The popular drink for that middle part
of the night was Glotzenglubber, Eve Cheese and Rhine
wine over pink ice. (And back in the city the leading
Nyctalops were taking their midnight break at the Top-
pers' Club.)
Of course it was wonderful, as were all of Ildefonsa's-
But she had never been really up on philosophy so she
had scheduled only the special thirty-five-minute honey-
moon. She looked at the trend indicator to be sure. She
found that her current husband had been obsoleted,
and his opus was now referred to sneeringly as Mouser's
Mouse. They went back to the city and were divorced
in Small Claims Court.
The membership of the Toppers' Club varied. Suc-
cess was the requisite of membership. Basil Bagelbaker
might be accepted as a member, elevated to the presi-
dency and expelled from it as a dirty pauper from three
to six times a night. But only important persons could
belong to it, or those enjoying brief moments of impor-
tance,
'I believe I will sleep during the Dawner period in
the morning," Overcall said. "I may go up to this new
place, Koimopolis, for an hour of it. They're said to be
good. Where will you sleep, Basil?"
139
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
a
“Flop house."
"I believe I will sleep an hour by the Midian Method,"
said Burnbanner. “They have a fine new clinic. And
perhaps I'll sleep an hour by the Prasenka Process, and
an hour by the Dorinidio."
"Crackle has been sleeping an hour every period by
the natural method,” said Overcall.
"I did that for half an hour not long since,” said Bum-
banner. “I believe an hour is too long to give it. Have
you tried the natural method, Basil?”
"Always. Natural method and a bottle of red-eye.”
Stanley Skuldugger had become the most meteoric
actor-imago for a week. Naturally he became very rich,
and Ildefonsa Impala went to see him about three A.M.
"I had him firstl" rang the mocking voice of Judy
Skuldugger as she skipped through her divorce in Small
Claims Court. And Ildefonsa and Stanley-boy went off
honeymooning. It is always fun to finish up a period with
an actor-imago who is the hottest property in the busi-
ness. There is something so adolescent and boorish about
them.
Besides, there was the publicity, and Ildefonsa liked
that. The rumor-mills ground. Would it last ten minutes?
Thirty? An hour? Would it be one of those rare Nyctalops
marriages that lasted through the rest of the night and
into the daylight off-hours? Would it even last into the
next night as some had been known to do?
Actually it lasted nearly forty minutes, which was al-
most to the end of the period.
It had been a slow Tuesday night. A few hundred
new products had run their course on the markets.
There had been a score of dramatic hits, three-minute
and five-minute capsule dramas, and several of the six-
minute long-play affairs. Night Street Nine-a solidly
sordid offering-seemed to be in as the drama of the
night unless there should be a late hit.
Hundred-storied buildings had been erected, occu-
pied, obsoleted, and demolished again to make room
a
140
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
for more contemporary structures. Only the mediocre
would use a building that had been left over from the
Day Fliers or the Dawners, or even the Nyctalops of
the night before. The city was rebuilt pretty completely
at least three times during an eight-hour period.
The period drew near its end. Basil Bagelbaker, the
richest man in the world, the reigning president of the
Toppers' Club, was enjoying himself with his cronies.
His fourth fortune of the night was a paper pyramid
that had risen to incredible heights; but Basil laughed
to himself as he savored the manipulation it was founded
.
on.
Three ushers of the Toppers' Club came in with firm
step.
"Get out of here, you dirty buml" they told Basil sav.
agely. They tore the tycoon's toga off him and then
tossed him his seedy panhandler's rags with a three
man sneer.
"All gone?" Basil asked. “I gave it another five min-
utes.
"All gone,” said a messenger from Money Market.
“Nine billion gone in five minutes, and it really pulled
some others down with it."
"Pitch the busted bum outl" how led.Overcall and Burn-
banner and the other cronies.
"Wait, Basil," said Overcall. “Turn in the President's
Crosier before we kick you downstairs. After all, youll
have it several times again tomorrow night."
The period was over. The Nyctalops drifted off to
sleep clinics or leisure-hour hideouts to pass their ebb
time. The Auroreans, the Dawners, took over the vital
stuff.
Now you would see some actionl Those Dawners real-
ly made fast decisions. You wouldn't catch them wasting
a full minute setting up a business.
A sleepy panhandler met Ildefonsa Impala on the
way.
141
SLOW TUESDAY NIGHT
“Preserve us this moming, Ildy,” he said, “and will
you marry me the coming night?”
"Likely I will, Basil,” she told him. “Did you many
Judy during the night past?”
"I'm not sure. Could you let me have two dollars,
Ildy?"
“Out of the question. I believe a Judy Bagelbaker was
named one of the ten best-dressed women during the
frou-frou fashion period about two o'clock. Why do you
Deed two dollars?”
“A dollar for a bed and a dollar for red-eye. After
all, I sent you two million out of my second."
“I keep my two sorts of accounts separate. Here's a
dollar, Basil. Now be offl I can't be seen talking to a
dirty panhandler."
"Thank you, Ildy. Ill get the red-eye and sleep in an
alley. Preserve us this morning.”
Bagelbaker shuffled off whistling “Slow Tuesday
Night.”
And already the Dawners had set Wednesday morning
to jumping.
142
SNUFFLES
I
n
“I ALWAYS SAID we'd find one of them that was fun,"
remarked Brian. “There's been entirely too much solem-
nity in the universe. Did you never panic on thinking
of the multiplicity of systems?”
"Never,” said Georgina.
"Not even when, having set down a fine probability
for the totality of worlds, you realized suddenly that you
had to raise it by a dozen powers yet?”
“What's to panic?”
"Not even when it comes over you, This isn't a joke;
this is serious; every one of them is serious'?"
*Cosmic intimidation,' Belloc called it. And it does
tend to minimize a person.”
"And did you never hope that out of all that prodi-
gality of worlds, one at least should have been made
for fun? One should have been made by a wild child
or a mixed-up goblin just to put the rest of them in
proper perspective, to deflate the pomposity of the
Cosmos.
"You believe this is it, Mr. Carroll?
“Yes. Bellota was made for fun. It is a joke, a carica-
ture, a burlesque. It is a planet with baggy pants and
a putty nose. It is a midget world with floppy shoes and
a bull-roarer voice. It was designed to keep the cosmos
from taking itself too seriously. The law of levity here
conspires against the law of gravity."
"I never heard of the law of levity. And Mr. Phelan
believes that he will soon have the explanation for the
peculiar gravity here.”
143
SNUFFLES
“The law of levity does not apply to you, Georgina.
You are immune. But I spoke lightly.
The theory that Bellota was made for a joke had not
been proved; no more than the other theories about it.
But it was a sport, a whole barrelful of puzzles, a place
of interest all out of proportion to its size, eminently
worthy of study. And the six of them had been set down
there to study it.
Sociability impels-and besides they weren't a bad
bunch at all. Meet them now, or miss them forever.
They were six.
1. John Hardy. Commander and commando. As capa-
ble a man as ever lived. A good-natured conglomerate
of clanking iron who was always in control. A jack of
all techniques, a dynamic optimist. He had the only
laugh that never irritated, however often heard, and
he handled danger cavalierly. He was a blue-eyed, red-
headed giant, and his face was redder than his hair.
2. William Malaquais (Uncle Billy) Cross. Engineer,
machinist extraordinary, gadgeteer, theorist, arguefier,
first mate, navigator, and balladeer. Billy was a little
older than the rest of them, but he hadn't mellowed.
He said that he was still a green and growing boy.
3. Daniel Phelan. Geologist and cosmologist, and hold-
er of heretical doctrines about field forces, "Phelan's
Corollary” may be known to you; and, if so, you must
be both intrigued and frustrated by- the inherent con-
tradictions that prevented its acceptance. A highly pro-
fessional man in the domain of magnetism and gravity,
he was also a low amateur rake and a determined wolf.
A dude. Yet he could carry his share of the load.
сапу
4. Margaret Cot. Artist and photographer, botanist
and bacteriologist. Full of chatter and a sort of charm.
Better looking than anyone deserves to be. Salty, really
the newest thing in salinity. A little bit wanton, And a
little kiddish.
5. Brian Carroll. Naturalist. And natural. He had been
hunting for something all his life, but did not know what
144
SNUFFLES
a
it was, and was not sure that he would know it when
he found it, but he hoped that it would be different.
“O Lord,” he would pray, “however it ends don't let it
have a pat ending. That I couldn't stand.” He believed
that anything repeated was trite. And it was for that
reason that there were pleasant surprises for him on Bel-
lota.
6. Georgina Chantal. Biologist and iceberg. But the
capsule description may be unjust. For she was more
than biologist and much more than iceberg. Frosty only
when frostiness was called for, she was always proper
and often friendly. But she was no Margie Cot, and in
contrast perhaps she was a little icy.
Actually there wasn't a bad apple in that basket.
The most obvious peculiarity of Bellota was its grav-
ity, which was half that of Earth's, though the circum-
ference of the globe was no more than a hundred miles.
It was on account of this peculiarity that Daniel Phelan
was on the little planet in the first place. For it was
held by those who decide such things that there was a
bare chance that he could find the answer; no one else
had found it. His own idea was that his presence there
was fruitless: he already had the answer to the gravity
behavior of Bellota; it was contained in Phelan's Corol-
lary. Bellota was the only body that behaved as it should.
It was the rest of the universe that was atypical.
And in other ways Bellota was a joker. Fruits proved
noisome and thorns succulent. Rinds and shells were
edible and heartmeat was not. Proto-butterflies stung
like homets, and lizards secreted honeylike manna. And
the water-the water was soda water-sheer carbonated
soda water.
If you wanted it any other way, you caught rain
water, and this was so highly nitric that drinking it was
something of an experience also; for the thunderstorns
there were excessive.
No, they were not excessive, claimed Phelan, they
were normal. It was on all other atmospheric planets
145
SNUFFLES
known that there was a strange deficiency of thunder-
showers.
Here, at least, there was no deficiency: it rained
about five minutes out of every fifteen, and the multi-
colored lightning was omnipresent. In all their stay there,
the party was never without the sound of thunder, near
or distant, nor of the probe of lightning. For this reason
there could be no true darkness there, not even be-
tween the flashes; there were flashes between the
flashes. Here was meteorology concentrated, without
dilution, without filler.
"But it is always different,” said Georgina. “Every
lightning flash is entirely different, just as every snow-
flake is different. Will it snow here?"
“Certainly,” said Phelan. "Though it did not last night,
it should tonight. Snow before midnight and fog by
moming. After all, midnight and moming are only an
hour apart."
At that time they had been on the planet only a few
hours.
"And here the cycle is normal,” said Phelan. “It is
normal nowhere else. It is natural for humans and all
other creatures to sleep for two hours and to wake for
two hours. That is the fundamental cycle. Much of our
misbehavior and perversity comes from trying to adapt
to the weird day-night cycle of whatever alien world
we happened to be born on. Here within a week we
will return to that normal that we never knew before."
"Within what kind of week? asked Hardy.
“Within Bellota's twenty-eight-hour week. And do you
realize that the projected working week here would be
just six and two-thirds hours? I always thought that
that was long enough to work anyhow.”
There were no seas there, only the soda-water lakes
that covered a third of the area. And there were flora
and fauna that burlesqued more than they really re-
sembled Earth's and kindred worlds'.
The trees were neither deciduous nor evergreen
146
SNUFFLES
(though Brian Carroll said that they were ever-green),
nor palm. They were trees as a cartoonist might draw
them. And there were animals that made the whole
idea of animals ridiculous.
And there was Snuffles.
Snuffles was a bear-possibly-and of sorts. The bear
is himself a caricature of animalkind, somehow a giant
dog, somehow a shaggy man, an ogre, and also a toy.
And Snuffles was a caricature of a bear.
Billy Cross tried to explain to them about bears. Billy
was an old bear man.
"It is the only animal that children dream of without
having seen or been told about. Moncrief by his recall
methods has studied thousands of early childhood
dreams. Children universally dream of bears, Tahitian
children subject to no ursine influence in themselves or
their ancestry, Australian children, town tikes before
they ever saw a bear toy. They dream of bears. The
bear is the boogerman. Bears live in the attics of old
childhood houses. They did in my own and in thousands
of others. Their existence there is not of adult sug-
gestion, but of innate childhood lmowledge.
“But there is a duality about this boogerman. He is
friendly and fascinating as well as frightening. The
boogerman is not a story that adults tell to children. It
is the only story that children tell to adults who have
forgotten it."
“But how could you know?" asked Margie Cot. “I
had no idea that little boys dreamed of bears. I thought
that only girls did. And with us I had come to believe
that the bear dreams symbolized grown man in his
fundamental aspect, both fascinating and frightening."
"To you, Margie, everything symbolizes grown man
in his fundamental aspect. Now the boogerman is also
philologically interesting, being actually one of the less
than two hundred Indo-European root words. Though
Bog has come to mean God in the Slavic, yet the booger
was earlier an animal-man demiurge, and the Sanscrit
D
147
SNUFFLES
bhaga is not without this meaning. In the sense of a
breaker, a smasher, it is in the Old Irish as bong, and
the early Lithuanian as banga. In the sense of a de-
vourer, it survives in the Greek root phag, and as one
who puts to flight it is in the Latin fug. We have, of
course, the Welsh bwg, a ghost, and bogey has been
used in the meaning of the devil
. And we have bugbear,
which rounds out the circuit."
"So you make God and the Bear and the Devil one,"
said Georgina.
“In many mythologies it was the bear who made the
"
world,” said John Hardy. “After that he did nothing
distinguished. It was felt by his devotees that he had
done enough."
Snuffles was not a bear exactly. He was a pseudo-
ursine. He was big and clumsy, and bounced around
on four legs, and then up on two. He was friendly, chill-
ingly so, for he was huge. And he snuffled like some
old track-eating train.
He was a clown, but he seemed to observe the line
that the visitors drew. He did not come really close,
though often too close for comfort. He obeyed, or when
he did not wish to obey, he pretended to misunderstand.
He was the largest animal on Bellota, and there seemed
to be only one of him.
"Why do we call him he?" asked Brian Carroll, the
naturalist. “Only surgery could tell for sure, but it ap-
pears
that Snuffles has no sex at all. There is no way I
know of that he could reproduce. No wonder there is
only one of him; the wonder is that there should be
any at all. Where did he come from?"
"That could be asked of any creature,” said Daniel
Phelan. "The question is, where is he going? But he
shows a certain sophistication in this. For it is only with
primitives that toy animals (and he is a toy, you know)
are sexed. A modem teddy bear or a toy panda isn't.
Nor were the toys in the European tradition except on
the fringes (Tartary before the ninth century, Ireland
148
SNUFFLES
n
before the fifth) since pre-classical times. But before
those times in its regions, and beyond its pale even to-
day, the toy animals are totems and are sexed, exag-
geratedly so.
“Yes, there is no doubt about it,” said Brian. “He does
not have even the secondary characteristics of mammal,
marsupial, or what you will. But he has characteristics
enough of his own."
Snuffles was, among other things, a mimic. Should a
book be left around, and they were a bookish bunch, he
would take it in his forepaws and hold it as to read, and
turn the pages, tuming them singly and carefully. He
could use his padded paws as hands. His claws were re-
tractable and his digits projective. They were paws, or
they were claws, or they were hands and he had four
of them.
He unscrewed caps and he could use a can opener,
He kept the visitors in firewood, once he understood
that they had need of it, and that they wanted dry
sticks of a certain size. He'd bite the sticks to length,
stack them in small ricks, bind them with lianas, and
carry them to the fire. He'd fetch water and put it on
to boil. And he gathered bellotas by the bushel.
Bellota means an acom, and they had named the plan-
et that from the profusion of edible fruit-nuts that
looked very like the acom. These were a delicacy that
became a staple.
And Snuffles could talk. All his noises were not alike.
There was the “snokle, snoke, snokle" that meant he
was in a good humor, as he normally was. There was a
snook, snook" and a “snoff.” There were others similar
in vocables but widely varied in tone and timbre. Per-
haps Billy Cross understood him best, but they all un-
derstood him a little.
In only one thing did Snuffles become stubbom. He
marked off a space, a wild old pile of rocks, and for-
bade them to enter its circle. He dug a trench around
it and he roared and bared foot-long fangs if any
dared
149
SNUFFLES
-
cross the trench. Billy Cross said that Snuffles did this
to save face; for Commander John Hardy had previously
forbidden Snuffles a certain area, their supply dump
and weapons center. Hardy had drawn a line around it
with a mattock and made it clear that Snuffles should
never cross that line. The creature understood at once,
and he went and did likewise.
The party had been set down there for two Earth
weeks--twelve Bellota weeks-to study the life of the
planetoid, to classify, to take samples, tests, notes, and
pictures; to hypothesize and to build a basis for theory.
But they ventured hardly at all from their original camp-
site. There was such an amazing variety of detail at
hand that it would take many weeks even to begin to
classify it.
A feature there was the rapidity of enzyme and
bacterial action. A good wine could be produced in
four hours, and a fungus-cheese made from grub exuda-
tions in even less time. And in the new atmosphere
thoughts also seemed to ferment rapidly.
"Every person makes one major mistake in his life,
said John Hardy to them once. "Were it not for that, he
would not have to die."
"What?" quizzed Phelan. "Few die violently nowa-
days. How could all die for a mistake?”
"Yet it's a fact. Deaths are not really explained, for
all the explanations of medicine. A death will be the
result of one single much earlier rashness, of one weak-
ening of the mind or body, or a crippling of the re-
generative force. A person will be alive and vital. And
one day he will make one mistake. In that moment the
person begins to die. But if a man did not make that
one mistake, he would not die.
"Poppycock,” said Daniel Phelan,
"I wonder if you know the true meaning of 'poppy-
cock'?” asked Billy Cross. "It is poppy-talk, opium-talk,
the rambling of one under the narcotic. Now the element
'cock' in the word is not (as you would imagine) from
a
150
SNUFFLES
-
either the Norwegian kok, a dung heap, nor from co-
quarde in the sense that Rabelais uses it, but rather
from-
"Poppycock," said Phelan again. He disliked Billy
”
Cross's practice of analyzing all words, and he denied
his assertion that a man who uses a word without feeling
its full value is a dealer in false coinage, in fact a liar.
“But if a person dies only by making a mistake, how
does an animal die?" asked Margie Cot. “Does he also
make a mistake?”
"He makes the mistake of being an animal and not
a man,” said Phelan.
"There may be no clear line between animal and
man," Margie argued.
"There is,” said Phelan, and three others agreed.
“There is not,” said Billy Cross.
"An animal is paradoxically a creature without an
anima-without a soul,” said Phelan. “This comes oddly
from me because I also deny it to man in its usual con-
notation. But there is a total difference, a line that the
animal cannot cross, and did not cross. When we arrive
at wherever we are going, he will still be skulking in his
den."
“Here, at least, it is the opposite of that,” said Brian
Carroll. “Snuffles sleeps in the open, and it is we who
den."
It was true. Around their campsite, their supply dump
and weapons center, there were three blind pockets,
grottocs back in the rocks. Billy Cross, Daniel Phelan
and Margie Cot each had one of these, filled with the
tools of their specialties. Here they worked and slept.
And these were dens.
John Hardy himself slept in the weapons center, in-
side the circle where Snuffles was forbidden. And the
hours that he did not sleep he kept guard. Hardy made
a fetish of sccurity. When he slept, or briefly wandered
about the region, someone else must always take a turn
151
SNUFFLES
at guard, weapon at hand. There was no relaxation of
this, no exception, no chance of a mistake.
And Snuffles, the animal, who slept right out in the
open (“Is it possible,” Brian asked himself, “that I am
the only one who notices it? Is it possible that it hap-
pens?”) did not get wet. It rained everywhere on that
world. But it did not rain on Snuffles.
"The joy of this place is that it is not pat,” said Brian
Carroll. As previously noted, he hated anything that was
pat. "We could be here for years and never see the end
of the variety. With the insects there may be as many
species as there are individuals. Each one could almost
be regarded as a sport, as if there were no standard to
go by. The gravity here is cock-eyed. Please don't analyze
the word, Billy; I doubt myself that it means rooster-
eyed. The chemistry gives one a hopeful feeling. It
uses the same building blocks as the chemistry else-
where, but it is as if each of those blocks were just a
little off. The lightning is excessive, as though whoever
was using it had not yet tired of the novelty; I never
tired of the novelty of lightning myself. And when this
place ends, it will not have a pat ending. Other globes
may turn-to lava or cold cinders. Bellota will
pop
like
a soap bubble, or sag like spaghetti, or turn into an ex-
ploding world of grasshoppers. But it won't conform. I
love Bellota. And I do hate a pat ending."
“There is an old precept of 'Know thyself, said
Georgina Chantal. They talked a lot now, as they were
often wakeful, not yet being accustomed to the short
days and nights of Bellota. “Its variant is ‘Look within.'
Look within, but our cyes point outward! The only way
we can see our faces is in a mirror or in a picture. Each
of us has his mirror, and mine is more often the micro-
scope. But we cannot see ourselves as we are until we
see ourselves distorted. That is why Snuffles is also a
mirror for all of us here. We can't understand why
we're serious until we know why he's funny.”
"We may be the distortion and he the true image,"
)
1
152
SNUFFLES
said Billy Cross. "He lacks jealousy and pomposity and
greed and treachery-all the distortions.
"We do not know that he lacks them,” said Daniel
Phelan.
So they talked away the short days and nights on
Bellota, and accumulated data.
II
When it happened, it happened right in narrow day-
light. The phrase was Brian's, who hated a pat phrase.
It happened right in the middle of the narrow two-hour
Bellota day.
All were awake and aware. John Hardy stood in the
middle of the weapons center on alert guard with that
rifle cradled in the crook of his arm. Billy and Daniel
and Margaret were at work in their respective dens; and
Brian and Georgina, who did not den, were gathering in-
sects at the open lower end of the valley, but they had
the center in their sight.
There was an unusual flash of lightning, bright by
even Bellota standards, and air snapped and crackled.
And there was an unusul sound from Snuffles, far re-
moved from his usual “snokle, snokle” talk.
And in a moment benignity seemed to drain away
from that planet
Snuffles had before made as if to cross the line, and
then scooted off, chortling in glee, which is perhaps
,
why the careful John Hardy was not at first alarmned.
Then Snuffles charged with a terrifying sound.
But Hardy was not tricked entirely; it would be im-
possible for man or beast to trick him entirely. He had
a split second, and was not one to waste time making
a decision, and he was incapable of panic. What he did,
he did of choice. And if it was a mistake, why, even
the shrewdest decision goes into the books as a mistake
if it fails.
153
SNUFFLES
a
He was fond of Snuffles and he gambled that it would
not be necessary to kill him. It was a heavy rifle; a shoul-
der shot should have turned the animal. If it did not,
there would not be time for another shot.
It did not, though, and there was not. Commander
John Hardy made one mistake and for that he died.
He died uncommonly, and he did not die from the in-
side out, as meaner men do.
It was ghastly, but it was over in an instant. Hardy's
head was smashed and his face nearly swiped off. His
back was broken and his body almost sheared in two.
The great creature, with the foot-long canines and claws
like twenty long knives, mangled him and crushed him
and shook him like a red mop, and then let go.
It may be that Brian Carroll realized most quickly
the implications. He called to Georgina to come out of
the valley onto the plain below, and to come out fast.
He realized that the other three still alive would not
even be able to come out.
Incongruously, a thing that went through Brian Car-
roll's mind was a tirade of an ancient Confederate gen-
eral against ancient General Grant, to the effect that
the blundering fool had moved into a position that com-
manded both river and hill and blocked three valley
mouths, and it could only be hoped that Grant would
move along before he realized his advantage.
But Brian was under no such delusion. Snuffles real-
ized his advantage; he occupied the supply dump and
weapons center, and commanded the entrances to the
three blind pockets that were the dens of Billy Cross
and Daniel Phelan and Margie Cot.
With one move, Snuffles had killed the leader, cor-
nered three of the others, and cut off the remaining
two from base weapons, to be hunted down later. There
was nothing unintentional about it. Had he chosen an-
other moment, when another than John Hardy was on
guard, then Hardy alive would still somehow have been
154
SNUFFLES
>
a threat to him, even weaponless. But, with Hardy
dead, all the rest were no match for the animal.
Brian and Georgina lingered on the edge of the plain
to watch the other three, though they knew that their
own lives depended on getting out of there.
“Two could get away,” said Georgina, “if a third
would make a rush for it and force Snuffles into another
charge."
"But none of them will,” said Brian. "The third would
die."
It was a game, but it couldn't last long. Phelan whim-
pered and tried to climb the rock wall at the blind end
of his pocket. Margie cajoled and told Snuffles how good
friends they had always been, and wouldn't he let her
go? Billy Cross filled his pipe and lit it and sat down to
wait it out.
Phelan went first, and he died like a craven. But no
one, not sure how he himself might die, should hold that
overly against a man.
Snuffles thundered in, cut him down in the middle
of a scream, and rushed back to his commanding spot
in the middle of the weapons center.
Margie spread out her hands and began to cry, softly,
not really in terror, when he attacked. The pseudo-bear
broke her neck, but with a blow that was almost gentle
in comparison with the others, and he scurried again to
the center,
And Billy Cross puffed on his pipe. “I hate to go like
this, Snuff, old boy. In fact, I hate to go at all. If I made
a mistake to die for, it was in being such a pleasant,
trusting fellow. I wonder if you ever noticed, Snuff,
what a fine, upstanding fellow I really am?”
And that was the last thing Billy Cross ever said,
for the big animal struck him dead with one tearing
blow. And the smoke still drifted in the air from Billy's
pipe.
Then it was like black thunder coming out of the
valley after the other two, for that clumsy animal could
155
SNUFFLES
a
move. They had a start on him, Brian and Georgina had,
of a hundred yards. And soon their terror subsided to
half-terror as they realized that the shoulder-shot bear
animal could not catch them till they were exhausted.
In a wild rin, they could even increase their lead over
him. But they would tire soon and they did not know
when he would tire. He had herded them away from
the campsite and the weapons. And they were trapped
with him on a small planet.
Till day's end, and through the night, and next day
(maybe five hours in all) he followed them until they
could hardly keep going. Then they lost him, but in the
dark did not know if he was close or not. And at dawn
they saw him sitting up and watching them from a
quarter of a mile away.
But now the adversaries rested and watched. The
animal may have stiffened up from his shot. The two
humans were so weary that they did not intend to run on
again till the last moment.
"Do you think there is any chance that it was all a
sudden fury and that he may become friendly again?”
Georgina asked Brian.
"It was not a sudden fury. It was a series of very
calculated moves.”
“Do you think we could skirt around and beat him
back to the weapons center?” "
“No. He has chosen a spot where he can see for
miles. And he has the interceptor's advantage-any
angle we take has to be longer than his. We can't beat
him back and he knows it."
"Do
you
think he knows that the weapons are weap-
ons?"
"Yes.”
"And that all 'our signal equipment is left at the
center and that we can't communicate?”
“Yes.”
"Do you think he's smarter than we are?"
"He was smarter in selecting his role. It is better to
156
SNUFFLES
be the hunter than the hunted. But it isn't unheard of
for the hunted to outsmart the hunter."
"Brian, do you think you would have died as badly
as Daniel or as well as Billypo
"No. No to both.
"I was always jealous of Margie, but I loved her at
the end. She didn't scream. She didn't act scared. Brian,
what will happen to us now po
"Possibly we will be saved in the nick of time by the
Marines.”
"I didn't know they had them any more. Oh, you
mean the ship. But that's still a week away, Earth time.
Do you
think Snuffles knows it is to come back for us?o
"Yes, he knows. I'm sure of that."
“Do you think he knows when it will come?" ”
"Yes, I have the feeling that he knows that too."
"But will he be able to catch us before then?"
"I believe that all parties concerned will play out the
contest with one eye on the clock.
Snuffles had now developed a trick. At sundown of
the short day, he would give a roar and come at them.
And they would have to start their flight just as the
dark commenced. They ran more noisily than he and
he would always be able to follow them; but they could
never be sure in the dark that he was following, or how
closely. They would have to go at top panting, gasping,
thumping speed for an hour and a half; then they would
ease off for a little in the half hour before dawn. And in
the daytime one of them had to watch while the other
slept. But Snuffles could sleep as he would, and they
were never able to slip away without his waking instant-
ly.
Moreover, he seemed to herd them through the fertile
belt on their night runs and let them rest on the bartens
in the daytime. It wasn't that food was really scarce; it
was that it could only be gathered during time taken
from flight and sleep and guard duty.
They also came on a quantity of red fruit that had
a
157
SNUFFLES
a weakening and dizzying effect on them, yet they could
hardly leave it alone. There was a sort of bean sprout
that had the same effect, and a nut, and a cereal grass
whose seed they winnowed with their hands as they
went along.
“This is a narcotic belt,” said Brian. “I wish we had
the time to study it longer, and yet we may get all too
much of studying it. We have no idea how far it goes,
and this method of testing its products on ourselves may
be an effective one, but dangerous.”
From that time on, they were under the influence of
the narcotics. They dreamed vividly while awake and
walking. And they began to suffer hallucinations which
they could not distinguish from reality.
It was only a Bellota day or so after their dreaming
began that Brian Carroll felt that the mind of Snuffles
was speaking to him. Carroll was an intelligent amateur
in that field and he put it to the tests; there are valid
tests for it. And he concluded that it was hallucination
and not telepathy. Still (and he could see it coming)
there would be a time when he would accept his hal-
lucination and believe that the ursine was talking to
him. And that would signal that he was crazy and no
longer able to evade death there.
Carroll renounced (while he still had his wits) his
future belief in the nonsense, just as a man put to
torture may renounce anything he concedes or confesses
or denies under duress.
Yet, whatever frame it was placed in, Snuffles talked
to him from a distance. "Why do you think me a bear
because I am in a bear skin? I do not think you a man,
though you are in a man skin. You may be a little less.
And why do you believe you will die more bravely than
Daniel? The longer you run, the meaner will be your
death. And
you
still do not know who I am?"
"No," said Brian Carroll aloud.
"No what?" asked Georgina Chantal.
»
158
SNUFFLES
.
“It seems that the bear is talking to me, that he has
entered my mind."
“Me also. Could it be, or is it the narcotic fruit?"
"It couldn't be. It is hallucination brought on by the
narcotics, and tiredness from travel, and lack of sleep-
and our shock at seeing our friends killed by a boy
tumed into a monster. There are tests to distinguish
telepathic reception from hallucination: objective corrob-
oration, impossible at this time (with Snuffles in his
present mood) and probably impossible at any time;
sentient parallelism-surely uncertain, for I have more
in common with millions of humans than with one
pseudo-ursine; circumstantial validity and point-for-point
clarity-this is negative, for I know myself to be fevered
and confused and my senses unreliable in other 'matters.
By every test that can be made, the indication is that
it is not telepathy, that it is hallucination.
“But there isn't any way to be sure, is there, Brian?"
"None, Georgina; no more than I can prove that it is
not a troup of Boy Scouts around a campfire that is
causing pain and burning in my gullet, that it is really
the narcotic fruit or something else I have eaten con-
spiring with my weariness and apprehension to discom-
fort me. I cannot prove it is not Boy Scouts and I can-
not prove it is not telepathy, but I consider both un-
likely."
“I don't think it is unlikely at all, Brian. I think that
Snuffles is talking to me. When you get a little nuttier
and tireder, then you'll believe it too.
"Oh, yes, I'll believe it then-but it won't be true.”
"It won't matter if it's true or not. Snuffles will have
gained his point. Do you know that Snuffles is king of
this world?”
"No. What are you talking about?"
“He just told me he was. He told me that if I would
help him catch you, he would let me go. But I won't do
it. I have become fond of you, Brian. Did you know
that I never did like men before?
n
159
SNUFFLES
"Yes. You wote mlled the iceberg.“
"But now 1 like vou very much.”
"I
"You have no one else left to like."
"It isn't thrt. It's the mood I'm in. And I won't help
Snuffles minh you unless he gives me very much better
reasons for it."
Damn the girl! If she believed Snuffles talked to her,
then for all prontical purposes he did. And, however
the idea of a trade for her life had been implanted in
her mind, it would grow there.
Now Snuffles talked to Brian Carroll again, and it
was somehow a waste of time to intone the formality
that it was hn Murination only.
"You still do not know what I am, but you will have
to leam it before you die. Hardy knew it at the last
minute. Cross guessed it from the first. Phelan still isn't
sure. He goes about and looks back at his body lying
there, and he still isn't sure. Some people are very hard
to convince. But the girl knew it and she spread out her
hands."
In his fever, that was the way the bear animal talked
to him.
They ate leaves now and buds. They would have no
more of the narrotic fruits even if they had to starve.
But narcosis left them slowly, and the pursuit of them
tightened.
It was just at sunset one day that diaster struck at
Brian. The hear had nearly hypnotized him into im-
mobility, talking inside his head. Georgina had started
on before him and repeatedly called for him to follow,
but for some reason he loitered. When Snuffles made
his sudden sunrown charge, there seemed no escaping
him. Brian was trapped on a rimrock. Georgina had
already tal-en a winding path to the plain below. Brian
hesitated than hrld his ground for the bruin's charge.
He believed that he could draw Snuffles on, and then
break to the left or the right at the last instant, and
perhaps the animal would plunge over the cliff.
160
SNUFFLES
But old Snuff modified but did not halt his charge
at the last minute. He came in bottom-side first, like
an elephant sliding bases, and he knocked Brian off the
cliff.
There are few really subjective accounts of dying,
since most who die do not live to tell about it. But the
way it goes is this:
First one hangs in space; then he is charged by the
madly rising ground armed with trees and rocks and
weapons. After that is a painful sleep, and much later
a dazed wakening.
III
He was traveling upside-down, that was sure, and
roughly, though at a slow rate of speed. Perhaps that
is the normal way for people to travel after they are
dead. He was hung from the middle in an odd doubled-
up manner, and seemed supported and borne along by
something of a boatlike motion, yet of a certain resilience
a
and strength that was more living than even a boat. It
had a rough softness, this thing, and a pleasant fra-
grance.
But, though it was bright moming now, it was hard
to get a good look at the thing with which he was in
contact. All he could see was grass flowing slowly by,
and heels.
Heels?
What was this all about? Heels and backs of calves,
>
no more.
He was being carried, carried slung like a sack over
her shoulder by Georgina. For the thing of the pleasant
fragrance was Georgina Chantal.
She set him down then. It was a very rough valley
they were in, and he saw that they had traveled per-
haps four miles from the base of the rimrock; and
Snuffles had settled down in the morning light a quarter
of a mile behind them.
a
161
SNUFFLES
>
"Georgina, did you carry me all night?"
“Yes.
“How could you?"
”
"I changed shoulders sometimes. And you aren't very
heavy. This is only a half-gravity planet. Besides, I'm
very strong. I could have carned you even on Earth.”
"Why wasn't I killed by the fall?”
"Snuffles says he isn't ready to kill you yet, that he
could kill you any time he wanted to with the lightning
or rock or poison berry. But you did hit terribly hard. I
was surprised to be able to pick you up in one piece.
And now Snuffles says that I have lost my last chance.”
"How?”
"Because I carried you away from him before he could
get down the cliff in the dark. Now he says he will kill
me too.
"Snuff is inconsistent. If he could kill me any instant
with the lightning, why would he be angered if you
carried me away from him?"
“I thought of that too. But he says he has his own
reasons. And that lightning--do you know that it doesn't
lighten all the time everywhere on Bellota? Only in a
big circle around Snuffles, as a tribute to him. I've no-
ticed myself that when we get a big lead over him, we
almost move clear out of the lightning sphere."
"Georgina, that animal doesn't really talk to us. It is
only our imaginations. It is not accurate to so personify
it.'
"It may not be accurate, but if that isn't talk he puts
out, then I don't know talk. And a lot of his talk he
makes come true. But I don't care if he does kill me for
saving you. I'm silly over you now.”
"We are both of us silly, Georgina, from the condi-
tion we are in. But he can't talk to us. He's only an
animal run amok. If it was anything else, it would mean
that much of what we know is not so.
Brian had the full effect of it one sunny afternoon a
couple of Bellota days later. He was dozing and Geor-
162
SNUFFLES
gina was on guard when Snuffles began to talk inside
his head.
"You insult me that you do not recognize my iden-
tity. When Hardy said that in many mythologies it was
the Bear who made the world, he had begun to guess
who I was. I am the creator and I made the world. I
have heard that there are other worlds besides Bellota,
and I am not sure whether I made them or not. But if
they are there, I must have made them. They could not
have made themselves. And this I did make.
"It isn't an easy thing, or all of you would have made
them, and you have not. And there is pride in creation
that
you
could not understand. You said that Bellota was
made for fun. It was not made for fun. I am the only
one who knows why it was made, for I made it. And it
is not a little planet; it is a grand planet. I waited for
you to confess your error and be amazed at it. Since
you did not, you will have to die. I made you, so I can
kill
you if I like. I must have made you, since I made
all. And if I did not, then I made other things, red
squirrels and white birds.
"You have no idea of the achievement itself. I had
very little to work with and no model or plans or previ-
ous experience. And I made mistakes. I would be the
last to deny that. I miscalculated the gravity, a simple
mathematical error that anyone could make. The plan-
et is too small for the gravity, but I had already em-
bodied the calculated gravity in other works that I did
not choose to undo, and I had no material to make a
larger planet. So what I have made I have made, and
it will continue so. An error, once it is embodied, be-
comes a new truth.
"You may wonder why my birds have hair. I will
confess it, I did not know how to make feathers, nor
could you without template or typus. And you are puz-
zled that my butterflies sting and my homets do not?
But how was I to know that those fearfully colored
monsters should have been harmless? It ill befits one
163
SNUFFLES
who has never made even the smallest—but why do I
try to explain this to you?
"You wonder if I am talking to you or if it is-only a
delusion of your mind. What is the difference? How
could there be anything in your mind if I did not put it
there? And do not be afraid of dying. Remember that
nothing is lost. When I have the pieces of you, I will use
,
them to make other things. That is the law of conserva-
tion of matter as I understand it.
“But do you know that the one thing desired by all
is really praise? It is the impelling force, and a creator
needs this more than anyone. Things and beings are
made to give praise, and if they do not, they are de-
stroyed again. You had every opportunity to give it,
and instead you jeered.
"Did any of you ever make a world? I tell you that
there are a million things to remember all at once. And
there can be no such thing as a bad world, since each
of them is a triumph. Whether it was that I made the
others and I forgot them is only a premise; or whether
I will make them in the future, and they are only now
talked of out of their proper time. But some of your
own mythologies indicate that I made your own. .
"I would tell you more, only you would not under-
stand it. But after I have conserved your matter, then
you will know all these things.”
"Snuffles is cranky with me today," said Georgina
Chantal. “Is he also cranky with you?"
"Yes,” said Brian Carroll.
"He says that he made Bellota. Did he tell you that
"
too? Do you believe it?"
"He told me. I do not believe it. We are delirious.
Snuffles cannot communicate.
"You keep saying that, but you aren't sure. He told
me that when he chews us up he will take a piece of
me and a piece of you and chew them together and
make a new thing, since we are belatedly taken with
each other. Isn't that nice?"
2
164
SNUFFLES
“How cozy.”
"I wonder why he made the grass so sharp, though.
There is no reason for it to be like that."
"Why, and what?”
"Snuffles. Why did he make the grass so sharp? My
shoes are nearly gone and it's killing me.”
"Georgina, hold onto what's left of your mind. Snuf-
fles did not make the grass or anything else. He is
only an animal, and we are sick and walking in delirium.“
So they walked on a while, for evening had come.
Then the voice of Snuffles came again inside the head
of Brian.
"How was I to know that the grass should not be
sharp? Are not all pointed things sharp? Who would
have guessed that it should be soft? If you had told me
gently, and without shaming me, I would have changed
it at once. Now I will not. Let it wound you!”
So they walked on a while, for evening had come.
Then days and nights.
"Brian, do you think that Snuffles knows the world is
round?”
"If he made it, he must know it.”
"Oh, yes, I had forgotten.”
"Dammit, girl, I was being ironicl And you are now
quite nutty, and I hardly less so. Of course he didn't
make it. And of course he doesn't know that it's round.
He's only an animal.”
“Then we have an advantage back again."
"Yes. I'd noticed it before if I hadn't been so con-
fused. We are more than halfway around the little
planet. He is no longer between us and our weapons
center, but he behaves as though he thought he was.
We have no more than forty miles to go to it. We will
step up our pace, though gradually. Our old camp val.
ley is prominent enough so that we could recognize it
within several miles either way, and we can navigate
that close. And if he seems to say in your mind that he
n
165
SNUFFLES
»
is onto our trick, do not believe him. The animal does
not really talk to our minds.”
But their narcosis still increased. “It isn't a narcotic
belt," said Brian. “It is a narcotic season on all Bellota-
a built-in saturnalia. But we have not been able to en-
joy the carnival."
"Snuffles shows up well as a camival king, though,
,
don't you think? It is easier to believe in time of carni-
val that he made the cosmos. I went to the big camnival
once in Nola when I was a little girl. There was a big
bear wearing a crown on one of the floats, and I be-
lieve that he was king of the camival. It wasn't an or-
dinary bear. I am sure now that it represented Snuffles,
though I was only six years old when I saw it. Do you
think that Snuffles' explanation of the law of gravity
here is better than Phelan's?"
"More easily understandable at least than the corol-
lary, and probably more honest. I always thought that
the corollary also embraced a simple mathematical er-
ror and that Phelan stuck to it out of perversity.”
“It is one thing to stick to an error. It is another to
build a world to conform to it. Brian, do you know what
hour it is?"
"It is the three hundred and twelfth since we were
set down.”
"And they return for us at the three hundred and
thirty-sixth. We will be back at our campsite and in
control by then, won't we?”
“If we are ever to make it back and be in control, we
should make it by then. Are you tired, Georgina?”
“No. I will never again be tired. I have been walking
in a dream too long for that. But I never felt more
pleasurable than now. I look down at my feet which
are a sorry mess, but they don't seem to be my feet.
Only a little while ago I felt sorry for a girl in such a
state, and then I came to half realize that the girl was
me. But the realization didn't carry a lot of conviction.
It doesn't seem like me.”
166
SNUFFLES
"I feel disembodied myself. But I don't believe that
this comical old body that I observe will carry me much
farther.”
"Snuffles is trying to talk to us.
“Yes, I feel him. No, dammit, Georgina, we will not
give in to that nonsense. Snuffles is only a wounded old
bear that is trailing us. But our hallucination is coming
again. It will take a lot of theory to cover a dual bal.
lucination."
"Hush, I want to hear what he says.”
Then Snuffles began to talk inside the heads of the
two of them.
"If you know and do not tell me, then you are guilty
of a peculiar affront. A maker cannot remember every-
thing, and I had forgotten some of the things that I had
made before. But we are coming on a new world now
that is very like Bellota. Can it be that I have only re-
peated myself, and that I did not improve each time?
These hills here I made once before. If you know, then
you must tell me now. It may be that I cannot wait to
chew your brains to find out about it. How will I ever
make a better world if I make them all alike?”
"He has forgotten that he made it round, Brian.”
"Georgina, he did not make anything. It is our own
minds trying to reassure us that he does not know we
are ahead of him and going toward our weapons.
“But how do we both hear the same thing if he isn't
talking to us?”
“I don't know. But I prefer it the way it is. I never
did like easy answers.'
a
Then there came the evening they were within sight
of their original valley, and, if they moved at full speed
through the night, they should reach their campsite very
soon after dawn,
“But the weariness is beginning to creep up through
the narcosis,” said Brian. "Now I'm desiring the effect
that we tried to avoid before."
167
SNUFFLES
“But what has happened?"
"I believe that the narcotic period of the planet is
over. The carnival is coming to an end."
"Do you know something, Brian? We did not have to
go around the world at all. At any time we could have
separated and outunaneuvered him. He could not have
intercepted both of us going toward the weapons pile
if we went different ways. But we could not bear to
part.”
"That is a woman's explanation."
"Well, let's see you find another one. You didn't want
to be parted from me, did you, Brian?"
"No, I didn't."
It was a rough, short night, but it would be the last.
They moved in the agony of a cosmic hangover.
"I've become addicted,” said Brian, "and the fruit
has lost its numbing properties. I don't see how it is
possible for anyone to be so tired.”
“I'd carry you again if I weren't collapsing myself."
"
"Dammit, you couldn't! You're only a girll”
"I am not only a girll Nobody is only an anything.
Our trouble here may have started with your thinking
that Snuffles was only an animal; and he read your
thoughts and was insulted.”
"He did not read my thoughts. He is only an animal.
And I will shoot his fuzzy hide full of holes when we
get to our campsite. Let's keep on with it and not take
any chances of his catching or passing us in the dark.”
“How could Phelan's corollary apply to this planet
and no other when he had never been here then?"
"Because, as I often suspected, Phelan had a touch
of the joker in him and he composed it sardonically.”
"Then he made it for fun. And do you still think that
Bellota was made for fun?”
"The fun has developed a grotesque side to it. I am
afraid I will have to put an end to a part of that fun.
The dark is coming, and there is our campsite, and we
are in the clear. I'll make it before I drop if I have to
168
SNUFFLES
bust a lung. There's an elephant gun with a blaster at-
tachment that I'll take to that fur-coated phony. We're
going to have bear steak for breakfast."
He achieved the campsite. He had reached the wob-
bly state, but he still ran. He was inside the circle and
at the gun stack, when a roar like double thunder froze
his ears and his entrails.
He leaped back, fell, rolled, crawled, snaked his way
out of reach; and the sudden shock of it bewildered him.
And there was Snuffles sitting in the middle of the
supply dump and smoking the pipe of Billy Cross.
And when the words rattled inside Brian's head
again, how could he be sure that it was hallucination and
not the bear talking to him?
“You thought that I had forgotten that Bellota was
round? If you knew how much trouble I had making it
as round as it is, you would know that I could never
forget it.
Georgina came up, but fell to her knees in despair
when she saw that Snuffles was there ahead of them.
"I can't run any more, Brian, and I know that you
can't. I am down and I can never get up again. How
soon will they get here?"
"The Marines?"
“Yes, the ship.”
"Too late to help us. I used to wish they would be
late just once. I am getting that wish, but it isn't as
amusing as I anticipated.”
Snuffles knocked out his pipe then, as a man would;
and laid it carefully on a rock. Then he came out and
killed them: Georgina, the friendly iceberg, and Brian,
who did hate a pat ending.
And Snuffles was still king of Bellota.
The report of the ship read in part:
“No explanation of the fact that no attempt seems
to have been made to use the weapons, though two of
the party were killed nearly a week later than the others.
169
SNUFFLES
All were mangled by the huge pseudo-ursine which
seems to have run amok from eating the local fruit,
seasonally narcotic. Impossible to capture animal with-
out unwarranted delay of takeoff time. Gravitational
incongruity must await fuller classification of data.”
The next world that Snuffles made embodied certain
improvements, and he did correct the gravity error, but
it still contained many elements of the grotesque. Per-
fection is a very long, very hard road.
170
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
>
"WE'VE BEEN on some tall ones,” said Gregory Smirnov
of the Institute, “but we've never stood on the edge of
a bigger one than this, nor viewed one with shakier
expectations. Still, if the calculations of Epiktistes are
correct, this will work.”
“People, it will work,” Epikt said.
This was Epiktistes the Ktistec machine? Who'd
have believed it? The main bulk of Epikt was five floors
below them, but he had run an extension of himself up
to this little penthouse lounge. All it took was a cable,
no more than a yard in diameter, and a functional head
set on the end of it.
And what a head he chosel It was a sea-serpent head,
a dragon head, five feet long and copied from an old
camival float. Epikt had also given șimself human speech
of a sort, a blend of Irish and Jewish and Dutch comedi-
an patter from ancient vaudeville. Epikt was a comic
to his last para-DNA relay when he rested his huge,
boggle-eyed, crested head on the table there and smoked
the biggest stogies ever bom.
But he was serious about this project.
"We have perfect test conditions,” the machine Epikt
said as though calling them to order. “We set out basic
texts, and we take careful note of the world as it is. If
the world changes, then the texts should change here
before our eyes. For our test pilot, we have taken that
portion of our own middle-sized city that can be viewed
from this fine vantage point. If the world in its past-
present continuity is changed by our meddling, then
the face of our city will also change instantly as we
watch it.
171
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
"We have assembled here the finest minds and judg-
ments in the world: eight humans and one Ktistec ma-
chine, myself. Remember that there are nine of us. It
might be important."
The nine finest minds were: Epiktistes, the transcend.
ent machine who put the “K” in Ktistec; Gregory
Smirnov, the large-souled director of the Institute; Valery
Mok, an incandescent lady scientist: her over-shadowed
and over-intelligent husband Charles Cogsworth; the
humorless and inerrant Glasser; Aloysius Shiplap, the
seminal genius; Willy McGilly, a man of unusual parts
(the seeing third finger on his left hand he had picked
up on one of the planets of Kapteyn's Star) and no
false modesty; Audifax O'Hanlon; and Diogenes Ponti-
fex. The latter two men were not members of the In-
stitute (on account of the Minimal Decency Rule), but
when the finest minds in the world are assembled, these
two cannot very well be left out.
"We are going to tamper with one small detail in
past history and note its effect," Gregory said. “This
has never been done before openly. We go back to an
era that has been called “A patch of light in the vast
gloom,' the time of Charlemagne. We consider why
that light went out and did not kindle others. The
world lost four hundred years by that flame expiring
when the tinder was apparently ready for it. We go
back to that false dawn of Europe and consider where
it failed. The year was 778, and the region was Spain.
Charlemagne had entered alliance with Marsilics, the
Arab king of Saragossa, against the Caliph Abd ar-
Rahmen of Cordova. Charlemagne took such towns as
Pamplona, Huesca and Gerona and cleared the way to
Marsilies in Saragossa. The Caliph accepted the situa-
tion. Saragossa should be independent, a city open to
both Moslems and Christians. The northern marches to
the border of France should be permitted their Chris-
tianity, and there would be peace for everybody.
"This Marsilies had long treated Christians as equals
>
172
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
in Saragossa, and now there would be an open road
from Islam into the Frankish Empire. Marsilies gave
Charlemagne thirty-three scholars (Moslem, Jewish and
Christian) and some Spanish mules to seal the bar-
gain. And there could bave been a cross-fertilization of
cultures.
*But the road was closed at Roncevalles where the
rear-guard of Charlemagne was ambushed and de-
stroyed on its way back to France. The ambushers were
more Basque than Moslems, but Charlemagne locked
the door at the Pyrenees and swore that he would not
let even a bird fly over that border thereafter. He kept
the road closed, as did his son and his grandsons. But
when he sealed off the Moslem world, he also sealed
off his own culture.
"In his latter years he tried a revival of civilization
with a ragtag of Irish half-scholars, Greek vagabonds
and Roman copyists who almost remembered an older
Rome. These weren't enough to revive civilization, and
yet Charlemagne came close with them. Had the Islam
door remained open, a real revival of learning might
have taken place then rather than four hundred years
later. We are going to arrange that the ambush at Ron-
cevalles did not happen and that the door between the
two civilizations was not closed. Then we will see what
happens to us.
"Intrusion like a burglar bent,” said Epikt.
"Who's a burglarpo Glasser demanded.
"I am,” Epikt said. "We all are. It's from an old verse.
I forget the author; I have it filed in my main mind
downstairs if you're interested."
"We set out a basic text of Hilarius," Gregory con-
tinued. "We note it carefully, and we must remember
it the way it is. Very soon, that may be the way it was.
I believe that the words will change on the very page of
this book as we watch them. Just as soon as we have
done what we intend to do."
The basic text marked in the open book read:
»
173
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
The traitor, Gano, playing a multiplex game,
with money from the Cordova Caliph hired Basque
Christians (dressed as Saragossan Mozarabs) to am-
bush the rear-guard of the Frankish force. To do
this it was necessary that Gano keep in contact
with the Basqucs and at the same time delay the
rear-guard of the Franks. Gano, however, served
both as guide and scout for the Franks. The am-
bush was effected. Charlemagne lost his Spanish
mules. And he locked the door against the Mos-
lem world.
That was the text by Hilarius.
"When we, as it were, push the button (give the nod
to Epiktistes), this will be changed," Gregory said.
“Epikt, by a complex of devices which he has assembled,
will send an Avatar (partly of mechanical and partly
of ghostly construction), and something will have hap-
pened to the traitor Gano along about sundown one
night on the road to Roncevalles.
“I hope the Avatar isn't expensive, Willy McGilly
said. “When I was a boy we got by with a dart whittled
out of slippery elm wood."
“This is no place for humor,” Glasser protested. “Who
did you, as a boy, ever kill in time, Willy?”
"Lots of them. King Wu of the Manchu, Pope Adrian
VII, President Hardy of our own country, King Marcel
of Auvergne, the philosopher Gabriel Toeplitz. It's a
good thing we got them. They were a bad lot."
“But I never heard of any of them, Willy,” Glasser
insisted.
"Of course not. We killed them when they were kids."
"Enough of your fooling, Willy,” Gregory cut it off.
"Willy's not fooling," the machine Epikt said. “Where
do
you
think I got the idea?"
“Regard the world,” Aloysius said softly. “We see our
own middle-sized town with half a dozen towers of
174
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
pastel-colored brick. We will watch it as it grows or
shrinks. It will change if the world changes.'
"There's two shows in town I haven't seen,” Valery
said. “Don't let them take them away! After all, there
are only three shows in town."
"We regard the Beautiful Arts as set out in the re-
views here which we have also taken as basic texts,
Audifax O'Hanlon said, “You can say what you want to,
but the arts have never been in meaner shape. Painting
is of three schools only, all of them bad. Sculpture is
the heaps-of-rusted-metal school and the obscene tinker-
toy effects. The only popular art, graffiti on mingitorio
walls, has become unimaginative, stylized and ugly.
“The only thinkers to be thought of are the dead
Teilhard de Chardin and the stillbom Sartre, Zielinski,
Aichinger. Oh well, if you're going to laugh there's no
use going on.
“All of us here are experts on something,” Cogsworth
said. “Most of us are experts on everything. We know
the world as it is. Let us do what we are going to do
and then look at the world."
"Push the button, Epikt!” Gregory Smimov ordered.
From his depths, Epiktistes the Ktistec machine sent
out an Avatar, partly of mechanical and partly of ghost-
ly construction. Along about sundown on the road from
Pamplona to Roncevalles, on August 14 of the year 778,
the traitor Gano was taken up from the road and hanged
on a carob tree, the only one in those groves of oak and
beech. And all things thereafter were changed.
"Did it work, Epikt? Is it done?” Louis Lobachevski
demanded. “I can't see a change in anything."
"The Avatar is back and reports his mission accom-
plished,” 'Epikt stated. "I can't see any change in any.
thing either."
"Let's look at the evidence," Gregory said.
The thirteen of them, the ten humans and the Ktistec,
175
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
Chresmoeidec and Proaisthematic machines, turned to
the evidence and with mounting disappointment.
"There is not one word changed in the Hilarius text,“
Gregory grumbled, and indeed the basic text still read:
The king Marsilies of Saragossa, playing a multi-
plex game, took money from the Caliph of Cor-
dova for persuading Charlemagne to abandon the
conquest of Spain (which Charlemagne had never
considered and couldn't have effected), took mon-
ey from Charlemagne in recompense for the cities
of the Northern marches being retumed to Chris-
tian rule (though Marsilies himself had never ruled
them); and took money from everyone as toll on
the new trade passing through his city. Marsilies
gave up nothing but thirty-three scholars, the same
number of mules and a few wagonloads of book-
manuscripts from the old Hellenistic libraries. But
a: road over the mountains was opened between
the two worlds; and also a sector of the Mediter-
ranean coast became open to both. A limited open-
ing was made between the two , worlds, and a
limited reanimation of civilization was affected in
each.
"No, there is not one word of the text changed,"
Gregory grumbled. "History followed its same course.
How did our experiment fail? We tried, by a device
that seems a little cloudy now, to shorten the gestation
period for the new birth. It would not be shortened.”
“The town is in no way changed,” said Aloysius Ship-
lap. "It is still a fine large town with two dozen imposing
towers of varicolored limestone and midland marble. It
is a vital metropolis, and we all love it, but it is now as
it was before."
"There are still two dozen good shows in town that
I haven't seen,” Valery said happily as she examined
2
176
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
3
9
the billings. “I was afraid that something might have
happened to them.”
"There is no change at all in the Beautiful Arts as
reflected in the reviews here that we have taken as
basic texts,” said Audifax O'Hanlon. "You can say what
you want to, but the arts have never been in finer shape.”
"It's a link of sausage," said the machine Chresmoeidy.
'Nor know the road who never ran it thrice, said
the machine Proaisth. “That's from an old verse; I for-
;
get the author; I have it filed in my main mind in
England if you're interested.”
“Oh yes, it's the three-cornered tale that ends where
it begins,” said the machine Epiktistes. “But it is good
sausage, and we should enjoy it; many ages have not
even this much.”
“What are you fellows babbling about?" Audifax asked
without really wanting to know. “The art of painting is
still almost incandescent in its bloom. The schools are
like clustered galaxies, and half the people are doing
some of this work for pleasure. Scandinavian and Maori
sculpture are hard put to maintain their dominance in
the field where almost everything is extraordinary. The
impassioncd-comic has released music from most of its
bonds. Since speculative mathematics and psychology
have joined the popular performing arts, there is con-
siderably more sheer fun in life.
"There's a piece here on Pete Teilhard putting him
into context as a talented science-fiction writer with a
talent for outre burlesque. The Brainworld Motif was
overworked when he tackled it, but what a shaggy
comic extravaganza he did make of it! And there's Mul-
doom, Zielinski, Popper, Gander, Aichinger, Whitecrow,
Hornwhanger-we owe so much to the juice of the
cultists! In the main line there are whole congeries and
continents of great novels and novelists.
“An ever popular art, graffiti on mingitorio walls,
maintains its excellence. Travel Unlimited offers a nine-
ty-nine day art tour of the world keyed to the viewing
177
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
a
of the exquisite and hilarious miniatures on the walls of
its own rest rooms. Ah, what a copious world we live
in!”
"It's more grass than we can graze,” said Willy Mc-
Gilly. “The very bulk of achievement is stupefying. Ah,
I wonder if there is subtle revenge in my choice of words.
The experiment, of course, was a failure, and I'm glad.
I like a full world.”
“We will not call the experiment a failure since we
have covered only a third of it,” said Gregory. "Tomor-
row we will make our second attempt on the past. And,
if there is a present left to us after that, we will make
a third attempt the following day.”
"Shove it, good people, shove it,” the machine Epik-
tistes said. “We will meet here again tomorrow. Now
you to your pleasures, and we to ours.
The people talked that evening away from the ma-
chines where they could make foolish conjectures with-
out being laughed at.
“Let's pull a random card out of the pack and go with
it,” said Louis Lobachevski. “Let's take a purely intel-
lectual crux of a little later date and see if the changing
of it will change the world."
"I suggest Ockham,” said Johnny Konduly.
“Why?” Valery demanded. “He was the last and least
of the medieval schoolmen. How could anything he did
or did not do affect anything?”
"Oh no, he held the razor to the jugular," Gregory
said. "He'd have severed the vein if the razor hadn't
been snatched from his hand. There is something amiss
here, though. It is as though I remembered when things
were not so stark with Ockham, as though, in some
variant, Ockham's Terminalism did not mean what we
know that it did mean.'
"Sure, let's cut the jugular," said Willy. “Let's find
out the logical termination of Terminalism and see just
how deep Ockham's razor can cut.”
178
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
"We'll do it,” said Gregocy. “Our world has become
something of a fat slob; it cloys; it has bothered me all
evening. We will find whether purely intellectual at.
titudes are of actual -effect. We'll leave the details to
Epikt, but I believe the tuning point was in the year
1323 when John Lutterell came from Oxford to Avignon
where the Holy See was then situated. He brought with
him fifty-six propositions taken from Ockham's Commen-
tary on the Sentences, and he proposed their condemn-
nation. They were not condemned outright, but Ock-
ham was whipped soundly in that first assault, and he
never recovered. Lutterell proved that Ockham's nihil-
ism was a bunch of nothing. And the Ockham thing did
die away, echoing dimly through the little German courts
where Ockham traveled peddling his wares, but he no
longer peddled them in the main markets. Yet his view-
point could have sunk the world, if indeed, intellectual
attitudes are of actual effect."
"We wouldn't have liked Lutterell,” said Aloysius. “He
was humorless and he had no fire in him, and he was
always right. And we would have liked Ockham. He was
charming, and he was wrong, and perhaps we will de-
stroy the world yet. There's a chance that we will get
our reaction if we allow Ockhain free hand. China was
frozen for thousands of years by an intellectual attitude,
one not nearly so unsettling as Ockham's. India is hypno-
tized into a queer stasis which calls itself revolution
and which does not move-hypnotized by an intellectual
attitude. But there was never such an attitude as Ock-
ham's."
So they decided that the former chancellor of Ox-
ford, John Lutterell, who was always a sick man, should
suffer one more sickness on the road to Avignon in
France, and that he should not anive there to lance
the Ockham thing before it infected the world.
“Let's get on with it, good people,” Epikt rumbled
the next day. “Me, I'm to stop a man getting from Ox-
179
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
ford to Avignon in the year 1323. Well, come, come,
take your places, and let's get the thing started.” And
Epiktistes' great sea-serpent head glowed every color
as he puffed on a seven-branched pooka-dooka and
filled the room with wonderful smoke.
"Everybody ready to have his throat cut?" Gregory
asked cheerfully.
*Cut them,” said Diogenes Pontifex, “but I haven't
much hope for it. If our yesterday's essay had no effect,
I cannot see how one English schoolman chasing an-
other to challenge him in an Italian court in France, in
bad Latin, nearly seven hundred years ago, on fifty-
six points of upscientific abstract reasoning, can have
effect."
"We have perfect test conditions here,” said the ma-
chine Epikt. “We set out a basic text from Cobblestone's
History of Philosophy. If our test is effective, then the
text will change before our eyes. So will every other
text, and the world.
“We have assembled here the finest minds and judg-
ments in the world," the machine Epiktistes said, “ten
humans and three machines. Remember that there are
thirteen of us. It might be important.
“Regard the world,” said Aloysius Shiplap. "I said
that yesterday, but it is required that I say it again.
We have the world in our eyes and in our memories. If
it changes in any way, we will know it.”
"Push the button, Epikt,” said Gregory Smimov.
From his depths, Epiktistes the Ktistec machine sent
out an Avatar, partly of mechanical and partly of ghost-
ly construction. And along about sundown on the road
from Mende to Avignon in the old Languedoc district
of France, in the year 1323, John Lutterell was stricken
with one more sickness. He was taken to a little inn in
the mountain country, and perhaps he died there. He
did not, at any rate, arrive at Avignon.
22
"Did it work, Epikt?" Is it done?” Aloysius asked.
180
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
n
"Let's look at the evidence,” said Gregory.
The four of them, the three humans and the ghost
Epikt, who was a kachenko mask with a speaking tube,
turned to the evidence with mounting disappointment.
"There is still the stick and the five notches in it,"
said Gregory. “It was our test stick. Nothing in the
world is changed."
"The arts remain as they were,” said Aloysius. "Our
picture here on the stone on which we have worked for
so many seasons is the same as it was. We have painted
the bears black, the buffalos red and the people blue.
When we find a way to make another color, we can
represent birds also. I had hoped that our experiment
might give us that other color. I had even dreamed
that birds might appear in the picture on the rock be-
fore our very eyes.
"There's still rump of skunk to eat and nothing else,”
said Valery. “I had hoped that our experiment would
have changed it to haunch of deer.”
"All is not lost,” said Aloysius. “We still have the
hickory nuts. That was my last prayer before we began
our experiment. 'Don't let them take the hickory nuts
away,'I prayed."
They sat around the conference table that was a large
flat natural rock, and cracked hickory nuts with stone
fist-hammers. They were nude in the crude, and the
world was as it had always been. They had hoped by
magic to change it.
“Epikt has failed us,” said Gregory. “We made his
frame out of the best sticks, and we plaited his face out
of the finest weeds and grasses. We chanted him full of
magic and placed all our special treasures in his cheek
pouches. So, what can the magic mask do for us now?"
“Ask it, ask it,” said Valery. They were the four finest
minds in the world-the three humans, Gregory, Aloy-
sius and Valery (the only humans in the world unless
you count those in the other valleys), and the ghost
Epikt, a kachenko mask with a speaking tube.
181
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
"What do we do now, Epikt?" Gregory asked. Then
he went around behind Epikt to the speaking tube.
"I remember a woman with a sausage stuck to her
nose,” said Epikt in the voice of Gregory. “Is that any
help?”
“It may be some help," Gregory said after he had
"
once more taken his place at the flat-rock conference
table. “It is from an old (what's old about it? I made
it up myself this morning) folk tale about the three
wishes.
"Let Epikt tell it,” said Valery. “He does it so much
better than you do.” Valery went behind Epikt to the
speaking tube and blew smoke through it from the huge
loose black-leaf uncured stogie that she was smoking.
"The wife wastes one wish for a sausage," said Epikt
in the voice of Valery. “A sausage is a piece of deer-
meat tied in a piece of a deer's stomach. The husband
is angry that the wife has wasted a wish, since she could
have wished for a whole deer and had many sausages.
He gets so angry that he wishes the sausage might stick
to her nose forever. It does, and the woman wails, and
the man realized that he had used up the second wish.
I forget the rest."
"You can't forget it, Epikt!” Aloysius cried in alarm.
"The future of the world may depend on your remem-
bering. Here, let me reason with that damned magic
maskl” And Aloysius went behind Epikt to the speaking
tube.
“Oh yes, now I remember," Epikt said in the voice of
Aloysius. “The man used the third wish to get the
sausage off his wife's nose. So things were the way they
had been before."
"But we don't want it the way it was before!" Valery
howled. "That's the way it is now, rump of skunk to
eat, and me with nothing to wear but my ape cape. We
want it better. We want deer skins and antelope skins.
"Take me as a mystic or don't take me at all,” Epikt
signed off.
182
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
n
(
"Even though the world has always been so, yet we
have intimations of other things," Gregory said. “What
folk hero was it who made the dart? And of what did
he make it?”
“Willy McGilly was the folk hero,” said Epikt in the
voice of Valery, who had barely got to the speaking
tube in time, “and he made it out of slippery elm
wood.”
"Could we make a dart like the folk hero Willy made?"
Aloysius asked.
"We gotta,” said Epikt.
"Could we make a slinger and whip it out of our own
context and into-
"Could we kill an Avatar with it before he killed
somebody else?” Gregory asked excitedly.
"We sure will try,” said the ghost Epikt, who was
nothing but a kachenko mask with a speaking tube. “I
never did like those Avatars.
You think Epikt was nothing but a kachenko mask
with a speaking tube! There was a lot more to him than
that. He had red gamet rocks inside him and real sea
salt. He had powder made from beaver eyes. He had
rattlesnake rattles and armadillo shields. He was the first
Ktistec machine.
“Give me the word, Epikt,” Aloysius cricd a few mo-
ments later as he fitted the dart to the slinger.
“Fling it! Get that Avatar fink!” Epikt howled.
Along about sundown in an unnumbered year, on the
Road from Nowhere to Eom, an Avatar fell dead with
a slippery-elin dart in his heart.
“Did it work, Epikt? Is it done?” Charles Cogsworth
asked in excitement. "It must have. I'm here. I wasn't in
the last one.”
“Let's look at the evidence,” Gregory suggested calm-
ly.
“Damn the evidence!" Willy McGilly cussed. “Remem-
ber where you hcard it first."
183
THUS WE FRUSTRATE CHARLEMAGNE
"Is it started yet?" Glasser asked.
"Is it finished?" Audifax O'Hanlon questioned.
"Push the button, Epikt!” Diogenes barked. “I think
I missed part of it. Let's try again.
"Oh, no, no!” Valery forbade. “Not again. That way is
rump of skunk and madness.”
184
NAME OF THE SNAKE
WHEN Pio Quindecimo-Confiteantur Domino Misercor-
dia ejus-had proclaimed it, it was received (even by
the faithful) with a measure of ennui. Contingent, spec-
ulative, rhetorical-it was not thought of as touching on
practicality. Pio was not one of the outstanding Popes
of the century.
The encyclical was titled modestly “Euntes Ergo Do-
cete Omnes”: “Going therefore Teach Ye All.” Its sub-
stance was that this was a literal command of the Lord,
and that the time had come to implement that com-
mand in its extreme meaning; that when the Lord had
said “Go into all lands,” He had not meant to go into
all lands of one narrow earth only; that when the Lord
had said “Teach Ye All,” it was not meant to teach all
men only ... within the narrow framework in which we
have considered the term “men.
Should the command be taken literally, its implemen-
tation would cause far-reaching activity. It was in the
implementation of the command that Padreco Barnaby
was now on that remote planet, Analos.
Could one call the Analoi humans? Had their skeletal
remains been discovered on old Earth, they would un-
hesitatingly have been classed as human. The oddly
forned ears,not really as large as they seemed-some-
what Gothic in their steepled upsweep, their slight
caudal appendage, their remarkable facial mobility and
chameleon-like complexions, these could not have been
read from their bone remains. But how are we to say
that their ears were more grotesque than our own?
When did you last look at your own ears objectively?
Are they not odd things to be sticking on the sides of
a person's head?
185
NAME OF THE SNAKE
*They are gargoyles," said an early visitor from Earth.
Of course they were. The gargoyles had been copied
by a still earlier visitor to Analos from Earth. But they
were a lively and interesting bunch of gargoyles: me-
chanically civilized, ethically weird, artistically exciting.
They were polished and polyglot, and in many ways
more human than the humans.
On Analos, the Padreco was at first a guest of Land-
master, a leading citizen. Here the priest, speaking of his
mission, first came up against the Wall.
"I can see what this might lead to, little priest," Land-
master told him when they discussed the situation. "It
might even become bothersome to us-if we ever let
anything bother us—if we had not passed beyond the
stage where annoyance was possible. So long as you
confined your activity to resident Earthlings and humans
or that recension, there was no problem. Fortunately we
do not fall within those categories. That being so, I do
not see how your present aspirations can have any point
of contact with us.
"You Analoi are sentient creatures of great natural in-
telligence, Landmaster. As such it is even possible that
you have souls."
“We have souls that are fully realized. What could
humans give to us who transcend humanity?
"The Truth, the Way, the Life, the Baptism.”
"We have the first three greatly beyond yourselves.
The last-the crabbed rite of a dying sectwhat could
that give us?"
"Forgiveness of your sins."
"But we haven't any sins. That's the whole point
about us. We've long since passed beyond that. You hu.
mans are still awkward and guilt-ridden. You are of a
species which as yet has no adult form. Vicariously we
may be the adult form of yourselves. The idea of sin
is an aspect of your early awkwardness.”
"Everybody has sins, Landmaster.
"Only according to your own childish thesis, little
186
NAME OF THE SNAKE
a
priest. And consequent to that, you would reason that
everybody must be saved-and by yourselves, a race of
crop-eared, flat-faced children.
"But consider how meaningless it becomes in rela-
tion to ourselves, the Analoi. How could we sin? What
would we have to sin about? Our procreation no longer
follows the grotesque patter of your own, and ours is
without passion. You can see that ninety percent of your
sin is already gone.
“What else is left to us? What other opportunity-if
that is the word for it-have we for sinning? We have
no poverty, no greed, no envy. Our metabolism is so
regulated that neither sloth nor hysterical activity is pos-
sible. We have long ago attained a balance in all things;
and 'sin' is only a forn of unbalance.
“I have forgotten, little priest. What are the ‘sins' of
the childish races?"
“Pride, covetousness, lust, anger, gluttony, envy, sloth,”
said Padreco Bamaby. "These are the capital sins and
the sources of sin. All others derive from them.”
"Spoken like a valiant little mime. And nothing is
derived but from a source. But you can see how com-
pletely we lack these seven stumbling blocks of children.
Pride is only a misunderstanding of the nature of
achievement; covetousness disappears when all that
could be coveted has been acquired; lust is an adjunct
to an arrangement that no longer has a counterpart in
ourselves. Anger, gluttony, envy, sloth are only malfunc-
tions. All malfunctions are subject to adjustment and
correction, and we have corrected them.”
Padreco Barnaby was defeated for the while, and he
let his mind wander. He gazed over the countryside of
Analos.
An early explorer has given his impression of that
world:
"It was as though I were walking under water," he
wrote. “This was not from any obstruction or resistance,
for the atmosphere is lighter than Earth's. It was from a
>
187
NAME OF THE SNAKE
sort of shimmering and wavering of the air itself and
from the ‘air shadows,' not clouds, that pass along like
the running shadows of overhead waves. This, coupled
with the flora (very like the underwater plants of Earth,
though free-standing) gave me the feeling that I was
walking on the bottom of the ocean."
To the Padreco it seemed as though he had been
talking under water and that he had not been heard.
"What is the meaning of that giant kettle in the center
of your main plaza, Landmaster?" he finally asked. “It
seems quite old.”
"It is a relic of our old race, and we keep it. We have
a certain reverence for the past-even the obsoleted
past. In minds as great as ours there is room even for
relics."
"Then it has no present use?"
"No. But under a special condition we could revert
to an ancient use of it. That need not concern you now."
A kettle, a giant kettle! You have no idea how gro
tesquely pot-bellied the thing was!
But the Padreco retumed impotently to his main
theme.
"There has to be sin, Landmaster! How else can there
be salvation?”
"We have salvation, little priest. You haven't. How
could you bring it to us?”
So Padreco Barnaby left Landmaster and went out
to see if he could not discover sin somewhere on Analos.
He asked a small boy about it.
"Sonny, do you know what sin is? Have you ever
run across the thing?"
"Sir and stranger, sin is an archaic word for an out-
moded thing. It is an appurtenance to an unclarified
state of mind that still obtains on the more benighted
worlds. The word and the concept behind it will pass
into oblivion as soon as true light can be brought into
those dark places."
а
188
NAME OF THE SNAKE
Damnation!-a meaningless word on Analos: even the
children of the gargoyles were too polite to be human.
"You little monster, do all the children on Analos talk
like that?”
“All who are not deviationists would of necessity talk
as I do. And 'monster,' as you call me with disap-
probation, means a 'show-piece,' that which is dis-
played, a wonder. The late meaning of the word in the
sense of a grotesque animal is an accretion. I gladly
accept the name of monster in its true meaning. We
are the Monsters of the Universe.'
Damme, I believe that you are, the Padreco said to
himself. Polygot little prig! He couldn't even cope with
the children of the things.
"Sonny, do you ever have any fun?" he finally asked.
"Fun is another archaic word, but I am not sound on
its meaning,” said the boy. "Is it not related to the ob-
solete concept of sin?”
"Not directly, boy. Fun is the third side of a two-
sided coin. It slips in. Or it used to."
"Sir and stranger, it is possible that you should take
a course in corrective semantics."
"I may be taking one now. But what of the children
"I
who are deviationists? Where are they? And what are
they like?"
“I don't know. If they don't pass their probationary
period, we don't see them any more. I believe they are
sent to another place.”
"I have to find a little bit of sin somewhere,” the
Padreco mumbled to himself. “An honest man should
be able to find it anywhere if he really inquires. On
Earth the saying was that a taxi-driver would always
know whcre to find it."
The Padreco hailed a taxi. A taxi is a circle. That is
to say that one clambers over and sits in the single
circular seat that faces inward. The Analoi are gre-
garious and like to gaze on the faces of their fellows.
Only the shame-capable humans would wish to sit in
>
189
NAME OF THE SNAKE
unfacing rows. The driver sits above in an open turret,
and dangles his head down to talk.
"Where would you go, stranger?” the driver asked
the Padreco. There was one other passenger, a thought-
ful man of early middle age.
"I'm looking for sin," the Padreco told the driver. "It's
a tradition that taxi-drivers always know where to find
it.”
“Riddles is it, stranger? Let me deliver my other
customer while I puzzle this one out. It's his last ride and
that makes it important.”
“How is it your last ride?” Padreco Barnaby asked
the thoughtful man. Conversation was unavoidable in
such a taxi. The facing was too direct to get out of it.
"Oh, my time has come,” said the man, “a little earlier
than with most. I've drunk the cup empty, so there's
nothing left. It was a nice life-welī
, I suppose it was.
Rather expected more out of it, but I see now that I
shouldn't have. An adult will know when it's over. And
they do make a clean end of it for you.
"Deus meus, is that the way it ends on Analos?”
?
"How else? Natural death has been pushed back so
far that nobody could contemplate waiting for it. Should
we drag out our lives and become abridged repetitious
creatures like those of the lesser races? One goes quiet-
ly when he realizes that he has covered it all.”
“But that is despair!"
“A little boy's word for a little boy's thing. Termina-
tion with dignity-that's the only way. Goodbye to you
both. And to all."
The thoughtful man got out and entered the Termina-
tors.
“Now what was the name of that thing you wanted
to be taken to, stranger?" the taxi-driver asked the Pa-
dreco.
“Never mind. I may have found it already. I'll walk
back.”
There was something here that needed a name.
a
2)
190
NAME OF THE SNAKE
He walked till he came to the buildings of the city
again, and the buildings distorted as he neared them.
The edifices of Analos seem bulbous at near view, and
indeed they are built slightly so. Yet when seen at a
distance, due to a vagary of atmosphere called Tower-
ing by Earth meteorologists, they appear normal and
straight. The few buildings built to Earth specifications
seem pinched-in when viewed from afar, almost col-
lapsing on themselves. But to the Padreco, the pot-
bellied buildings of Analos made him feel a complete
alien. He was lost in this world, and he cried out:
"Oh, for the old familiar sins that one can get hold
of and denouncel In my book, Termination is not the
only way, and Dignity has another meaning. Where are
the people who sin like people? Is there nowhere a
healthy case of d.t.s or a hoppy in need of reform? Is
there no burglar I can call my brother? No golden-
hearted chippy who needs only be shown the right
way? Is there no thief or usurer or politician to strike
a note of reality? Hypocrites, wife-beaters, seducers,
demagogues, sleazy old perverters, where can I find
you? Answer mel I need
you
nowl”
"Sir, sir, you are crying out in the street,” a young
Analoi lady told him. “Are you ill? What are you
call-
ing out for?"
"Sin. A little sin, please, for the love of Christ. If
there is no sin in my cellar, then the foundation of my
house is not what I supposed.”
"Hardly anyone uses sin any more, sir. What a peculiar
thing to be crying out in the street for! But I believe
there is one shop that still handles it. Here. I will write
you the address.
Padreco Bamaby took the address and ran to the shop.
But it was not what he sought. Sin was an old name of
a scent, but the name had been changed as no longer
conveying a meaning.
There were very many of these scent shops. Too
many. And the scent of the scent shops was not the
191
NAME OF THE SNAKE
-
odor of sanctity. Was it possible that a new sensuality
had taken the place of the old?
And the other shops-block after block of them,
what were they for? What were the uses of the strange
apparatus displayed in them? And why should they
give that sticky feeling of menace?
The Padreco spent a long day wandering through
the capital city of Analos. The pavements were green
and artfully shadow-painted so as to resemble turf. The
effect, however, was not that of placid nature; it was
of a primordial wildness able to break through the thin
shell at any time. And what was the new weirdness
that came over him when he walked through the parks?
The earlier explorer had been mistaken: the plants of
Analos did not resemble the undersea plants of Earth;
they resembled the undersea animals. They leered like
devilfish and grinned like sharks.
It was here everywhere. But it had changed its name.
It was with shameful triumph that Padreco Barnaby
first uncovered the sweeping outlines of the thing. It
was with growing horror that he amassed the details.
When he had enough of it, he went back to Landmaster,
who was now with several others of his kind.
“Repent! Repentl" the Padreco called to them. "The
ax is already laid to the roots. The tree that bears evil
fruit will be cut down and cast into the fire!"
"Of what should we repent, little priest?” Landmaster
asked.
"Of your sins! At oncel Before it is too latel”
"I have explained to you that we have no sins, little
priest; and that we could not have them according to
our developing nature. Your repetition would annoy us
if we ever let anything annoy us.
Landmaster made a sign to one of his fellows, who
left them at once.
"What were the rather humorous names you gave
them this morning?” Landmaster asked, turning again
to the priest.
n
192
NAME OF THE SNAKE
You remember the names I gave. Now I give others.
Too effete for the ancient sins themselves, you have
the deadly shadows of them: presumption, establish-
ment, ruthlessness, selfishness, satiety, monopoly, de-
spair."
“An interesting argument. We have a Department
of Interesting Arguments. You should go there and have
it recorded."
"I will record it here. You practice infanticide, juveni-
cide, senectucide, suicide.
“Yes, the Gentle Terminators."
“You murder your own children who do not measure
up to your atrocious norm.
“Judicious Selection.”
"You have invented new lusts and pervorsions."
"Refined Amusements.
"There are the evil who are evil openly. There are
the evil who hide their evil and deny that they are
venomous. There are the ultimate in evil who keep the
venom and change the Name of the Snake.”
"I'm happy that we're the ultimate," said Landmaster,
"We would be affronted by a lesser classification.”
Padreco Barnaby raised his head.
"I smell wood buming," he said suddenly. "You no
longer use wood for fuel here.”
“In one case only," said Landmaster. “An ancient and
seldom employed ritual of ours.”
"Which?"
"You do not understand little priest? Ten million
Earth cartoons of the thing and still you do not under-
stand them or comprehend their origin. What is the
unvarying fate of the Missioner cast up on the Savage
Shore?"
"You are not supposed to be savage.”
"We revert, little priest. In this one case we revert.
It is our ancient answer to the obstreperous missioner
who persists in asking us the irksome question. We can-
not allow ourselves to be irked."
193
NAME OF THE SNAKE
Padreco Bamaby conldn't believe it. Even after they
put him in the monstrous kettle he couldn't believe it.
They were setting the long tables for the feast-and
surely it was all a mistakel
"Landmaster! You people-you creatures-can't be
serious!”
"Why no, little priest This is a comical affair. Wby
should we be serious? Do you not think it comical that
the missioner should be boiled in a potpu
"No! No! It's ghastly!"
This had to be a dream-an underwater nightmare.
"Why did you make ten million comical cartoons of
the thing if you didn't find it comicph Landmaster asked
with black pleasure.
"I didn't make theml Yes, I did-two of them-when
I was a seminarian, and for our own little publication.
Landmaster. The water is bellish hot!"
"Are we magicians that we can boil a man in cold
waterpo
"Not-not shoes and all?" the Padreco gasped. That
seemed to be the ultimate outrage.
"Shoes and all, little priest We like the flavor. What
was your own favorite caption for the race-memory
cartoons, Padrecopo
"You can't do this to mell"
Yes, that was a good one. But it was the subscript,
as I remember it, and the caption was Famous Last
Words.' However, my own favorite, while it concerns
anthropophagi, does not concem a missioner. It was
the cannibal chief who said, My wife makes a fine soup.
I'll miss her.' What was your favorite of the kettle jokes,
Shareshuffler?
Shareshuffler had a great two-tined fork, and he stuck
it into Padreco Barnaby to see if he was done yet. The
Padreco was far from done, and the clamor he set up
made it impossible to hear Shareshuffler's own favorite
of the folk jokes. This is a loss, for it was one of the best
of them all.
a
194
NAME OF THE SNAKE
How loud the little priest was against the Analoi car-
rying out their ancient custom)
“A lobster doesn't make such a noise when he's boiled,"
chided Landmaster. “An oyster doesn't, and a Xtlea
nutlico doesn't. Why should a man make such a noise? It
would be irritating to us if we ever let anything irritate
US,
But they didn't-nothing at all. They were too de-
veloped a race to allow themselves to be irritated.
When the Padreco was finally done, they had him
out of the kettle and polished him off. They dealt in
the prescribed manner with the ancient menace, and
they had a superb feast out of it too.
The Analoi weren't quite what they seemed. They
had hid from themselves, and dealt in shadows instead
of things. They had even changed the name of their
nature ... but they hadn't changed their nature.
But on occasion they could still revert They could
stage an old-time, red-blooded, slumgullion-slurping,
bone-gnawing dangeroo of a feast. Men and monsters,
they did have one now!
Citizens, that Padreco had good stuff in him!
195
NARROW VALLEY
IN THE YEAR 1893, land allotinents in severalty were
made to the remaining eight hundred and twenty-one
Pawnee Indians. Each would receive one hundred and
sixty acres of land and no more, and thereafter the
Pawnees would be expected to pay taxes on their land,
the same as the White-Eyes did.
"Kitkehahkel” Clarence Big-Saddle cussed. “You can't
kick a dog around proper on a hundred and sixty acres.
And I sure am not hear before about this pay taxes
on land.”
Clarence Big-Saddle selected a nice green valley for
his allotinent. It was one of the half dozen plots he
had always regarded as his own. He sodded around
the summer lodge that he had there and made it an
all-season home. But he sure didn't intend to pay taxes
on it.
So he burned leaves and bark and made a speech:
"That my valley be always wide and flourish and
green and such stuff as that!” he orated in Pawnee
chant style. “But that it be narrow if an intruder come.
He didn't have any balsam bark to burn. He threw
on a little cedar bark instead. He didn't have
any
elder
leaves. He used a handful of jack-oak leaves. And he
forgot the word. How you going to work it if you for-
get the word?
"Peta hauerat!" he howled out with the confidence he
hoped would fool the fates.
"That's the same long of a word,” he said in a low
aside to himself. But he was doubtful. "What am I, a
White Man, a burr-tailed jack, a new kind of nut to
think it will work?” he asked. “I have to laugh at me.
Oh well, we see.
>
196
NARROW VALLEY
He threw the rest of the bark and the leaves on the
fire, and he hollered the wrong word out again.
And he was answered by a dazzling sheet of summer
lightning.
"Skidi)” Clarence Big-Saddle swore. “It worked. I
didn't think it would."
Clarence Big-Saddle lived on his land for many years,
and he paid no taxes. Intruders were unable to come
down to his place. The land was sold for taxes three
times, but nobody ever came down to claim it. Finally,
it was carried as open land on the books. Homesteaders
filed on it several times, but none of them fulfilled the
qualification of living on the land.
Half a century went by. Clarence Big-Saddle called
his son.
"I've had it, boy,” he said. "I think I'll just go in the
house and die."
"Okay, Dad," the son Clarence Little-Saddle said.
"I'm going in to town to shoot a few games of pool
with the boys. I'll bury you when I get back this evening.
So the son Clarence Little-Saddle inherited. He also
lived on the land for many years without paying taxes.
There was a disturbance in the courthouse one day.
The place seemed to be invaded in force, but actually
there were but one man, one woman, and five children.
"I'm Robert Rampart," said the man, "and we want the
Land Office."
"I'm Robert Rampart Junior," said a nine-year-old
gangler, and we want it pretty blamed quick.”
"I don't think we have anything like that,” the girl
at the desk said. “Isn't that something they had a long
time ago?"
"Ignorance is no excuse for inefficiency, my dear,"
said Mary Mabel Rampart, an eight-year-old who could
easily pass for eight and a half. “After I make my re-
port, I wonder who will be sitting at your desk tomor-
n
row."
197
NARROW VALLEY
You people are either in the wrong state or
the
wroug century," the girl said.
"The Homestead Act still obtains," Robert Rampart
insisted. “There is one tract of land carried as open in
this county. I want to file on it."
Cecilia Rampart answered the knowing wink of a
beefy man at the distant desk. "Hi" she breathed as she
slinked over. "I'm Cecilia Rampart, but my stage name
is Cecilia San Juan. Do you think that seven is too young
to play ingenue rolespa
"Not for you," the man said. “Tell your folks to come
"
over here."
"Do you know where the Land Office ispa Cecilia
asked.
"Sure. It's the fourth left-hand drawer of my desk.
The smallest office we got in the whole courthouse. We
don't use it much any more.
.
The Ramparts gathered around. The beefy man
started to make out the papers.
"This is the land description," Robert Rampart began.
Why, you've got it down already. How did you know?"
"I've been around here a long time," the man an-
swered.
They did the paper work, and Robert Rampart filed
on the land.
"You won't be able to come onto the land itself,
though," the man said
"Why won't IP” Rampart demanded. “Isn't the land
description accurate?"
"Oh, I suppose so. But nobody's ever been able to
get to the land. It's become a sort of joke."
"Well, I intend to get to the bottom of that joke,”
Rampart insisted. “I will occupy the land, or I will find
out why not."
"I'm not sure about that,” the beefy man said. “The
last man to file on the land, about a dozen years ago,
wasn't able to occupy the land. And he wasn't able to
say why he couldn't. It's kind of interesting, the look
198
COURTH MANSIONS
persons (or, in extreme cases, double that), but they
do not point to the plain fact that special effort and
ingenuity might be required to bring the world to
such developments; and to the further plain fact that
special effort and ingenuity are no longer possible to
mankind as presently constituted.
“That these things were possible to mankind in the
past we acknowledge, but we have refined them out
of ourselves in our advancement. The world we have
built and which we hold in our hands is a world of
proper size and adjustment and enjoyment. The 'trou-
bling of giant effort has happily been left behind
us. We are not dinosaurs to aspire to great size, nor
yet swarming insects to aspire to great numbers. We
are people. We have now had fifteen consecutive years
of decrease in world population and we have or-
dained decreases for another fifty years. We will not
be crowded or pushed, we will not be stirred to unusual
effort for anything. We are the lords and we require
lordly room. Ah, and here is a thing that only we of
the elite know. We did not bring this about at all, though
we take the credit for it. We need credit standing to
our account. Perhaps we triggered it a little early,
but that also I doubt. There are these biological swings
and it swung. What we do now is set up safeguards
so that it may never swing back again in the other di-
rection,
"Nor have I any patience with those who speak of
the 'loss of nerve' of our world. 'Nerve,' in this sense,
is a property of animals or of animals in the process
of becoming men. It is not a property of finalized
man. Yes, we have lost our nerve, at least I hope we
have. Let it be buried with other prehistoric monsters.
Let it never trouble our world again. Does that answer
your question, young sir? Ah-he is a little confused, he
is a little resentful. These were not quite the questions
he meant to ask, and yet they are the questions that
199
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
came out of his mouth. There are questions that we of
the elite cannot allow to be asked, and they will not
be asked. The young have not the words for these ques-
tions yet. They have no words except the catchwords
we give them. And when they come to an age to
have the words they will have forgotten the questions.
(“Let me go at the old gaffer, Foley,” said one named
Cro]l. "Who are the monsters who still trouble the
world, now that you fine-haired dudes have it all fixed
up so fine?")
“Here is a question,” said Michael Fountain. “It's as
though it came from a live and not an imaginary lis-
tener. This is odd, that it is a real questioner but not
a real question. The thing to grasp about the monsters
of my questioner is that they are not exterior but in-
terior. They neither guard nor assault the world for the
reason that they are not there. They are but uncon-
scious remnants in some persons. It was once believed
that we had need of these symbols. If we had once,
we have not now. These were the four menaces that
stood on the four forbidden roads that pre-man has
already traversed. The Toad symbol is the loathsome
origin, and death, and rebirth. And the alternate and
sublimate of the Toad symbol is the Ox symbol (which
is also the Worricow), possibly because both the toad
and the ox have such bare staring faces (and possibly
there is a trope with the horned toad). The jewel in
the head of the Toad is the life-spark itself, which was
first generated in cold flesh.
“The Python symbol is illicit wisdom; the python is
a man-image as seen by pre-man (hairless, unnaturally
mobile-appearing man was somewhat snake-like to the
more hairy and less supple and less articulated pre-
men, even when pre-men and man were combined in
one person). Alternates to the Python symbol are the
Octopus and the Hydra symbols (free-walking and
tool- or weapon-handling man seemed, to pre-man,
200
FOURTH MANSIONS
possessed of extra members or arms); and also, unac-
countably, the Lion symbol is alternate to the Python.
"The Falcon symbol is the air-hunter, the bird-mur-
derer, the taller authority, the tyranny, the force-rule
of the first mounted men (man-on-horseback was, to
some extent, man given the power of flight, Falcon-
Man.)
“The Badger symbol is the cave or burrow symbol,
the stubborn holing into the earth, the rear-guard de-
fense of all rear-guard things. The alternates to the
Badger symbol are the Bear symbol, the Man-in-the-
Animal-Mask symbol, and finally the Man symbol. There
seemed no confusion, to primitives, between the Man
symbol and man himself.
"These four symbols are not proper symbols for mod-
ern men. They were symbols used by animals in the
process of becoming men. Some, however, believe that
these are valid symbols in our unconscious, and that
by them our unconscious is trying to tell us something:
as though we had cut some needed element out of our-
selves and these symbols were warning us to bring it
back in. I do not accept this view. Nor do I accept the
easy explanations: tentacled liberalism (the python-hy-
dra) opposing snap-jawed conservatism (the stubborn
badger); and each abetted by its preternatural under-
form, Communism, from underground (the toad with
the tantalizing jewel in its head) opposed by resur-
gent Fascism (the hunter-falcon, full-feathered, prey-
ing). There is polarity in the world, but it isn't so
storied and allegorical as that. No, my young question-
er, there can be no answer to no question. There are
no exterior monsters who trouble the world either in
attacking it or in defending it. They are not real."
(“Old Gaffer, we are real,” Croll said, giving the hiss-
ing growl of a very badger. "We are the abiding men,
we are the abiding monsters, and we are real.”)
Then Fred Foley knew that Croll was the patrick, a
201
FOURTH MANSIONS
more-than-a-patrick, a Croll: that he had been com-
mitted by his title, not his name. He knew, as a matter
of fact, that Croll was Patrick of Baltimore and Wash-
ington, that he was Over-Patrick or Croll of the entire
continent. He also understood that Croll was a little
bit simple and inept, for sign that the office was more
important than the man.
>
But a new force, a new man, entered the projected
play now, one who could enter anywhere that Fred
Foley could enter. The other inmates who had gath-
ered around the communication felt this new person
strongly.
(“Here's another of the monsters,” Croll bear-growled.
“Don't tell me he's not real.” The new-appearing mon-
ster was Miguel Fuentes and he was real.)
Michael Fountain, dictating privately in his own rooms
thirteen hundred miles away, had become highly nerv-
ous but he still composed brave words for his lecture:
“We come to apex, and it is no way elevated or out-
standing; we come to perfection, and to perfect simple
means to finish; we come to climax, and it is beauti-
fully flat and undistinguished. We have completed the
world. Behold it!"
And in some manner Michael Fountain was holding
a large, fine, precious, crystal bowl, The Golden Glass
Bowl, in his two hands. It was pretty. It was almost
substantial.
"This is the world,” Michael intoned in a self-induced
trance. “This is our lives, this is our final achievement.
Worry not that it is small: it is the largest world ever,
if we will not allow a larger one. Worry not that it is
flawed: we ourselves are the flaws: and if we say that
we are not flaws, then who is there to contradict us?
Worry not that it is fragile, so long as we are very care-
ful not to drop it."
“Drop itIl" the thunder-clap voice of Miguel Fuentes
202
FOURTH MANSIONS
exploded. Everybody in the entire communication jumped
at the cannon-barking violence of that command. And Mé
chael Fountain dropped his world.
It tinkled into a thousand tinny pieces. It shattered
and all the light flickered out of it. The face of Michael
Fountain also broke and shattered and the light went
out of it also. He cast himself down and was racked
by dry sobs.
“How did we go wrong? What did we forget?"
Michael moaned.
"You forgot that there is One who will not be mocked,"
Miguel Fuentes 'said in a voice like curling smoke.
The falcons, like the patricks, believe strongly in things
like that.
.
"That spik sure queered him," said Leo Joe Larker.
“Do you know that spik, Foley?”
,
"Yeah, I know him."
“I know him way on back," said Leo Joe. “I was a
Mexican one time myself.”
"That one was real,” said Croll. “He's as real as I
am. The old gaffer isn't quite real, though. He had a
good spiel going but he couldn't hold onto it. He came
right up to the still, past the grinders, and then dropped
his molasses jug."
"The funny thing about the old fellow," said Loras
who claimed to be an alien. “He had known where
the fountains were once. But the last time he went
to them he busted his pitcher.”
>
But there are also formalities in the life in the
Bug, in the tomb. There was interrogation after a while.
There was separation. There were more of those shots,
tranquilizers. But Foley had been tranquil ever since
he was buried here. There was even a little cleanliness
lecture. And there was supper.
There was supervised recreation. This is the original
203
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
contradiction of terms. It was for making suggestions
about supervised recreation that the devil was cast into
hell; any other account you have heard is false. The
inmates were crazy, but they weren't crazy enough
to like that stuff.
Then to the beds. Even the sleeping was supervised,
and honest darkness was not allowed in this tomb.
Stubborn sleep then, and appearances that were not
supervised.
The brain-weave was in tension and exhilarating un-
natural agony. James Bauer and Arouet Manion were
locked in lawless death passion, very much like snakes
trying to swallow each other. It was not absolutely cer-
tain that Bauer was the master, for all that Arouet
groveled before him. Bauer was in the grip of his own
terror, that of horrifying height (and he was sitting on
the ground-level patio of his own home), mind-blind-
ing height, and Arouet knew of the terror and knew
how to heighten it.
The arena became crumbling sand then, on the edge
of cliffs of immeasurable height, and James Bauer
and Arouet Manion were the two bulls who fought
to death. Bauer was the heavier and stronger, he was
the old king bull who had never been defeated: longer
and more massive of horn, more humped and knotted
of neck, bulkier of body, more iron of hoof, and alto-
gether fearsome. But Arouet became the challenger,
even though it was Bauer who had commanded him
to the battle. Arouet held the high ground and could
charge downward. He could regroup and charge again.
But Bauer was trapped on the very edge before it
started. He could not lunge without the sand further
crumbling and sending him over the edge. He was
hunched together, and all support began to slice out
from under him. He dug one great horn into the steep
turf for anchor, and dug more emptiness beneath him-
self as his sand base cascaded down the cliff-sides. He
204
.
.
FOURTH MANSIONS
bellowed, and it caved beneath him still more. Arouet
punished him from above, brought him to his knees,
raked him and slashed him, but he could not turn that
heavy armored head or come to the flank.
Bauer tangled horns with Arouet, hunched mightily,
and broke Arouet's neck. But now the lighter bull was
down on Bauer, twisted on his horns, quivering and
screaming, and Bauer had no firm stance to pitch the
thing away and back from his horns. Back legs pawing
air, catching sand again, crumbling it with the effort,
and pawing fearful empty air again. What great bull
can stand to all charge with a crumbling foothold?
Arouet dying . . . let him die then, but how to get
rid of him? And Arouet, though frantic with the fear
of death, would go if he could take Bauer with him.
The king bull feared no death except the falling death,
and bull Bauer with the burden on his horns began to
run like the sand itself over the edge of the cliff that
had no bottom.
The arena became a pit then, green rocks and green
shadows. Two great snakes, each trying to swallow the
other. Bauer was the stronger and more massive, but
Arouet Manion was perhaps the longer of jaw. Gaping
mouths spread, unhinged, and spread again, wider, more
mucous, now clinging and gaining like bird-lime, now
sliding and slavering like very snake oil. Arouet had
his longer jaws over the snout of Bauer, obliterating
nostrils and eyes, closing over the great gape with
extension that was drawn as thin as blue bubble, suf-
focating Bauer in the wide-spread translucent jaws.
Bauer grappled and won in the writhing snake-wrestle,
breaking Arouet's back again. But in death spasms Arou-
et gained and gulped, swallowing Bauer's head, inch-
ing down the length of him, blistering and murdering
him with blazing gastric and psychic juices, spreading
his own Arouet-death over Bauer like a clinging plastic
205
FOURTH MANSIONS
sheath. And, suffocatingly, Bauer knotted himself a-
gain and again to try to burst the killing sheath.
Bauer, on his own patio, was breathing with a rasp-
ing groan that would not leave him for the rest of his
life; and Arouet Manion writhed on the stone floor, fran-
tically afraid of death, frantically avid for killing.
The arena changed to-obscene interval—that is too
degrading to contemplate even in a brain-weave. The
arena changed again and again while the double death
battle tallied off all its aspects one by one. The other
members of the weave were brought to continuing psy-
chic orgasm by the strong and musky play of agony
and death. And it would be played out for many hours
yet.
Hondo Silverio was shaken with waves of disgust
and loathing. That noble snake found himself revolted
to his depth. It was then that he decided either to
master or to break the weave; but that isn't done in a
minute or an hour, nor even in a day.
Another arena, and another. The dead wife of Bauer
waited in agony in an uncontinented place for Bauer
to fall past her into hell: ashen anguish, ghostly torture.
The living-aspect wife, caught in deep catalepsy, waited
for the hypnosis over her to be broken by death, if
indeed even death would break it. A saintly sexpot and
a cinnamon cookie (the cookie for Cerberus) were
caught in the passion, the passion that would break
the weave.
Bedelia Bencher would come for Foley, either late
that night or early in the morning, either on bat-wings or
by commercial flight; but she would have a very deep
draft of this passion first.
So would they all. They were the psychic athletes
and this was their game, the sounding evil of it, before
they broke it in final disgust. But the horror-gulping
gusto would reign a long reign before the disgust over-
whelmed it.
206
FOURTH MANSIONS
In another place, a young man was having evil fun in
his grave in the caves underground. Miguel Fuentes
was the hunted there, but he also ran with the hunters.
Indeed, he was the bright young Mexican boy, guileless
and glib, who told certain army patrols that he knew
the caves better than anyone in the world, that he could
find anyone in them. And he led the patrols in to their
loss and murder, and them hunting for him all the
while. This young man would be a falcon full-feathered
when he finally came out from underground.
And in still another place (and it could be any one
of many, as they of that species are so much alike),
a patrick was experiencing a waking night-dream out
of Samuel, the saddest verses in scripture:
And the patrick answered: “Here I am, Lord.” And
again he said, “Here I am; for you called me.” But the
Lord answered him: “I did not call you. Go back and
sleep."
Well, why did the Lord never call the patricks? They
had been waiting, oh how they had been waiting for the
calll It was given to others. It was never given to the
patricks, and they waiting so ready for their thousands
of years.
"Smith, Foley, whatever your name is, turn that thing
off, whatever that thing is,” protested Loras who claimed
to be an alien. “We want to sleep. How can we sleep
with you dreaming that bright-colored stuff?”
207
XII: FOURTH MANSIONS
That I be one to catch the hard truth hurled
And fight soft lies that have the world for spanl
I know the Ox, the Eagle, and the Man,
The Lion-and the schism of the world.
I feed on elementals like a cloud
Though buried in constraining earthy room
Where now I harvest lightning in my
tomb
And integrate the monsters for a shroud.
a
a
Here in Fourth Mansions which is Death or Life
Is rooted world that it is worth to live:
The Giant Troubling and the Giant Brawn.
Though I be dead a while I bite the knifel
In monumented earth I grow and give
While I predict and manufacture dawn.
Broken Cisterns and Living Waters:
Endymion Ellenbogen
>
“THERE IS A holiness in a whole person or a whole
world,” the patrick Croll said. “The veriest monsters in-
side us may be sanctified. They were put there by Him
who is 'Father of Monsters' also. What right have we to
cut them out of us? Who are we to edit God? We cut
strong things out of ourselves and suppress them, and
the rocks and clouds will give birth to them again. We
dry up our interior fountains and they gush out again,
208
FOURTH MANSIONS exteriorly and menacingly. We cannot live without mon­ sters' blood coursing through us. Only to the whole per­ son is life worth living and death worth dying. Here in Fourth Mansions we must be whole or we must be nothing." "Where do you get those curious phrases, Croll?" Freddy Foley asked him. "From the manual. As patrick, I must recite certain passages every morning." "But aren't the patricks themselves monsters?" "Yes, I believe so. But we're the monsters under the man-symbol." This was the morning of the second day of the burial or incarceration of Foley. "A man and his daughter were here looking for you earlier this morning," an attendant told Foley now, "but they found no trace of you. They're nearly con­ vinced that you're not here. You aren't here, you know." "Well, but who is this here then?" asked Freddy. "You're in the records as Julius Smith." "That explains why so many call me Smith. Did you tell the man and his daughter that I was carried as Smith on the rolls?" "No. I just hinted enough that they might not be gone for good. They were very generous with me this morn­ ing. A little later they may be even more generous. They're wealthy, aren't they?" "They may be, but don't run it into the ground." "I'll have to be the judge of that, Foley-Smith. Oh, I miss out entirely some times when I shoot for too high a figure. But I make it up, I make it up, I often do quite well. I have a good judgment of what the traffic will bear. That girl-those eyes-are they real?" "Not entirely. But you saw her and I didn't." "I swear she has eyes like nobody has eyes. She has pictures painted on her eyeballs, weird pictures, snakes and monsters and fountains and upheavals. I never saw 209
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
anything like them. But she gets around all right. How
can she see with those pictures painted on her eyeballs?”
"She's a clown, but she's more than that. She's mutated
and she can see with every part of her. So can I. I just
now realized it. Who needs eyeballs? Is there a tattoo
artist here in the Bug? I'll have him tattoo my eyeballs.
I'll be the first one here with tattooed eyeballs.
“Yeah, there is one here. If you pay me-you have
money to your account here and you can release some
to me-I can tell you which one he is, and we can-
Nah, you're joking.
Oh well, what can one do in a grave except wait for
that last trumpet to blow, or perhaps an intermediate
trumpet in special cases? But for an inquiring mind there
are interesting questions cropping up everywhere, even
in the grave. Fred Foley asked one of the doctors
about one of the questions that was bothering him.
It wasn't that he was reconciled to the doctors here.
He believed that they also were tilted, though perhaps
not to such an angle as the boarders. Those doctors had
trouble with jokes too. For answer to a joke they were
likely to gaze at you with steely eyes, and then pull
your record and make cabalistic marks on it. Doctor
Decker was better than the others, but only a little.
“Doctor, what I wonder is whether group delusion
is common,” Fred Foley asked him.
“Quite common, Smith, quite common,” Doctor Deck-
er told him.
"Then there are other groups like us who share a
common delusion?”
“At least a dozen groups in this very hospital at the
moment, and there have been hundreds.”
“What were some of the more unusual-ah-obses-
sions?”
“A few years ago there was a group here that be-
lieved that very low musical notes caused their teeth
210
2
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
to loosen. They campaigned strenuously against all low-
down songs, they lobbied against them, and some of
them smashed and destroyed those coin-operated ma-
chines which I believe are called goop boxes. They also
tried to have the Army 'Taps' changed, to eliminate
several low notes.
“And what was the outcome?”
"Oh, the group split up. It had no real cohesion.
Some of the patients were finally released. Some went
on to other obsessions."
“No, I don't mean the outcome like that. I mean the
tests. Did it show that low musical notes caused their
teeth to loosen?”
"Sizzling sandburrs, Smith! What are you talking
about? There was no such test.”
"Then who was to say that it was an obsession? It
might have been a shrewd observation that wasn't
acted on. There was no test at all? What were some
of the other groups?"
”
"There was one quite small group, three. This is the
smallest possible group by our definition. All three of
these men were locomotive engineers, and they all
believed that their lonely night whistles were answered
by giant flying creatures. They believed these creatures
were not large enough to carry off an entire train, but
that a locomotive running alone might be carried off;
and they swore that this was the answer to several
disappearing locomotives. They said the giant flying
creatures believed the night whistles were mating calls.
"And were there actually cases of disappearing lo-
comotives? And were there any attempts made to pur-
sue this explanation?”
"Smith, are you kidding?”
"Not entirely. As a reporter I did hear of cases of
locomotives disappearing when running alone at night.
I'll follow this up when I get out and when I settle
other matters. What were some of the other groups?”
211
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Oh, there was a bunch who all believed there'd
be a terrible earthquake in the Great Lakes region on
the morning of June 19, 1979, that the southern shore-
lines would sink, and that thousands would be drowned.
“But that was the very date of it! They were right!
This proves that some of the groups can be right and
you can be wrong."
"Of course that was the date of it, Smith, and their
insistence that the area be cleared would have saved
thousands of lives if it had been timely. But the ob-
session occurred three years after the event. All the
afflicted believed themselves living several years in the
past, anterior to the happening. All had been eyewit-
nesses and near victims of it and it had deranged them.
Then there was the group that believed that all red-
headed women were creatures from outer space sent
here to intermingle with mankind to cause trouble and
destruction.”
"I could give you instances that would seem to prove
them right,” Freddy said.
“So could I, Smith,” said the doctor. “Some of the red-
heads do seem to come from way out. Then we had
a clutch of odd ducks here who believed that the
messages and mottoes in fortune cookies form a sinister
code of instructions sent by an evil mastermind in high
Tibet.
“And there was a clique with the belief that the
white oak tree is a man-eater, and that persons who
have unaccountably disappeared will invariably be
found to have disappeared in the neighborhood of a
white oak tree. They believed also that the wood of
the tree had certain dangerous properties, and that a
certain furniture factory that makes much use of the
wood should be enjoined from doing so. We still have
some of the white oaks here.
“The majority of the coteries, however, have beliefs
very similar to the group you belong to, Smith. This is
>
>
212
O
FOURTH MANSIONS
the belief that the world is ruled by a hidden-hand
group of men who may be known by such and such
marks, that these men plot against the world, and that
their plot against the world is about to succeed; they
maintain that it's absolutely necessary that their warn-
ings be hearkened to and acted upon. You're really a
variant of the world-is-ending societies."
“What if one of our groups is right, Doctor?”
"Why then, the plot against the world would succeed,
since your warnings are most certainly not going to
be acted upon.”
"Do you really believe I'm insane, Doctor Decker?”
"Yes, on one point you are, Smith. One point of
insanity is about par for the never-quite-normal human
race. I actually believe that it's a healthy sign for a
man to be clearly insane on one clear point; it gives
him balance and otherwise keeps him sane. The nor-
mally insane have a point of eccentricity that's minor,
private, and of no threat. That's where you go past it,
Smith. In an involved society the eccentricity must be
a minor one. It must not annoy or harm your neighbors.
And it plainly must not lead you to vicious slander
of persons in high places. Yours has led you to that.”
"Then you don't believe it possible that the world is
being plotted again?”
"Likely it is, Smith, and in thousands of plots. The
world is a fine apple and we all want a bite. But I
don't believe in an effective plot any more than I be-
lieve that the white oak tree is a man-eater.”
"What's the very latest thing here in group belief?”
Fred Foley asked.
“Your own was of yesterday and the day before,
Smith. There's a new one today. It's the belief in a new
disease. This is a death-wave to come and be charac-
terized first by nasal itching, then by a tiredness and
certain irritability, later by drowsiness, and eventually
by death.”
213
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“That sounds like the nornal life story to me, Doc-
tor.”
“Yes, but this is all to take place within five hours,
according to the addicts. And according to them it's
caused by germs carried by gossamer, or by drifting
fluff from cottonwood trees (but there aren't any of
them here, and this isn't the season for them to cotton),
or more probably by a drifting medium similar in ap-
pearance to these but which may come from outer
space. The warners give very clear and detailed de-
scription of the disease, considering that it hasn't yet
appeared.”
"Five hours isn't a lot of warning, but for what it's
worth I may as well take it," said Foley-Smith. “My
own nose itches. That should mean that I'll be dead
by dark.”
"You have a delusion of your own, Smith, yet you
can joke about the delusions of others. Oh that damn
drifting stuff, like spider silk, it's been settling on me
all day! Wonder what it is? But there is real terror
among the addicts, Smith, and it begins to spread. We've
had to isolate those of the cult.”
"I wasn't joking about it, Doctor,” Fred Foley-Smith
said. “I believe that a complex of sudden and fatal dis-
eases is part of the ordeal in store for us. And it does
itch, Doctor. And I'm a little tired and could become
irritable.”
“I wouldn't worry about it, Smith. You aren't the
sort to panic, though you may be the sort to cause
panic. Nasal itching can be brought about by suggestion
easier than almost any other phenomenon. But it's curi-
ous that the members of this group (we haven't been
able to establish any previous relationship among them
at all) should all come up with this odd notion at one
time. And they've all come up with it violently, calling
out loud in the streets for massive efforts to destroy
the floating cosmic stuff.
a
214
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
"But it's just as curious about your own and similar
groups. I've tried very diligently to discover how it
all comes about. It's part of my business to discover
how these things come about. Do you have any idea
how they might happen? I'm asking you, Smith, because
you might be able to give me a lead. You aren't the
most intelligent of your group, but you're the most open,
the most communicative."
“I don't know about the other groups, Doctor. But
with my own group I know exactly how it happened.”
“Then tell me, Smith. I've been studying it for years.”
"It's as though an elephant were standing in the mid-
dle of the street, Doctor. One man sees it and announces
it. Then another man sees it (and there's been no prev-
ious relationship between the two men at all) and the
second man likewise announces it. And a third man sees
it (and he's a total stranger to the other two men)
and he announces it in his own way. So the three are
locked up in the strong house for believing that they
see it. The reason that they all believe they see the ele-
phant at the same time is that the elephant is there at
the same time.”
“To follow your analogy, if there is one, Smith, why
can't the keepers see the elephant too?”
“Because they, you, are too stubbom to look out the
window, Doctor. Because they believe it's impossible
for an elephant to be standing in the street.”
"Then the facts of your delusion are really that ob-
vious to you, Smith?”
"The facts of the case are really that obvious to me,
Doctor. I finally saw the whole conspiracy standing
as plain as an elephant in the street: also the conspiracy
was admitted to me in great detail by one of the princes
of the conspiracy."
“Bad, Smith, very bad.”
"
"If one of the inmates should come to you right now,
Doctor, and tell you that it was raining outside, you'd
>
215
22
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
say 'Bad, very bad,' and make damning marks on his
record
“That's probably true. It's an automatic response with
me. I do wish you'd get over this, though, Smith. You're
a likable young man.
"Why was the name Smith hung onto me, Doctor?
And Julius? There hasn't been a Julius in our family
since two generations before Adam. Why wasn't I com-
mitted under my own name?"
“You were. Your own name is Julius Smith. You
were wandering and amnesiac when picked up, and
you were proclaiming that men long dead had returned
to plague the world. We solved your identity by routine
methods, and we hope you'll soon remember your own
past life. That would be an important step to your cure.
"Are
you in on this cover job, Doctor Decker?”
“No, I'm not in on any cover job, Smith. I'm not at
all related to the political angle of this place, though
there is one. I accept the data that's passed on to me
and I work sincerely with the patients on the basis of it.”
"But
my name isn't Smith.”
"Oh well, neither is mine. And stop rubbing your nose.
If this keeps on it will become a national pastime. I
believe it will really be à disappointment to you you
don't die tonight from this nonexistent new disease.
Damn that drifting fluff anyhow! It's everywhere.
You'd go through with it, I know, Smith, just to prove
that one of the alarm groups was right.”
Doctor Decker had been rubbing his own nose, and
Foley-Smith left him then.
if
The disease was not imaginary. It had appeared. So
had half a dozen other new diseases. Though still un-
recognized, this nonexistent disease had already gone
into its second and third stages with many that day;
and by nightfall about thirty persons in the capital city
would have died quietly of it.
216
FOURTH MANSIONS
And then the first tremor of the hysteria would come.
It was a curious day. Things were shaping up, just
as the clouds were shaping and tumbling overhead.
It was a warm day for the season, but the sign of chill
had appeared on the edge of those clouds. Familiar
things looked unfamiliar. Unfamiliar things looked fam-
iliar. The ice cream man looked familiar,
The ice cream man, selling ice cream bars to the in-
mates through the iron fence, was Leo Joe Larker. But
wasn't Leo Joe Larker still an inmate of the Bug? No
he wasn't. He had escaped that very morning, they
said, and he would be recaptured within an hour, they
said. And nobody else should try the thing, to break
out into the world from the safe place where they were
understood.
Well, why didn't they recapture Leo Joe then, since
he was right outside the Bug? Since they were looking
for him everywhere? They didn't capture him because
they didn't recognize him. He did not look anything
like what he had looked like inside the Bug. He was
a different man entirely in appearance; he had been
several such different men; only Freddy Foley could
recognize him. And Leo Joe had turned into an ice cream
man to pass a message to Fred Foley. Why had he not
given him the message when he was inside, when
they could talk freely? He had not because that would
not have been grotesque enough for him. Freddy did
not know what the words or details of the message
would be, and yet he already knew their meaning. It
was “Goof gloriously, Freddy. Goof gloriously again.
It is required that one man should goof gloriously for
the people.
Leo Joe Larker was humming the old tune What
Kind of Fool Am I? when Freddy Foley came up to
him on the other side of the fence.
“You, Leo Joe, or I?” Foley asked him.
"You, Foley, you're the fool. Little Freddy Foley who
217
>
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
can see in the dark and was trapped like a coney in
broad daylight. Even a coney has a hole or a rockpile
he can get to. He isn't taken in the open as easy as
that.”
“Little Leo Joe, the man who changes faces and never
gets a very good one. What are you doing with an ice
cream pokey?” (But this Leo Joe wasn't a clown. He
had told Foley. “If they can kill you, I can kill you worse.
,
.
Whatever they tell you to do, don't do it. Whatever
they tell you not to do, do it.” This was Leo Joe Larker
who had perhaps raised a man from the dead when
he was only a boy.)
"I'm not Leo Joe. I'm no one you ever saw before.
The ice cream pokey gives me certain vantage points.”
"So does this Bug give me,” said Freddy.
“Just exactly what good can you do on that side of
the fence, Foley?”
"I'm not sure.
Leo Joe Larker sold a French lime bar to one of the
inmates, and a strawberry revel bar to another one.
Then a keeper was coming to the fence to chase him
away.
"Here's a grape sherbert bar for you, Foley,” said Leo
Joe. “Digest it well.”
"I'd rather have a French lime.
"I'm telling you not to get cute. Take it. And digest it.
Freddy Foley took the grape sherbert bar, thrust it
quickly into his pocket, and disassociated himself from
Larker. The guard came and chased the ice cream man
away, to the whimpering of inmates who were coming
with their allowances in their hands.
This was ridiculous, to be trapped with a melting
sherbert bar in the pocket, to know that it contained a
message, and to know that it was all grotesque. How
low and laughable must a man be brought before he
is born again? This was ignominy beyond even death
and burial.
22
218
FOURTH MANSIONS
And immediately there was a summons for Foley.
Grown now very suspicious, he was sure that his short
rendezvous with Larker had somehow been discovered
and reported, and he was embarrassed as to what to
do with the melting grape sherbert bar in his pocket.
It wasn't a dignified place to carry it. It was cold
there, but he didn't want it to get warm. And suspecting
that there was more to it than grape sherbert, he didn't
want to throw it away. Still less did he want to have
it in his pocket if he was subject to any sort of inter-
view.
>
It was Bedelia Bencher and her father, and Fred
Foley was allowed to visit with them, though guards
and attendants were present.
“Poor little sour pickle,” said Biddy. “Have they
treated you all right?” That Biddy and the eyes of her!
Landscapes, hellscapes, monsterscapes painted on her
eyeballs, and she laughing all the while.
“With every care of my body, Biddy, and none at all
of my soul,” Freddy said.
“Just what is this nonsense, Foley?” Mr. Bencher
asked sharply. His name was Richard but nobody ever
called him anything but mister. But he was looking at
Foley on two levels and understanding quite a bit.
“Part of the nonsense, Mr. Bencher, is that I'm Smith
and not Foley," Freddy said.
"You persist in that, Freddy? We very nearly didn't
find you under the name of Smith. But Biddy was
certain you were here, and she wouldn't leave town
without you. You do remember us, don't you?”
“Remember you? Certainly. I'm not crazy. It's the
people here who are crazy.”
“And what was your name when you knew us back
home?"
“My name has been Fred Foley all my life except for
the first two hours when it hung in the balance between
219
CC
FOURTH MANSIONS
Fred and Ronald. I've never been sure I got the best
of that deal.”
“Then why the Smith now? I'm trying to ask you
clear questions,” said Mr. Bencher. But Bencher was
reading Foley while he played this game with the
guards. Perhaps he had even read the message in the
sherbert bar.
"I'm trying to give some clear answers, Mr. Bencher,”
Freddy said. “I don't know why the Smith now."
"You mean that you don't know why you told the
authorities your name was Smith?”
“No, Mr. Bencher, I mean that I don't know why
the authorities told me my name was Smith. I guess
they've tried to hide me here.”
"Freddy, it's in your record that you insisted your
name was Julius Smith,” Mr. Bencher said evenly, and
that you don't know any Fred Foley nor remember ever
being such a person.”
But really Mr. Bencher was talking all of this for
the benefit of the long-eared attendants and guards.
His eyes were saying other things.
“Papa, don't press him so hard,” said Biddy. "He's
sick.” But what were the landscapes on her eyeballs
saying? There was lots of evil laughter still there, and
perhaps a little concem.
“Mr. Bencher, if that's in the record, then it's in the
record wrong," Freddy said. “There's some dirty work
here. Get me out of this place, will you? You have in-
fluence.
"Freddy, what's that leaking out of your pocket?”
Biddy asked.
“A sherbert bar, Biddy. A grape sherbert bar.”
.
"But why, Freddy? Why do you carry it melting in
your pocket?”
“Where else?"
"Do you often carry them there, honey?"
“Quite often. All the time, Biddy.”
220
22
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Freddy felt that he had slipped with them, and he
had no idea how to recoup. He was compelled not
only to goof gloriously but to goof grovelingly, Some-
thing had hold of his mind and it would force him into
this insanity role. But Freddy did not want an attend-
ant to get that sherbert bar, though he hated to look
like a total fool when the possibility of his really being
a total fool was under discussion.
“Well, take it out and throw it away, Freddy,” Bid-
dy was saying, “and then let me clean you up.
“No, Biddy. I couldn't possibly throw it away. I'll just
keep it there. I could never find a better place for it,
and it keeps me cool.”
“Ah, Foley, I have been trying to get to the bottom of
this," said Bencher. “I heard a little from Biddy of the
crazy jag of a story that you seemed to be on. I thought
it was just something you told her to put her off and
that you were working on something confidential that
couldn't be discussed prematurely. Biddy thought so
too. But now I find you actually have been trying to
prove that five-hundred-year-dead men have come back
alive and are meddling with our lives. Is that true?”
“Yes sir. It's quite true that they've come back. I
have most convincing evidence, which somehow doesn't
convince anybody. If I could persaude you of it, Mr.
Bencher, then you might have more weight than I at
getting the warning taken seriously.”
"Foley, I always liked you. I felt rather safe for Biddy
when she became attached to you. I still feel safe for
her with you in that way. But, Freddy, you're quite sick.
"I believe I'm the only one here who isn't.”
"I'll see that you get everything you need,” said Bench-
a
er.
>
“I need out,” Freddy Foley insisted,
“No, not that, Freddy,” Bencher said. “You're in no
state to be out.”
221
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Please let me throw that melted bar away, Freddy,"
Biddy begged. “It isn't nice to have it in your pocket.”
“No, I'll keep the bar there, Biddy. I feel somehow
that it contains the key to the whole world difficulty.
Besides, I like it there."
Biddy began to cry. Or did she? There was a lot
of suppressed hilarity behind that crying, but with eyes
like hers who could tell?
"Oh, Freddy,” she said, “you never knew how much
I liked you. We never did anything but kid. Oh, Freddy,
I hope you get well.”
“Then
you
think I'm sick too?"
“Oh, Freddy!”
"You really should take that mess out of his pocket,”
Bencher said to an attendant.
"It might upset him," said the man. “They become
attached to things and notions. It could set him back.
Besides, they get fresh-laundered clothes tomorrow.”
“Goodbye, Foley,” said Bencher, “and if there's any.
thing at all you want-"
"I want out.”
“God willing, and soon, as quickly as you're well,”
said Bencher.
“Be real good, honey,” said Biddy, “and you'll never
know how much.”
“But you don't believe in me?"
"
“Oh, Freddy!”
The Benchers went away and left Fred Foley-Smith
there with the attendants. He felt like a fool with the
melted sherbert running down his leg and his pants,
and his girl not believing in him, and gone. And the
world about to be taken over and frustrated by the
returnees.
And yet he had been brought strangely up to date
by the pictures painted on Bedelia's eyeballs. They
changed, you know, they changed. And they conveyed
messages.
>
222
>
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
Loras (who was alien), Croll (who was patrick),
and a man called Boneface by all, came up to Fred
Foley when he was ready to inspect the lavender de-
cay that was the sherbert bar.
“You're standing in the way, Foley-Smith,” Boneface
said. “There's two shows going on and we can't watch
either of them with you standing in the way.”
Oh! Michael Fountain was dictating lectures again
this day. And James Bauer and Arouet Manion were
still locked in death ordeal. The men wanted to watch
these shows, but they were not yet adept enough to
watch them apart from Foley. He had brushed the
weave. They had only brushed him.
The highly refined Michael Fountain seemed a little
shriveled today in his ultra-refinement. There was not
as much to him as there had once been, or it had turned
inward on him. His fine voice had become a little
cracked and thin, his fine features a little masklike and
amateurish. But had his fine words changed?
“Are there events in the world?” he was lecturing
into the dictaphone. “Are there events in the world at
the present time? We hear rumor, we see signs; surely
there is some shadow play going on which one might
call 'Events in the World. We of the elite, however,
do not need to be overly concerned with these. What
we do desire is a refinement still more refined, a
nobility still more noble, an elite still more elect. We
draw in on ourselves. There is a vulgarity of numbers.
We reduce the vulgarity and the thing. A thousand
gross units goes into one essence. And then we refine
the essence again and again.”
(“This man is wrong,” said Loras who was alien.
"It's been tried in other places; it doesn't work. You
reduce it and it dies, it dies every time. You narrow
the grove too much and even the noble trees die.” Lor-
as the alien had sought for his Earth visit a place like
the Bug, knowing that his sanity was not the sanity of
223
FOURTH MANSIONS
this strange world. He had had no real trouble gaining
admittance. He had simply gone to the attendance offi-
cial, declared that he was a visitor from the stars, and
after less than half an hour of lively discussion he had
been accepted as a member of the Bug. He wasn't a
handsome creature, but he had a pleasant and out-
going personality. And such little physical peculiarities
as he possessed-a slight caudal appendage, a triple
Adam's apple, opposable great toes-were not held a-
gainst him. He was intelligent and he adjusted well.
Only once had he eaten his plate after eating his food.
Only once had he given the astral caress on being
introduced to another. Only once-)
And Michael Fountain lectured on. “We will, of
course, abandon large sections of the world as soon as
we can phase them out. The entire old world, I believe,
can well be abandoned in the present century. There is
no need of it, really. The new world is ample for the
people. 'Is it not well that all the members of one
family should dwell in one house?' And many attitudes
and mythologies of the old world will likewise be al-
lowed to die. In a way, the old world has already be-
come something like the disordered unconscious of the
new. Discard it, I say! And then the southern conti-
nent of the new world may well be abandoned in a
further generation. One continent is enough for man-
kind. For a refined and elect mankind it is more than
ample."
(The sherbert had melted and dried in Freddy's
pocket now, leaving only a stain, a slight stickiness, and
a tightly rolled piece of paper. Freddy took it out and
read it as he listened with exterior ears to the distant
voice of Michael Fountain. You aren't a whole lot of
good in there, it said. Don't you know that things have
already begun? The day before yesterday there were
twenty deaths of the new diseases. Yesterday there
were fifty. Today there will be two hundred when the
224
FOURTH MANSIONS
count is in. And tomorrow three still newer diseases
will appear, one of them being the old disease named
panic. I know that you haven't any plan, and I haven't
I
much of one. I have a few men. I need a few more.
At sundown you will take three good men and go
over the fence. That was the sticky scribbling of Leo
Joe Larker on the lavender-stained paper.)
“Ultimately, all mankind will be lodged in a single
town,” Michael Fountain lectured on. “The dross will
have disappeared. Only the many-times refined gold
will remain. And more finally still, all of mankind will
be lodged in a single house. This is most important
to the closing and diminishing of the circle. We support,
as expedient, all cyclic Orphism; and so we must sup-
port the effort of the retumees. But they were only
shadows of ourselves. Their concern that the cycle of
birth, death, and rebirth be repeated has been a good
one up to this time. The returnees must at all cost keep
the world in this cycle. They cannot permit the world to
ascend. They cannot even permit the cycle to become
a helix, a spiral. We support them in the one direction,
but we do not support them in another. The cycle, of
course, cannot be permitted to become an ascending or
outgrowing spiral. Neither can it be permitted to re-
main a simple cycle forever. It must become a dimin-
ished concentric with each turn of it smaller and more
refined than the last. We will diminish to a point. We
will concentrate in one point.”
(“The patricks and their castles will stand against
him in that,” said Croll who was a patrick. “We've
stood for the open way even when it was stagnant;
we won't accept the closed way even when it's in move-
ment. Theirs isn't the eternal symbol of the snake with
his tail in his mouth, forever repeating. That snake eats
a little of his own tail every time he goes around, and
he becomes a much smaller snake. We'll stand against
them and their diminishment!")
>
225
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“The final human race, at its finest hour (and I see it
as an hour not more than ten seconds long) will surely
have diminished to no more than three or four excep-
tional men,” Michael Fountain lectured on. “And then
is the synthesis, the diminished finale: the world will
one day dissolve into the original Great Man. Is it not
a most quieting and peaceful concept? But what is that
silence? The roaring had gone down to a gurgling in
the last few years. The gurgling had softened to a
mere dripping in these later days. Now it no longer
drips. How has it become so shallow and dry?”
("Hal The old man's fountain ran dry,” said Bone-
face. “I knew it would.” This boney-faced man was a
madman. He was intensely mad, a killer. If he ever
said something that seemed to make sense–and often
he did-it was a slip. He was mad. He always insisted
on that point.)
(But will you be ready for it? asked the note from
Leo Joe Larker that Freddy had taken from his sticky
pocket. Ready or not, you will have to come. I am pre-
pared to visit some plagues of my own; but only on
the returnees, not on the world. You may already have
guessed that I once joined their company. But I was a
very recent recruit of theirs and I have broken away.
To make up for the part I have had in it I will try to
stop the thing. Now, here is what you will do,)
(“Let's look at the other two, Foley-Smith,” said the
patrick Croll. “There's a lot better stuff in them than
in this dried-up old man. Sure, he knew where the
fountain itself was once. He went to it with his pitcher.
But that's all gone with him now. Let's get the other
bunch. Those two have a real fight going on, and some
of the sideplay from the others in the show is so strong
that it takes you right up into it.”)
James Bauer and Arouet Manion still continued their
teetering on the edge of the world battle. They fought
through arena after arena. Bauer still sat, ponderous
226
FOURTH MANSIONS
and purple-swollen and glassy-eyed, breathing like thun-
der. Arouet still stretched dragonlike on the stone floor,
shuddering with final sickness, poisonous to the last.
They were two arms of the deadly hydra, tearing and
killing each other. It is only for this reason that the
abominable creature, recreated so many times, has never
demolished the world: it mistakes its own tentacles
for other things and battles them to the death.
Hondo Silverio had come in. He was breaking the
brain-weave, tearing it loose, slicing it up. His green
mottled humor had become death gray with the new
concern, but he moved easily, helped himself to a drink
from the sideboard and flung himself onto one of the
scatter-couches.
Wing Manion came in, wrinkled her fish-nose in many-
layered disgust, and stood over her sick-dragon hus-
band Arouet. She also had sworn to break the weave.
The Harvester mark was still livid on her forehead but
she would no longer be a Harvester. She picked Arouet
up in her arms ("This fish gets pretty strong, after a
couple of days out of the old pond,” she had once said
of herself), carried the awkward length and lug of
him over to the most distant chair, and deposited him
there with worried concern. But Arouet, still showing
no more life than a dank quivering, poured himself
like quicksilver out of the chair and slithered the width
of the patio to lie again before Bauer in his attitude
of mocking adoration. They still had several arenas to
battle through. Letitia Bauer (the dead one) came and
stood wraithlike and worried. Bedelia Bencher also
came and watched a moment in her wraith-extension.
And Salzy was there. Ah, she was revolted and fasci-
nated at the same time by the struggle. It was as pas-
sionate as she could have wished it, but it was not at
all the right shape. She had so hoped that it would
be helicall
227
FOURTH MANSIONS
Meanwhile, back in our main context, Foley-Smith
had finished reading the note from Leo Joe Larker. There
were some straight specifics in it. That Larker was a
real strategist, a poor man's general. He knew how to
go about a street fight, a town fight. And the last words
of the note: Now eat it. Chew it up and eat it. It should
have a pleasant sherbert flavor. A determined man can
swallow paper. It does not really bulk larger for the
chewing. It only seems to. Now swallow it.
And Fred Foley swallowed it.
Foley was to take three of the inmates over the
fence with him. Larker had written that more would
be useless. Foley thought that the three would be use-
less. They were Loras who was alien, Croll who was
patrick, and O'Mara who was Irish. But the boney-faced
man insisted that he would go also. He knew every
word that was in the note, though he had not read it
with his eyes. Boneface had spooky powers. It was
better to have him on your side than against you.
In town people had begun to die like flies. They
became drowsy and died, without really being sick.
Actually most of them weren't sick, but the suggestion
to die was implanted in them.
Overhead the clouds were gathering and tumbling.
They were touched with sudden silver and (now that
it came near sunset) they were also touched with that
color that is called morada which is a mulberry or
violet or purple. Foley gathered his four men. There
was no leaving Boneface behind. That man had sensed
and entered his element.
"I used to be a pathological killer,” Boneface said.
"They say they've cured me of that and I'm no longer
dangerous. They think they've cured me! Men, just
give me a target and I'm a butcher all over again. Oh,
you can't shake me. You have to take me along. And for
one of your squeamish jobs I'm just the man.
There were events in the world and the city that
>
228
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
afternoon and evening. The plague itself appeared.
There was a clear case of it truly verified. But a curi-
ous aspect of the appearance was that it was widely
reported on the air and on paper several hours before
it came. Manipulated panic was all the thing.
And at almost the identical time two men were mur-
dered. One of them was a Great Liberal Statesman
who was actually a shoddy phony, and one was a
Well-Beloved Conservative Leader whose own family
couldn't stand him. There was a further distortion. The
reports of both murders were out slightly before they
happened, and partisans of both men had begun to
gather.
And just previous to the riots, an army detachment
had crossed over from Virginia to put down the riots.
The military could not find the reported corpses strew-
ing the sidewalks. Wisely they waited. They were only
a little bit early.
In other sections, students attacked soldiers. The
students always averaged about ten years older than
the soldiers. Embassies were burned. Small private ar-
mies moved through the streets. They were distin-
guished only by armbands or not distinguished at all.
The transit workers announced a one hour strike for the
following morning as evidence of their solidarity.
Fred Foley heard a chuckle in his mind. It was the
brittle chuckle of Carmody Overlark. Carmody and his
would cause the disturbances to succeed (while seem-
ing to fail) or to fail (while seeming to succeed); any-
how they would have their sort of value out of them,
and the world would be further shackled.
“It's time to get moving,” Fred Foley told his four
men. “Only one target inside the Bug, according to
Larker. I'd have thought there'd be more."
Foley sent Croll to kill Doctor Millhouse. Croll
the patrick seemed a little timid about going and kill-
>
229
FOURTH MANSIONS
ing a man, and Boneface wanted to do it, but Foley
repeated the command, and Croll went.
Meanwhile, Foley briefed them again rapidly, armed
them from the cache that Leo Joe Larker had hidden
and told of in the note, waited. Croll came back
twitching; he said that he couldn't kill Doctor Millhouse,
that Doctor Millhouse had already been dead when he
got to him. Foley looked around for Boneface, then
saw him deep in the shadows. “Who, me?” was the
look that Boneface gave him. Well, it was done, and
Boneface had done it; but Foley had rather wanted to
test the patrick Croll on an easy one first. They went
over the fence to begin what Larker had called the
Night of the Long Knives in his notes. Like all unstarred
generals, Larker was something of a ham.
230
XIII: AND ALL TALL MONSTERS STAND
The psychological rule says that when the inner
situation is not made conscious, it happens outside
as fate. That is to say, when the individual remains
undivided and does not become conscious of his
inner contradictions, the world must perforce act
out the conflict and be torn into opposite halves.
Aion: C. G. Jung
TARGETS! Larker had tagged many of the prominent
returnees for Foley and his group to get. But another
unstarred general was mocking in Foley's mind.
"It doesn't make any difference, Frederick,” Miguel
Fuentes was saying from his distant underground. “It
is just a little diversion, a little fun. Do it if you want
to do it. But the first phase has already happened, and
the next will not begin till I and others (and especially
you) come out tomorrow. This doesn't matter."
“This does matter.” Foley swore. “You battle your
monsters and I'll battle minel There will be dimensions
-in me, or in the world.”
Some very prominent people were on the list, but
who would have suspected that they were returned
people? Lee, Twitchell, Cramms, Rowell, Goodfoot,
Munsey, Napier, Nash, Cabot, Bottoms, Miss Cora
Addamson. Well, how does one go about killing leading
people, those of a station above one? The "etiquette
of murder is incomplete. It may be that the intent and
231
a
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
the act itself carry the basis of an introduction. There
should be a certain fluidity of the rules, murder being
partly a social and partly a business thing. There is
need of a small rule book on the manners of it.
Lee was the first on the list and the first ticked off.
Foley knew him on sight, knew where he lived, knew
his shuffling figure now going back and forth in front
of his own luxury apartment building. In fact, Lee
seemed to be waiting for Foley or for the event. Foley
killed him quickly, the first man he ever slew.
He shot him suddenly. A lady gasped nearby, and
there were other sounds of shock in the street. But
many things as rude were going on. Foley quickly re-
joined his group.
On Constitution Avenue, one group of soldiers had
scattered a gaggle of “students” and there was a little
clatter of quick death on each side. Some very respect-
able fighting was going on around the circles and up
and down Massachusetts and New York Avenues. “It
is all for nothing, Freddy,” Miguel Fuentes was mocking.
"This isn't the real thing. It is only little theatricals."
"They want to tum the world into little theatricals,"
Freddy said. "I want to make it real again.” Freddy
went after Twitchell.
Twitchell had a permanent hotel suite right in the
way and Fred Foley went boldly in. It was a red-eyed
woman who answered and came to the door.
“I must see Mr. Twitchell at once,” Freddy said and
began to push in.
“That will be quite impossible,” said the red-eyed
lady. “Please go. I haven't time to explain.”
“
”
“Neither have I-I'll just come in. What I have to do
will only take an instant.”
“No, no, God nol Not at a time like this.” The lady
was suddenly strong, and Foley had pushed his way
in only with great difficulty.
>
>
>
232
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Be quiet, lady,” he said. “My business will be brief
and to the point, if my hand is steady."
“My husband has no more business at all to transact.
He is dead.”
“But can we be sure? I'll make sure, lady.”
“You monsterl He has just died. How is it possible for
one to be so heartless?” But Foley had forced his way
into the inner room.
“He does look pretty dead. What was it?”
“One of the new diseases of today. He was tired and
he lay down for a little. When I went to wake him just
now he was dead.”
"There's no harm at all in making sure.”
“The doctor will make sure. He's on his way here now.”
"The doctors are going to be very overworked to-
night. I'll make it easier for them. I'll leave no doubt
that this man is dead.”
Mrs. Twitchell uttered a series of short little screams
or yelps, and Foley made sure that Twitchell was dead.
“I bet I'm as good with the short knife as Boneface
says that he is,” Freddy growled in a sort of sordid
trance as he did it. The man bled hardly at all when
Foley gave him the blade. It was as if the blood had
been frozen. From this, and from other signs, Foley
knew that the man had been suspended, not dead. But
now he was dead.
Mrs. Twitchell was making such a fuss about it that
Foley was glad to get out of there, back to his group
and to the peace and quiet of the riotous streets.
Loras was explaining that he had not been able to
kill Cramms, that Cramms was already dead when he
got there. “Well, all right, so long as you made sure,”
said Foley.
“Of course I made sure,” Loras stated. “It was a little
embarrassing for me to do it, me a stranger with no
proper explanation of myself, and his family all around
him, but I made sure.
>
>
233
FOURTH MANSIONS
"How?" asked Boneface.
"Why, I held a small mirror to his mouth. It wasn't
clouded as it would be if he had the slightest breath.
And he had no pulse or body warmth. He was dead.”
“No, let me," said Boneface. “I'll make sure.” Bone-
face went up to kill Cramms, and Loras was puzzled.
“But what other test will he use?” this peculiar Loras
asked. It wasn't just that Loras was an alien. Beyond
that, he seemed uncomprehending at times.
“Oh, he'll have a sure test," Foley said. “I thought
you understood the nature of the men we're combatting."
“I begin to see,” Loras mused. “It's possible that he
was not dead at all. That would fool anybody not in
the secret, wouldn't it? But I haven't a lot of enthusiasm
for this killing. I am terminating my relationship with
this group
Loras didn't fully understand people. Or else he was
faking; possibly he was no alien, but something else.
“You'll either kill or be killed," Foley told him. “I'll
leave no loose ends."
The lights of the town went out then. It gave a
chilly effect to Foley's words.
“No, no, I don't believe you'd do it,” Loras protested.
"A
person can quit any time he wants to quit. I'll stay
right here by the bonfire till you're gone. You wouldn't
dare do it here in the light.”
Boneface was back already. Say, that man was fast!
He was fast in understanding a situation also. He did
Loras in. He did it in an offhand way, with a rapid and
deadly wrist-flick that he used. “I was wrong," Foley
said to himself. “I'm not near as good with the short
knife as Boneface is.”
After that, luck turned against them. They couldn't
find Rowell; they realized that Rowell would see to
it that they didn't find him. And Goodfoot, Munsey,
Napier, Nash, Cabot, Bottoms were not only said to be
dead but they were aggressively dead; they were un-
234
FOURTH MANSIONS
alterably dead, watchfully dead, and with their min-
ions about them. They were making a great thing
about being dead. There was no getting to them; they
were guarded, they were inviolable. They had not made
the mistake of Twitchell and Cramms, or it may be
that the word travels very fast in their set. They were
safely dead so that they could live again, or they had
already entered other persons and were living there.
Perhaps one of them could be crashed to. Boneface
was eager to try it. It mattered not at all to him if his
own destruction was part of the bargain. Boneface dis-
appeared rather suddenly from the group, and he may
have gotten one of the Suspendeds. But none of the
rest of Foley's band could get at any of the enemies at
all.
“Forget it, Fred, forget it,” Miguel Fuentes was say-
ing from distant underground. “They are only toys now.
But tomorrow you yourself may turr.. into something
more than a toy."
It had become very difficult to move about now.
Everyone was out of his lightless house and into the
streets to watch the crowds and the fires. There is
no one who doesn't like to watch fires. There was a
great amount of breaking glass, and much fighting, but
now it was more and more confused.
The New Prophets began to preach by torchlight as
though the latter days had come. It was the younger
Pliny, those many centuries ago, who mentioned that in
times of turmoil men with beards will appear instantly,
when in all Rome there had not been bearded men
before the moment of strife. The younger Pliny had
lived in a shaved age; he believed that the bearded
men who appear suddenly are wraiths or portents, and
not men at all.
It was a bearded portent who appeared now at one
of the circles, further clogging traffic; and there were
others of them about town. This one talked with a rum-
>
235
FOURTH MANSIONS
ble touched with both irony and hysteria, and he seemed
to have found his proper setting there in the torchlight:
“The pact is broken. The compromise has revealed
itself as no deeper than spiderwebs on the grass. Did
you really believe that the peace would be longer than
a long breath? Did you imagine that the thin earth on
which you trod did not have another earth under it?
Did you really believe that these brittle buildings were
the houses of the mighty? Did you actually suppose that
this white town on the river would endure longer than
three long lifetimes? Did you imagine that the sickly
hum you heard vas truly the speech of men? Or that
the mechanical wound-up toys would never run down?”
You have heard of fiery-eyed prophets, and this
man was one indeed. There were many bonfires and
torches going now and their fire seemed to dance in
his huge eyes. And yet the fire images there were not
reflections; they were originals.
“Whoever promised you peace? Who promised you
ease? Did you really believe that you could live your
whole life without spilling blood? Could you have
dreamed that it is in the natural order for a man to die
in bed? You fancied that the day would be so long
that the dark would never come? That the earth would
lie still and no more riffle its hide? But the weak
interval is over with, and we come now to life itself,
or to death."
“He's a prophet like one of the prophets,” Croll told
Foley. “As patrick, I will extend my aegis over him."
“Who told you that your house was meant to keep
out the elements?” the prophet still prophesied. “Who
gave the promise that one should live clean and dry?
What mad seer said that a man should live long enough
to see the faces of his grandchildren? Who told you that
you had the right to go in shoes, or fed? Did you not
know that the steep earth would break through this
smooth clutter you have placed upon it? Who told you
236
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
to quit growing fangs and claws? What actuary prom-
ised you life till morning?”
Not direful, no, no. This was the most joyous prophet
anyone ever heard. It was all high expectation about to
be fulfilled for him now. Like snow on deserts, like
crowning fire in dead wood, like violence and eruption
giving the answer to satiety, this was an addled prophet
of new life, not of death.
"It has been said that a man must lose his soul at least
once if only for the pleasure of finding it again. I say
that a man who has died without seeing the end of
the world has lived in vain! But many of us here will
not have lived in vain. The corral is open and the
beasts are loose. Do not look back. The world isn't there
any more. Ah, but look back then, if only to raise a little
salt. There has never been enough salt in the earth.
Unless your salt exceeds that of the saltimbanques it
were no matter if you ever lived or not. Why do you
fear to die who have never lived? But I am sure of
my
new life, I am sure of my new desire, though it is bom
out of ashes. What, is it not a wonder that I was dead
and that now I live?”
"Let's be about our business, Croll,” Foley said.
“I have his words anyhow, as coming from the weave.”
“And I have them anyhow, as patrick,” Croll said.
It was hard to tell which of the night screams were
genuine, as the teenagers were on the jag of screaming
in dark places for the fun of it. A genuine scream will
always sound false, just as real terror always appears
comical and contemptible to those without compassion.
But there was more noise than blood that night. An
effete generation does not return to massive rapine
and murder all at once, even though it has long lost all
moral objection to them. It will take a while for new
energy to grow toward real action.
The amateur town-criers were having a field night of
it with stories of rockets only ninety seconds away, and
237
FOURTH MANSIONS
Baltimore and Philadelphia already obliterated; and
corpses piled deep in the streets of New York with no
one to bury them.
It was only those who believed in an incredible plot
who understood that it might already have succeeded.
For, if the Suspendeds had already decided to die,
it meant that they had the situation under control, or
that they had entered other hosts. It was not their idea
to waste time in watching these death agonies of a
civilization, a dreary interval that would surely take
the greater part of a generation.
And their job had not been too difficult: to bump the
world at one critical point, to ensure that it dropped once
more into its old repeating cycle, that it did not break
out of the cycle into ascending spiral. Three cities, each
more advanced in artifact and building and spirit: these
had been. Then the fourth city, the city of destruction.
And then let it repeat. This was the essence of real
order, to maintain the sequence of birth, growth, de-
struction and death, and rebirth: the closed cycle. Let
it never be broken or opened!
And (like the old Oriental wrestlers) you could let the
world throw itself by its own strength. The stodgy old
watchers, they would overwatch now. The reactors would
overreact. The Lawful-Lawless Hydra-Weave would
absorb psychic energy and turn it back on itself. The
monsters defeat each other and the world and bring
about the destruction plateau.
“We'll see if their plot works, Fred,” young Miguel
Fuentes was communicating from far underground.
“Yes, the watchers will overwatch. The old patrick
here is shaking their invisible net. The reactors will
overreact. I myself will overreact most strenuously in
the morning. And that hydra that brushed myself and
yourself, it is sending out electric poison that I can
see like the borealis lights even here in my underground.
But there is something else, little Freddy. You are
238
FOURTH MANSIONS the something else. You are the simple man, the inno­ cent, you are the virgin who charms the unicorn. Hey, is that not jazzy talk, little Freddy? I don't know what you will do, how you will alter it. But there is some­ thing. Do you know what you willdo, Freddy?" "No," said Fred Foley shortly to the voice that was coming from underground seventeen hundred miles away. "This patrick does not overwatch, but he watches," said Croll. "We need no more than the desire to break to a higher life," the prophet was still sounding in the dis­ tance. "If we are sure of this, then we cannot be leveled." Yet it would seem as if the stimums of the Sus­ pendeds was working. Throughout the boondocks and waste places of the world, a hundred or so groups had gotten the whiff of the change, of the vacuum needing to be filled, and had begun to move. There was a strong group in Anatolia, one in Bas Pyrenees, one in Circassia, one in Sierra Leone, one on the Rio Grande River which was led by Miguel Fuentes. Some of these sudden armies, after they had eaten their surroundings and their near rivals, would be of real effect. And tin­ der had been torched everywhere. Double assassinations of men of opposite parties had happened in a dozen parts of the world. Soon there would be risings by the minorities and the abused, and the abusing. The acute could already hear those stir­ rings like a. giant hornets' nest. "That phase is unstoppable, Freddy," Miguel Fuentes called again from the distance. "But tomorrow you will start a different thing. Freddy, you are the difference."
Then they spoiled the night. They turned on the lights again. A few maintenance workers had got past the tepid terrorists and turned on the lights of the city again. It made a disappointing difference. There had been a
239
FOURTH MANSIONS certain rightness of setting in the torchlights and bon­ fires. Now that was gone. There was a dead girl lying in the gutter. Nobody went to her. All went past with eyes averted as thougli she had been nothing. She remained there; she may still be there. But otherwise it was only night-time in the city, and people going home. Foley, Croll, O'Mara and the honey-faced man went to Proviant's, which was still open, or opened again. Well, perhaps it was a different world already, but it looked about the same. They sat across from Larker (or a man who was just possibly Larker; he had still another appearance now) , who was with some people Foley didn't know. Foley and Larker exchanged glances and maintained the fie: tion of not knowing each other. "It didn't go off so well, even for a show," Foley told his group. "I imagine they planned it to misfire. Except for the grotesqueness and confusion of it all, it might have provoked some sort of heroic reaction; and their point is to prove that there's nothing heroic left. With that, our ruin is already assured, and they've won it in their sleep." "This is the way the world ends," said Larker at the table across. "The lights go on and it's revealed that it was all a play-act. There wasn't any world. There was only the fiction of a world." "There was a Byzantine legend," s aid Bencher, "to the effect that God made the world only for the grand effect of ending it. But the effect never came off quite right. He couldn't get the thing to climax properly. It was bad and he knew it. He'd set it back a few days or years from the ending and try again. It would be even worse. There were conflagrations that failed to con­ vince, thunderbolts that sounded as if a boy were throw­ ing them, doom-cracking that went off like a toy pistol. He'd set it back a few days and try the ending again,
240
FOURTH MANSIONS
and again, and again. And it developed that the ending
would ultimately be only that Byzantine one, to live
the latter days futilely over and over again.”
Bencher? What was Bencher doing here? And why
hadn't Foley known him when he had looked right at
him? Foley went over the man now, and he was Bench-
er in every point. But Foley hadn't known him before.
And how come he was with Larker and that com-
pany? How come he knew them?
“Mr. Bencher, what are you doing here?” Fred Foley
demanded.
“Drinking twice-heated bad coffee and observing an
unsatisfactory end of a world. Oh no, I didn't think that
you were crazy, Freddy. It was necessary at the time
that I appeared to. Biddy had come to me with your
story some time ago. I found it too wild to have been
invented. I looked into it and found that it was quite
true. I put my resources to it and discovered many of
its ramifications. I find now that I've come too late
on the scene; the damage is done. It's to be snake-bit
finally, to watch the snake slither out of reach of even
revenge. They're secure somewhere as though frozen
in ice and they can laugh at us out of the frost. There's
nothing we can do.
"Oh, we'll live with it for a while. We may even seem
for that while to regain part of our footing. But the
world has already worked itself into too precarious a
position. It's gone down before. I don't see how we
can keep it from going down again. It's the old cycle,
'
“I still hope to break that cycle, somehow," said Fred
Foley.
"Why, Freddy? To break it means there may be an
end to the temporality, I see that now. I'm not brave
enough to face that end, no matter how distant, and I'm
the bravest man I know. The repeating cycle is, after
all, the best. It means that someone will still be going
you know."
241
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
on, over and over. I'm afraid to break out of the cycle,
even out of the top side of it. And it will do no good
to warn the world. There'll be no belief in the nature
of the disaster, not even after the disaster has hap-
pened. And we'd certainly be madmen to talk of the
old dead men reappearing and frustrating at intervals.
"Can't we at least hunt down the remnants of them?"
the boney-faced man asked. “Now, yet tonight.”
“We will, some of them, and you'll have more adven-
ture tonight, man. But we can't even guess where most
of them have gone. We have one microscopic triumph
though, Freddy, Carmody Overlark, one of their real
leaders, the one who first attracted your attention, is
really dead and not gone to his state.
"That nearly makes me happy, Mr. Bencher. How?"
“Drowned. We went for him out at his estate. He
went into his lake at quite a deep point to escape us.
There's a local legend that the lake is bottomless. We
shot at him when he surfaced, and we watched for his
reappearance long enough to be sure that he wouldn't
reappear. He's drowned for good. He, at least, will
not be returning."
It is no good to warn the world of disaster, even after
it has happened. It is no good to tell your associates
that they hadn't made good even in this. Whatever had
happened to Carmody Overlark, he wasn't drowned, not
that oldest of the survivors, he who soaked his head in
a bucket. It was unlikely that he had been shot. It was
very likely that he was denned up underwater till he
should decide to waken again.
Had there been the veriest flick of mockery in
Bencher's telling Freddy of this? And why hadn't
Freddy known Bencher at first sight here, when he was
surely that man in every point of him?
"Where's Biddy?” Fred Foley asked.
"She should be here in a moment, Freddy,” Bencher
said. “She went after Miss Cora Addamson, that perni-
>
242
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
cious female of the returnees. And she got her. I felt it.”
“I thought that Addamson was on our list.”
"She was on several lists, Freddy; we wanted to make
sure of her. She'd try her escape by the back door of
her warren, and Biddy was at the back door. Biddy
wanted the job. She was as avid as Boneface here. The
report of Miss Addamson's death is already out. And
here comes Biddy now!” Biddy! That? Oh yeah, it
was Biddy.
"I'd go with her if I were you." (Why was Bencher
being a little oily about all this?) “Two young people
can still salvage something even from a sinking world.”
Why now, at the appearance of Biddy Bencher, did
it seem to Foley that things had gone irrevocably wrong?
For him, she should be the one right thing left in the
world. What was this new horror?
“There's something very wrong about all this,” Foley
said, rising. “All the warings are screaming at me but
I can't tell what they say."
"There are a lot of things wrong,” Bencher said, “but
this is one thing that can still be right. Be off, you two.
We'll bury the world without your help for the rest of
the night.”
"Come along, Freddy, little poodle-tooth," said Bid-
dy Bencher. “We have so many things to make up for.”
And Freddy went with her. Emptyl Biddy had never
seemed empty before.
“There's still something wrong with this,” Fred Foley
said to himself. “All the wamings are screaming at me.
Even from the weave. Why isn't she in the weave now?”
"Wait, sir, wait!” Croll called. He rushed to Foley,
caught him at the door, and held his two hands. No-
body in his life had ever called Freddy "sir” before.
The patrick seemed really possessed now and he ema-
nated another sort of weave.
“Sir, Your Magnanimous, know you that the Congre-
gation of Patricks, Larkers and Crolls, and Autocrats
243
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
and Exarchs, and Aloysii and Metropolitans, meet-
ing in convocation of the mind, have filled the Office
that has been vacant for a thousand years,” Croll in-
toned. He was pathetic in his derangement.
"I've heard of the office," Foley said. “Good luck to
all patricks this night! Who fills the office now, Croll?”
“You, sir, Your Simplicitas, Your Innocentia, Your
Laetitia, you are the Elect.” Then the Croll gave Foley
a sort of accolade-embrace, and Foley returned it in a
special form that he had been ignorant of till that mo-
ment. Croll also laid a narrow stole about the neck and
shoulders of Foley.
“But this isn't the purple of the ruler,” Freddy smiled.
"It's the lavender of the fool.”
"I know,” said Croll. “But it is so ordered.”
Biddy dragged Fred Foley out of the place. “What
was all that?” she asked him. “What did he do?”
“Made me Emperor,” said Freddy.
They walked in the parkways. It was all Biddy then,
Biddy chatter, Biddy lapses of logic, Biddy high spirits
as they walked about the mall. It seemed a little as if
she were walking him in a direction he didn't want to
go. But she'd always done that.
Oh, but why wasn't she in the weave? The weave
had now come to the point of explosion and this girl
who was essential to it wasn't in it at all. Cinnamon
cookie with her eyeballs painted with landscapes and
dragon-scapes, what had gone out from her? She seemed
unfamiliar inside herself. It was almost as if she didn't
know that the pictures on her eyeballs changed, as
if she couldn't see with every part of her, as if she
were using little peepholes through the painted scenes.
Now this was funny: Biddy's eyeballs were a part
of the weave, and her eyeballs were the painted-on
part of her. But otherwise, this girl here was not in
the swelling weave at all. Serpents and patricks in the
scenes on her eyeballs, the rooms of the patrick Bag-
244
a
OURTH MANSIONS
ley back home and the ape-dog plappergeist who served
himl The plappergeist picked up a small sign and
showed it and words flashed themselves across it. Fred-
dy, this is Biddy in the words. They moved in on me,
they took me over, she crowded me out. That's not me
Biddy in her. I go back to the weave now. We're going
to break it and throw it.
This girl here with him didn't even know that the
pictures on her eyeballs changed, but she was chatter-
ing Biddy chatter and leading Fred Foley in a direc-
tion he didn't seem to want to go. And then there was
the overpowering business of the breaking of the weave.
Hondo Silverio (that big, healing snake of a man) was
into the weave very powerfully to throw it. Foley had
the feeling and fear that Hondo would throw the weave
to him. Even so, the weave was cleaner now. And Biddy
Bencher was into the weave; dead, but not at all spirit-
less. The most overrated member of the weave, Baubo
the demon indeed, was being broken out of it by Hondo
and Salzy and Wing Manion; he began to lose his hold
and to fall, whimpering and gibbering.
Arouet Manion, the writhing reticulatus on the stone
floor, had been to his last arena. He died now with a
flickering blue and orange glow about him; the glow
gathered itself into a little ball-lightning that hung in
the air a moment. It decayed with hissing and noisome
odor, exploded with a weak poof, and was gone. And
that was all the soul that Arouet Manion had had.
Jim Bauer, purpled and choking on his own tongue,
staggered from the patio and reeled groaning down
the iron-railed stairway to the lake. His own soul gulped
out of his mouth in garish globs as he diminished and
dimmed. A crackling purple light fell past him and
plunged through the lake, falling down into interior in-
finity. It was the demon named Baubo who had been
broken out of the weave and finally let go.
And Bauer was letting go, though his fingers throbbed
245
FOURTH MANSIONS
out blood from the intensity of his grip on the iron rail-
ing. One by one, the members broke him out of the
weave. Letitia Alive arose from a couch in an interior
room, the hypnosis over her broken. She walked out
of the house Morada and into the road. She had no re-
semblance to Letitia Bauer now, and no remembrance
of the several days she had spent in Morada. Complete-
ly confused, back as the girl she had been before she
was mind-napped, she walked away down the front
road. She left the weave. She had never been in it
strongly.
Letitia Dead found release in the cleansing of the
weave and felt the first joy since she had died. And
Hondo (why such a thing, why such a thing?) was
throwing the weave to Fred Foley, as soon as Bauer
should be completely broken out of it.
Biddy Bencher was dead, but still strong and in com-
munication. And this girl here with Foley, who looked
like Biddy and was not, was aware of many outre
things, but she was completely blind and deaf to the
weave itself. And her painted eyeballs ceased to change
now; they were no more than dead paint. No, one last
flick, one final material message from Biddy herself in
words across the painted eyeballs.
Fooled her, Freddy, one last trick. The Harvester
mark on the forehead is cancerous. It's a short-term
body she's stolen from me.
Then the eyes were dead paint for an end, and this
girl was someone else.
“What happened to Biddy Bencher?” Freddy asked
her sullenly. Powerful men from the dark gripped
each of Foley's arms. He would go in the direction this
girl wished.
“But I'm Biddy Bencher,” she said. “How could there
be another?”
“Then what happened to Miss Cora Addamson the
beautiful and evergreen harpy?”
246
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
"I'm still beautiful, don't you think so? It's nice to
be several persons, and you yourself will sample that
pleasure. When did you know?”
“When you called me little poodle-tooth' Biddy had
several hundred pet names for me, but they followed
a pattern known only to the two of us. 'Poodle-tooth'
couldn't be among them. Why are we going back to the
Bug? And what did you do with Biddy?” Those men
were hustling Foley along at a pretty good clip now.
"I became Biddy, what else?” said the Beautiful Ad-
damson harpy. “You already know that. And you be-
gin to doubt your sanity now when you were so sure of
it before? Oh, you'll have a period of that, Freddy,
but when you come through on the other side you'll be
sound. We don't make mistakes in those we select to
join us."
“Dammit, Addamson, at least tell me where is her
body, or yours, or the other.
“When the lights came on in the town you saw it ly-
ing in the gutter and you passed it by without a second
look. An empty body doesn't have much meaning
when the personality has been drained out of it. Our
beloved Carmody Overlark (now enjoying a well-earned
sleep) told you that we were superb mimics, but I'm
afraid he didn't tell you all that's involved in our very
ancient art of mimicry. So now you don't know whether
this is her body or mine."
"Why Biddy? She wasn't prominent in the world.”
“In her potential she was staggering. Never in my lives
did I move into such a house. And her father was
prominent and rich and powerful, with a lifelong slum-
bering powerhouse of a mind. My own father, who is
still my father and who has now become Bencher, se-
lected him and her. My own father hadn't appeared in
the world in quite some centuries and there are reasons
why he can't be recognized even now. He rather over-
stepped himself the last time around and became one
247
>
22
FOURTH MANSIONS
of the permanent legends of evil. Quite a good fellow,
though. In not too long a time you'll appreciate him as
a father-in-law.”
"Had Bencher been taken over by your father when
I saw him last?"
“Yes. Just minutes before.”
They were back at the Bug. Two strong men dragged
Fred Foley in. Doctor Millhouse was presiding.
“Ah, Smith-Foley, you wandered off to see your girl,”
he purred. “Fortunately she had the good sense to have
you brought back here. You've guessed, haven't you,
that the Bug is more than the Bug? It's one of our Cen-
ters."
“I thought you were dead.”
"So did Croll. And Boneface, coming suddenly, killed
another man whom I put up as a shield and gave my
appearance (in the bone-face mind). And now things
will go on as before.”
“But the world is going to pieces," Foley protested.
"So it is,” agreed Doctor Millhouse. “Exactly as be-
fore. We keep it going to pieces. And it'll be a smaller
world when we put the pieces together again some-
time hence. We have to shrink it periodically; that's
part of the cycle. You also become part of it. You'll
be one of us now. Foley. Your catharsis will begin
now. Oh yes, you really will lose your mind, but only
for a while. It'll be a much more amenable mind when
it's restored to you. These things are so predictable.”
But one thing not at all predictable was suffering
terrible spasm and alteration.
>
>
In one context, James Bauer had lurched down to the
bottom of the iron stairway and was standing ankle-deep
in the waters of his lake, hanging on with the last
skin of his life and moaning that he should fall. But in
another context he had gone down the world cliff that
is the side of Morada. This cliff has no bottom, and
248
FOURTH MANSIONS
nobody has even been more than a dozen steps down
that broken stairway from the top. Concrete steps break-
ing off from the everlasting stone; the iron railing, which
had been built by giants, now swinging loose over the
void; steeper and more pitchful steps and a great gap
in them, and also the disappearance above of those
steps that were already climbed down.
Bauer leapt the first gap, clawed stone, found the
remnant of a step and even a last rusty length of an
iron rail, slid purposefully toward a ledge, hung there
a moment with bleeding fingers. He saw a continuance
of the steps below, back in under the cliff at a dizzy
angle. He swung himself in under, let go, scraped rough-
er rock in search of a foothold, missed his footing and
hold in a sudden dampness and slickness (that was the
lake in the mundane aspect) and fell downward, and
down, and down, screaming hoarsely forever.
“It's a new weave now," said Hondo Silverio. Even that
strong one, growing stronger, was shaken by Bauer's
fall like black lightning. “A new weave. Here, Freddy,
catch the tangle of it! We give you the Mastery!”
All his life people gave valuable things to Freddy
unasked-powers, lives, worlds.
It beat the other thing into him. Hondo and Salzy Sil-
verio, Wing Manion, the dead Letitia Bauer and the
dead Bedelia Bencher, all were tangled up in him and
they were stronger than the new intruder.
But a tired spirit was intruded into Foley then while
men held him fast and other men plunged needles into
him and Doctor Millhouse presided.
“He takes you over, Foley," the doctor said, “but he's
old and he's incomplete. It's necessary that a lot of you
survive along with him. You'll make your arrangements.
Go mad now! But when your long madness passes
you'll be one of us, what's left of you.” And Doctor Mill-
house held a watch in his hand, studying it.
"What are you looking at? Dammit, what are you
a
249
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
watching?” Fred Foley demanded as the darkness be-
gan to gulp him down.
"The second hand,” said the doctor. “These things are
so predictable.”
“Why? Why? Nothing is going to happen to me,” Fred-
dy declared. “I have strengths that you don't know
about.” (Pride of patricks, monstrous harvest of the
brain-weave, flight of falcons.) “Biddy-Oh, dammit!
Cora Addamson, what's he waiting for?”
Cora-Biddy had the curious old shell-form ears, the
itching ears of Scripture. She had them from both her
components, for the people of the weave are as evilly
avid for novelty as are the returning people.
"The stridor vesanus, Freddy,” said Cora-Biddy. "Be
patient. It comes.
"The what?” Fred Foley asked, but he already knew.
The second night in the tomb is always the most hide-
ous one. What comes forth, comes forth from that de-
lirium. And the last floating spider-silk had now settled
on him. He was caught in the spiderweb.
"The screaming, Freddy,” Cora the beautiful and ever-
green harpy said. “It always comes on schedule.”
Then, as Doctor Millhouse looked up from his watch,
Foley's mind gave way. He began to scream. The old,
returning Other entered and mingled with his mind and
body. He continued the screaming (the final tomb
humiliation) as they laced him into the jacket to take
him away. And that was the end of Fred Foley as he
.
had been.
>
But it wasn't the end of him as he would be. He did
have strengths that they didn't know about.
He was Master of the weave, and now the weave need
not remain anarchic.
With a word he could become Master of the falcon.
He could fly the falcon, or he could ground it.
He was companion of patricks, and now he was him-
250
FOURTH MANSIONS
self more than a patrick. He was more than a Croll or
Aloysius. He was Emperor.
He now had a retuming lightning-toad intruded into
his head and his body, and in the toad was the wisdom-
jewel.
He was Everyman. He was Everylout.
Nobody else, coming in simplicity, had ever partaken
of all four Monsters. Nobody else had had such good
eyes, had ever been able to see on all the levels and
into all the worlds. No person else had ever integrated
all his archetypes and become fully conscious-even
while tumbling into needle-induced unconsciousness.
He had been called, as the patricks had not been,
as the Harvesters themselves had not been, as none
of the exterior creatures had been of themselves. The
Harvesters, the persons of the weave, had not them-
selves truly mutated. They couldn't have done it; they
hadn't the holy simplicity for it. Theirs was a false
and premature mutation. It was Fred Foley who now
became the first of the new mutation, the special sort
of man.
And in the morning-
(Green-mottled humor in him, helical passion, saintly
sex-fish, ashen death-joy, cinnamon cookie for Cerberus-
Pride of patricks in him, Black Patricks of New
York and Nairobi, Yellow Patricks of Moscow and
Lhasa, Brown Patricks of Batangas and Tongareva, No-
bility of Metropolitans and Simplicity of Crolls, the
Exarch of Yerevan and the Aloysius of Dublin in him,
Oceanic ages in him, insane flitting reptilian wraiths
that have a random gift that isn't given to proper crea-
tures, and a new interior guest from that returning
jewel-headed toad people-
Flight of falcons in him. “You can command the fal-
con, Freddy, when you wake to it,” came the under-
251
>
-
FOURTH MANSIONS
ground voice of Miguel. “You can even command the
falcon to furl its wings again.”-
Unweaponed simplicity in him that could burst every
bond. Every under-thing rooted in him now,
The ashen Letitia herself had just borne a child who
was truly beautiful and full of light, somehow, in a
manner and place that we do not know the names of.
Som
Letitia-gladness in him. Gobbled devils in him,)
-and in the morning he would come out of it all: a
new element that the returnees had not calculated in
adjusting the cyclic trajectory. (Returnees also in him.)
On so small a new module it might depend. What
would be the shape and direction of it now: still the
repeating cycle, or the ascending spiral?
Would the next Mansions be the First again? Or the
Fifth?
252
get higher and higher and never have to come down from it, if you want the good-time town and the crowd that goes with it for a long haul (and it's going to be a very long haul), then howl it out so they'll know that you're interested. If you want anything at all added, tell them now, and they'll put it in. Contact them by regular mail, or phone or voxo. Or tear out a sheet of this screed, scribble your wants in the margin, and drop it in any mail box. It will get there. The address is:
That's all you need, but get with it. They're building our place now.
"Bureau of Wonderful Cities. Old Earth."
Maybe Jones and the City
191
Mean Men
Seven Story Dream
la
G ILFORD GADBERRY had a contempt for dawns badly
>
a
done. He knew how blatant and stylized the outdoor world can be
in its pristine moments: the contrived shagginess of grass, the
stupidity of trees, the falsity of flowers, the oafishness of the birds
and their inept melody. These scratched the smooth surface of his
soul. “Bad work, very bad work,” Gadberry would opine, for he
was an artist.
Yet there were times when these sorry units arranged them-
selves with striking effect. On this very carly dawn they made an
almost perfect harnony, and Gadberry gracefully acknowledged
it. There it was: the old oaks, and the new firs and hedges, the
ragged Bermuda on the vacant lot in the new sun, the thin rye
grass that held to the shade of the building, the corpse on the
lawn, the row of hollyhocks and the lone aster in the middle of
them, the drooping mimosa full of driveling birds, the even rank of
garbage cans standing chalky in the aluminum dawn, and that
damned dew over everything.
In spite of the elements that went into the composition the
effect was near perfect—and yet there was one clashing entity in
that aubade scene. Gadberry reviewed it in his mind, for the artist
is satisfied with nothing but perfection.
The firs, the hedges, the corpse, the mimosa, the garbage cans,
195
Mean Men
the lawn, the hollyhocks with their lone aster—something was in
that peaceful morning scene that simply did not belong there.
Gadberry strode over and savagely struck down the aster with
its white flower. The harmony of the scene was now perfect. He
walked
away,
his artist's soul satisfied.
On his way to find an early eating place, he met a policeman
named Embree and told him that Minnie Jo Merry was lying dead
on that little lawn behind the apartment where she lived, and
perhaps it should be looked into.
CAPTAINS Keil and Gold were there quickly and in charge.
Minnie Jo was bruised about the throat and dried blood framed
her mouth, but her death may have been caused by a violent
concussion. Keil and Gold left her to Dr. Sanderson and their men.
There was no crowd. This was very early on a Saturday morning,
the apartment was on a quiet street, and the small rear lawn was
secluded.
Orders were given for all the residents of the apartment
building to remain in the building, and Captain Keil sent for
Gilford Gadberry, the only one who had left. Gadberry told the
patrolman who came for him that he would come as soon as he
had finished his breakfast, and not a moment before. He finished it
leisurely, drinking coffee and sketching while the policeman
fumed. He was sketching a fuming policeman.
196
Seven Story Dream
a
>
“MRS. RAFFEL,” Captain Keil said, "you are the owner and
operator of this apartment. I assume that
you know something of
your renters. Who lives here?”
“Minnie Jo lived here, and how will I get her rent now? She
used to say, 'You worry too much about my rent. I'm not much
“
further back than some of the others. You should know that I'm
good for it. As long as I live I will always be good for what I owe.'
But now who will be good for what she owes?”
“Your problem, Mrs. Raffel. Who else lived—lives here?”
“Dillahunty, Gadberry, Handle, Izzard, Lamprey, Nazworthy,
all in a permanent or temporary state of single ss.”
“Six living and one dead tenant. Is that all?”
“It's a small place, but I do have two other empty units—three
it will be now. I doubt if this will help me rent them.”
“It may not make a difference. The girl was murdered in her
own room, we believe, and she seems to have made no outcry. She
was either taken very suddenly, or she knew the intruder well.”
“Not necessarily, Captain. Minnie Jo was a very open person.
If
Jack the Ripper himself had come in, red from his trade, she'd
have said, 'Hi, honey, sit down and talk to me.' But it was
probably someone she knew.”
“What are your feelings on hearing of the death of Miss
Merry?"
“Satisfaction—though I'll miss her—and relief and thankfulness
that it has finally turned out all right.”
“Turned out all right? Do you call it turning out all right that
she was murdered?” he asked her.
“Oh yes. There were many worse things that could have
.
happened to her. How lucky that Minnie Jo was killed before they
happened!”
“You will have to explain that. Did you
hate her?”
>
197
Mean Men
a
“No, I loved her—and I will explain. Minnie Jo was quite a
good girl, but she was on the edge of becoming quite a bad girl. I
have seen it happen to so many of the young ones who are loose in
the world. Every time I know one, and notice her nearing the
change, I pray that something will intervene and prevent it. This
is the first time my prayers have been answered, and I'm
thankful.”
“Could you yourself have done anything to bring about this, ah,
intervention, this preventative death?”
“I have just told you: I prayed. I didn't know it would be death,
but that's as good a solution as any."
Then they questioned her a little about other things.
Gadberry, now back from his breakfast, was questioned by
Captain Gold
“Gadberry, do you often get up so early?”
“Never. But I often stay up this late. I work at night and sleep
in the daytime.”
“Why?” Captain Gold inquired.
“It was originally a pose. Then I became used to it.”
"You seemed extraordinarily cool on discovering Miss Merry
dead. You did not make an outcry, or hurry to report it.”
“I reported it to the first person I met, a policeman. This
seemed the logical person, and the logical thing to do.”
“Almost too logical. What was your opinion of Miss Merry?”
“Alive, or dead? The girl was somehow completed in death. It
improves many people. So often we see only the outside of people,
but to look at her smeared with her own blood gives an added
dimension, a more total view.”
“Ah, what was your opinion of her alive?”
"Her hands and ankles were rather good; between, she was
“
198
Seven Story Dream
>
conventional. She hadn't eyes, no eyes at all. It isn't usual for a girl
her age to have eyes. A child will sometimes have eyes, a woman
after thirty may have them again, or a man after forty. I never saw
her hair, which is to say that it was doctored. I sketched her ears
sometimes, and her throat. I was not satisfied with either of them,
but then it isn't twice a year that I come on either that is really
good. Are you interested in these things?”
?
“We are somewhat interested in the throat of this girl, and other
matters. Since you work at night, you must have been awake. Did
.
you
hear any outcry or evidence of a struggle?”
“No. I could be throttled myself and not notice it. When I work
I am taken by the Holy Spirit of art. I am probably unable to help
you on the more mundane details you are seeking.”
“What is your opinion of the tenant George Handle? It is
reported that you sponge on him considerably.”
“The artist is worthy of his hire. George is an oaf, a fool; but do
not believe that a fool and his money are easily parted. I have to
work for every dollar I twist out of him. George has caught the
sickness of self-improvement. He learns at night. He has one of
those sets with an earphone for under the pillow. He's put quite a
bit of money into the recordings, money much better given to me.
He has his own recorder, reads into it things he wishes to learn,
then has them played back while he sleeps. Whatever he learns
while asleep, he is still a fool when awake.”
“You haven't any use for fools?”
“But I have! I often make use of fools.”
They questioned him a little more, then went on to Izzard.
“Mr. Izzard, what were your relations with Miss Merry?” Keil
asked.
“Avuncular-of the Dutch-uncle sort. Low Dutch, really, but
a
199
Mean Men
she hadn't come to realize that yet. I lavished gifts on her, and she
was friendly. I believe I would ultimately have been successful.
There was a change beginning in her.”
“Yes. Others have noticed the change. Were these expensive
gifts?”
“Not to me. The price tags don't matter. I run the A to Izzard
Variety Store. She was without discernment, and I have access to
bargains.”
“You wouldn't have been rebuffed by her, and been angry
enough to do her in?”
“I was rebuffed by her constantly, but she did it in a graceful
way-never so as to stop the flow of gifts. My timetable for her
was a long one and I am sorry to see it interrupted. No, I never
laid a hand on her, except sometimes in attempted affection.”
They questioned him a little about the others, a little more
about himself, and left him.
Next, they questioned Nazworthy, a large, sullen-appearing
,
man. He said that any of them might have done it: Handle, Izzard,
Lamprey, Gadberry, Dillahunty. “They are a bad bunch. All of
them always looking at the young girl. Any of them do it. Yes, I
am awake when it happen. I hear the shots ring out. I ‘
somebody have killed that pretty Miss Merry.' Whichever one you
I will positively identify him as the killer.”
“You are sure that you heard shots? She was not shot.”
“It was the knife I hear, then. I hear it go in loud. I say,
“Somebody have killed that pretty Miss Merry.'”
“She was not knifed.”
“How was it, then? What is the loud noise I heard? How did he
kill her?”
“We believe that she was strangled, and then thrown or pushed
from her window.”
say, 'Oh
decide on,
) )
200
Seven Story Dream
>
“My very thought. That is what I heard. The strangle noises and
the thrown-out-of-the-window noises. I hear everything. I know
everything. I will give testimony."
There was the look of arrogant laughter behind the hard eyes
of
Nazworthy. He was talking nonsense, either seriously or spe-
ciously. They would get nothing out of him.
Mr. Dillahunty told Keil and Gold, “My opinion of the lodgers
I cannot give as I would like, being opposed to profanity. You may
have to discount my opinion of them, however. I always have a
low opinion of those with whom I live; but when I have moved on
to other lodgings I remember them with affection. No, I heard
nothing in the night. I hear little without my aid, and I do not
sleep with it. My acquaintance with the aforesaid Minnie Jo was
sketchy. She would smile, and I would smile, but I am thrice her
age and a crippled man. Having second sight, I knew that this
would happen ... No, I haven't second sight to that extent; I
don't know who did it. You are sure it was one of the lodgers?”
“No. But she was apparently in her own room and in bed when
accosted. She seems to have been strangled there and thrown out
her own window. It was quite late, after the dew, and no feet left
the building after the dew and before her discovery-except those
of Gadberry, who reported her. At the moment we have no leads
to anyone except those who lived in this building. Tell us, what
about Mrs. Raffel?”
“A religious fanatic but a good woman. It is believed by the
others that I pay the regular rates here, but that is not so. I live
here partly on the charity of Mrs. Raffel.”
“And Gadberry, the artist?”
“In one word, selfish.”
“George Handle? He has been called a fool.”
“Only a half-fool. But easily led.”
>
a
201
Mean Men
>
>
a
“Izzard?”
“A merchant. He never spent a penny without a return."
“Nazworthy? Is he as crazy as he sounds?”
“No, he isn't. He's a sardonic kidder, with a dislike for all
authority. I can imagine a little the line he would take with the
police. The cat, the only other animal that indulges in straight-
faced sardonic humor, betrays itself by a fick of the tail.
Nazworthy has the same motion, but without the tail.”
“Could he kill?”
“I doubt he could kill Minnie Jo Merry. He hates only
pretentious people, and she wasn't. He could kill a policeman-or
her killer. If another is killed, then you
will know.”
“We'll watch for that. Lamprey?”
“Nothing there. A nothing man. Did you notice the girl well? A
beautiful thing and finely made, but there was plenty of strength
to her. That nothing man couldn't have strangled her. She'd have
strangled him and thrown him out the window. You'll have to look
to one of the others, not to him.”
Dillahunty was right. Lamprey was a nothing man, and he was
terrified of the police. “I didn't kill her. I didn't know her. I didn't
know anybody. I wash dishes at Webbers. I don't know nobody.
I'm in my room all night.”
“Well, did you hear noises in the night?"
“Noises I always hear, and some of them never happen. I'm a
nervous man, but I kill nobody, I hurt nobody. It is more I am
always afraid someone would kill me.”
Lamprey was a small man with small hands, a frightened man
on the edge of incompetency. They questioned him a little more
and left him.
“What do we have?” Captain Keil asked. “A heavy old woman
who is a religious fanatic and also a good woman, and is glad that
>
202
Seven Story Dream
a
the girl was killed before something bad happened to her. An
artist who is selfish. A sardonic kidder who is not as stupid as he
acts. A half-fool who is easily led. A nothing man. A merchant who
does not spend without a return. An old Irishman who is thrice her
age, but can we be sure that all the sap is dead in him? Seven, and
one of them is crazy, but which? Let's go talk to the half-fool.”
“Handle,” Captain Gold said, "did you sleep well last night?”
"No. I have never slept well any night of my life. I dream a lot
and worry a lot. I'm totally alive when I sleep.”
“Was it because of your restlessness at night that you
decided to
try the learn-while-you-sleep systems?”
“Yes. I want to know things, so I decided to tap my nocturnal
energy, as the advertisement said.”
“What is your relationship with Gilford Gadberry?”
“Oh, he takes me for quite a bit, but he knows all the things I
want to know. He can talk about music and funny paintings and
the new dirty novels and psychology and things like that.
Sometimes I turn him on when he talks, and play him back at
night. Sometimes when I lend him money he'll make recordings
for me—Gaelic furniture design, and things like that. He arranges
the things I'll hear at night so I'll get a well-rounded liberal
education.'
“I see. Did
you
hear
any
noises last night?”
“I hear noises every night, though I sleep with the earphones
on, and all outside noise is supposed to be cut out. It must be that
I dream the noises.”
“Did you dream last night? Did you dream anything about a
murder or a dead person?” Gold asked.
“Yes. About seven dreams like that."
“Tell us one of them.”
“Which one?”
203
Mean Men
>
“Hell, I don't know. We're shooting blind. Tell us one.”
“Well, this one, it's kind of silly. This was a long time ago, or
,
anyhow it took place in a cabin and by candlelight. We sat wake
over a corpse. We cracked and ate walnuts, but someone objected
when we threw the shells in with the corpse, though that was a
good place to throw them. Then someone else—"
“Oh Judas!” said Captain Keil.
“I believe that is enough of that one,” Captain Gold said.
“Were all of the seven dreams like that?”
“All of them about murder or corpses, yes. All of them kind of
silly.”
“Seven story dreams we have yet,” Keil said. “We're getting
nowhere.”
“Then we'll get somewhere,” Gold said. “Handle, have you any
idea who killed Minnie Jo Merry?”
“I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie Jo Merry.”
“What?”
“I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie-'
“You are talking for the record?”
“Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed Minnie
Jo Merry. I killed—”
So they took him downtown, but first they gave orders for a new
lock to be put on George Handle's door and they left a guard at
the apartment building.
NATURALLY they didn't leave it at that. The confession of the
half-fool was complete enough. There were odd elements in it, but
he was an odd man. He said that he had killed the girl in a dream;
204
Seven Story Dream
I
that he had risen and gone to her room and strangled her and
thrown her out of the open window because he was jealous. Then
he had gone back to his bed, to other dreams.
Yet there were points about that murder that hadn't been given
out, that only the killer could have known; George Handle knew
them
Nevertheless, the two captains continued to check during that
morning. They found that Minnie Jo was an inefficient but
promising worker for a stationery company. Her particular
girlfriend believed that Minnie Jo ran around only with the men
where she lived. They checked the places she frequented, and she
had been seen with all the men.
She had been out with Gadberry and with Handle often, and
with Izzard nearly as often. She had even been seen dining with
the sardonic Nazworthy at a sardonic place run by two Bulgarian
brothers. She often went to Webbers, and sometimes drank coffee
in the kitchen with the dishwasher Lamprey. It was believed by
them at Webbers, though, that this was mere kindness on her part.
Minnie Jo had even been seen drinking Irish coffee with
Dillahunty in the after-midnight hours at Maddigan's. Nor was she
the only girl a third his age that he brought in. The sap was not all
dead in him yet.
They found that Dillahunty was well liked, Handle was liked,
and even poor Lamprey was liked.
Izzard was not liked, Gadberry was not liked, Nazworthy was
not liked.
“We can tell nothing by that,” Keil said. “Handle has confessed,
and it makes no difference that the people who know him like him.
There is nothing to tie onto the others, even if Gadberry is selfish,
Izzard is demanding, and Nazworthy is sardonic. We still have the
fact that Handle has confessed.”
>
>
205
Mean Men
“Yes. Repetitiously. But to be sure, let's go hear him again.”
”
Again, George Handle told them, “I killed Minnie Jo Merry.
Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed Minnie
Jo”
"He sounds like_”
“Yes, doesn't he?” Keil interrupted Gold. “Let's go look for it.”
“HAS anybody been trying to get into Handle's room?” they
asked the guard at the apartment.
“Gadberry has. Says Handle owes him money. Says he was to go
in and get it. Says he wears Handle's shirts, and this locking out
puts him to grave inconvenience. Handle never locked his door,
according to him. Gadberry was disappointed to find the new lock
on it; he seems pretty nervous now.”
They found Gadberry.
“Come on with us. We'll go to his room and get it.”
“What? Get what?"
“What you were trying to get. What is making you nervous that
you couldn't get? It will be here, somewhere with the bunch of
them. Quite a few of them here, aren't there, Gadberry?"
They were in Handle's room now.
“I don't know what you mean,” Gadberry protested.
“The tapes, the wires, the records. How long would it take to
play them all?”
"I don't know."
“You know pretty well. It would take about forty hours or
more, wouldn't it? Will you find it for us, or must we play them
?
all? And you will listen.”
”
>
>
206
Seven Story Dream
>
.
>
>
“I won't listen to forty hours of that drivel. I'll find it for you.
I'd have said that nothing could break me down, but that surely
could.”
“Why did you kill the girl, Gadberry?”
“Jealousy, frustration, curiosity ..
“I can understand the jealousy. She was an attractive girl. What
was the frustration?"
“She was almost perfect, but not quite, and it is that which is
just short of a masterpiece that infuriates. It is so near—yet it
misses. I'm always in anger to destroy a near-masterpiece.”
“So you destroyed her. And the third element was your
curiosity, like when you said “The girl was somehow completed in
death.' You had to see how she would look dead.”
“Yes. That knowledge was necessary to my work.”
Gadberry had located the tape for them, and Captain Keil was
threading it into the machine.
“I suspect that
you weren't accurate in your appraisal to us of
Miss Merry, Gadberry. You said that she hadn't eyes, and other
things.”
“I lied. She had eyes, and she wasn't conventional. She was near
perfect, gentlemen. So near.”
“And in preparation for the murder it was only necessary for
you to condition the easily led George Handle to a confession?”
“Astute of me, was it not, Captains?”
The machine played now in the compelling voice of Gilford
Gadberry, as it had night after night played to George Handle, in
his sleep, till he had learned to answer on cue; and the cue, of
course, was the question: "Who killed Minnie Jo Merry?”
“Pretty uninspired,” Gadberry had to admit, “but I had to
assume uninspired questioners, to whom the cliché would come
naturally.”
207
Mean Men
The machine went on to recount certain abominations that only
the killer knew he would commit, but the voice of that most
polished madman returned again and again to the command:
“Say, 'I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie Jo Merry.
Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed-
208
Secret Places
Adam Had
Three Brothers
IN THE TOWN there are many races living, each in its own
enclave, some of many square miles, some of a few acres only,
some of but one or two streets. Its geographers say that it has
more Italians than Rome, more Irish than Dublin, more Jews
than Israel, more Armenians than Yerevan.
But this overlooks the most important race of all.
There is the further fact (known only to the more intense
geographers): it has more Rrequesenians than any town in
the world. There are more than a hundred of them.
By the vulgar the Rrequesenians are called Wrecks, and
their quarter is Wreckville. And there is this that can be said
of them that cannot be said of any other race on earth: Every
one of them is a genius.
These people are unique. They are not Gypsies, though they
are often taken for them. They are not Semites. They are not
even children of Adam.
3
WILLY MCGILLEY, the oldest of the Wrecks (they now use
Gentile names) has an old baked tablet made of straw and
pressed sheep dung that is eight thousand years old and gives
211
Secret Places
the true story of their origin. Adam had three brothers:
Etienne, Yancy, and Rreq. Etienne and Yancy were bache-
lors. Rreq had a small family and all his issue have had small
families; until now there are about two hundred of them in
all, the most who have ever been in the world at one time.
They have never intermarried with the children of Adam
except once. And not being of the same recension they are not
under the same curse to work for a living.
So they do not.
Instead they batten on the children of Adam by clever
devices that are known in police court as swindles.
Catherine O'Conneley by ordinary standards would be
reckoned as the most beautiful of the Wrecks. By at least
three dozen men she was considered the most beautiful girl in
the world. But by Wreckian standards she was plain. Her
nose was too small, only a little larger than that of ordinary
women; and she was skinny as a crow, being on the slight side
of a hundred and sixty. Being beautiful only by worldly
standards she was reduced even more than the rest of them to
living by her wits and charms.
She was a show girl and a bar girl. She gave piano lessons
and drawing lessons and tap-dancing lessons. She told for-
tunes and sold oriental rugs and junk jewelry, and kept
company with lonely old rich men. She was able to do all
these things because she was one bundle of energy.
She had no family except a number of unmarried uncles,
the six Petapolis brothers, the three Petersens, the five
Calderons, the four Oskanians, and Charley O'Malley, nine-
teen in all.
212
Adam Had Three Brothers
NOW it was early morning and a lady knocked at her door.
“The oil stock is no good. I checked and the place would be
three hundred miles out to sea and three miles down. My
brother says I've been took."
"Possibly your brother isn't up on the latest developments
in offshore drilling. We have the richest undeveloped field in
the world and virtually no competition. I can promise we will
have any number of gushers within a week. And if your
brother has any money I can still let him have stock till noon
today at a hundred and seventy-five dollars a share.”
“But I only paid twenty-five a share for mine."
"See how fast it has gone up in only two days. What other
stock rises so fast?"
"Well all right, I'll go tell him.”
THERE was another knock on the door.
"My little girl take piano lessons for six weeks and all she
can play is da da da."
“Good. It is better to learn one note thoroughly than just a
little bit of all of them. She is not ready for the other notes
yet. But I can tell you this: she is the most intelligent little
girl I have ever seen in my life and I believe she has a positive
genius for the piano. I truly believe she will blossom all at
once and one of these days she will be playing complete
symphonies.”
“You really think so?"
"I do indeed.”
213
Secret Places
“Well then I will pay you for six more weeks, but I do wish
she could play more than da da da.”
THERE was another knock at the door.
“Honey Bun, there was something wrong. I give you ten
dollars to bet on Summertime in the first race at Marine
Park; you say it's a sure thing and fifty to one. But now I find
there isn't any such track as Marine Park and nobody ever
heard of the horse. Huh, Honey Bun? What you do to your
best boy friend?"
“O, we use code names. What if all these hot tips ever got
out? Summertime of course was Long Day and Marine Park
was Jamaica. And he only lost by about six noses. Wasn't that
good for a fifty to one? And now I have an even better tip. It's
so hot I can't even tell you the name of the horse, but I feel
sure that twenty would get you a thousand.”
“All the time I give you money but never I win yet, Honey
Bun. Now you give a little kiss and we talk about another
bet.”
“I had surely thought our attachment was on a higher
plane."
“Words, Honey Bun, always words. But you give, um, um,
um, that's good. Now I bet again, but I bet I better win
someday.”
214
Adam Had Three Brothers
THERE was another knock on the door.
“How come you let my brother-in-law in on a good thing
and never tell me? For a hundred he'll have two hundred and
fifty in a week, and you never tell me, and I'm your friend
and never persecute you when you don't pay your bill."
So she had to give her caller the same deal she had given
his brother-in-law.
a
AFTER that she went out to take the game out of her traps.
She had set and baited them some days before. She had gone
to see five hundred people, which took quite a while even for
one with her excess of energy. And to each she said this:
“I have just discovered that I have an infallible gift of
picking winners. Now I want you to give it a test. Here is a
sure winner I have picked. I ask you bet it, not with me, not
with one of my uncles, but with a bookie of your own choice. I
prefer not to know with whom you bet.”
Of the five hundred there were a hundred and forty-four
winners, very good. So the next day she went to the hundred
and forty-four with even more assurance and offered them
the same proposition again. And of the hundred and forty-
four there were fifty-six winners. Very good, for she really
could pick them.
To these fifty-six she went the third day and offered them
the third sure bet free. And incredibly of the fifty-six there
were nineteen winners.
This was repeated the next day, and of the nineteen there
were seven winners.
215
Secret Places
Now she went to talk money. The seven lucky clients could
not deny that she indeed had the gift of picking winners. She
had given them all four straight in four days and her secret
should surely be worth money. Besides, they had all let their
bets ride and they had won a lot, an average of more than six
hundred dollars.
But she would give no more free tips. She would only sell
her complete and exclusive secret for a thousand dollars. And
she collected from six of them. The seventh was Mazuma
O'Shaunessey.
“I have given you four straight winners, but I cannot give
you any more free tips. We will now talk cold turkey."
“O, put it in a basket, Katie."
“Why, what do you mean, sir?”
”
“I learned it in my cradle. The Inverted Pyramid. You
tapped five hundred, and you got besides me how many?
Five?"
“Six besides you, seven in all.”
“Very good. You pick them nice for a little girl. But isn't
that a lot of work for no more than a hatful of money?"
“Six thousand dollars is a large hatful. And there is always
one smart alec like you who knows it all.”
"Now Kate dear, let's look at it this way. I can really pick
all the winners, not seven straights in five hundred, but all
five hundred if I wished.”
“O bah, you can't fool this little goose."
“O, I could prove it easily enough, but that's showy and I
hate to be a show-off. So I suggest that
you
take
my
word for
it and share my secret with me and give up this penny ante
stuff.”
216
Adam Had Three Brothers
“And all you want for your sure thing secret is five
thousand dollars or so?”
“Why Kate, I don't want your money. I have so much that
it's a burden to me. I only want to marry you."
a
SHE looked at him and she was not sure. O, not about
marrying him, he was nice enough. She was not sure, she had
,
never been sure, that he was a Wreck.
“Are you?"
“Why Kate, does one Wreck have to ask another that
question?"
“I guess not. I'll go ask my uncles what they think. This is
something of a decision.”
She went to see all her bachelor uncles and asked them
what they knew about Mazuma O'Shaunessey.
He was known to all of them.
“He is a competent boy, Kate," said Demetrio Petapolis. “If
I do not miscount I once came out a little short on a deal with
him. He knows the Virginia City Version, he knows the old
Seven-Three-Three, he can do the Professor and His Dog, and
the Little Audrey. And he seems to be quite rich. But is he?"
He meant, not is he rich, but—is he a Wreck?
“Does one Wreck have to ask another that question?" said
Kate.
“No, I guess not."
I
a
217
Secret Places
HODL OSKANIAN knew him too.
“That boy is real cute. It seems in the last deal I had with
him he came out a little ahead. It seems that in every deal I
have with him he comes out a little ahead. He knows the
Denver Deal and the Chicago Cut. He does the Little Old
Lady and the Blue Hat. He knows the Silver Lining and the
Doghouse and the Double Doghouse. And he seems quite
likeable. But is he?”
He meant, not was he likeable, but—was he a Wreck?
“Cannot one Wreck always tell another?" said Kate loftily.
LARS PETERSEN knew Mazuma too.
“He is a klog pog. He knows the Oslo Puds and the
Copenhagen Streg. He knows the Farmer's Wife and the
Little Black Dog. He can do the Seventy-Three and the Sup-
per Club. And he runs more tricks with the Sleepy River than
anyone I ever saw, and has three different versions of the
Raft and four of Down the Smoke Stack. And all the officers
on the bilk squad give him half their pay every week to invest
for them. He seems quite smart. But is he?"
He meant, not was he smart, but
is he a Wreck?
“Should one have to ask?” said Kate haughtily.
HER uncle Charley O'Malley also thought well of Mazuma.
"I am not sure but that at last count he was a raol or so
218
Adam Had Three Brothers
ahead of me. He knows the Blue Eyed Drover and the Black
Cow. He can do the Brandy Snifter with the best of them, and
he isn't bashful with the Snake Doctor. He does a neat
variation of the Bottom of the Barrel. He can work the
Yellow Glove and the Glastonburry Giveaway. And he seems
affable and urbane. But is he?”
He meant, not was he affable and urbane (he was), but—is
he a Wreck? Ah, that was the question.
“How can you even ask?” said Kate.
SO they were married and began one of the famous love
affairs of the century. It went on for four years and each day
brought new high adventure. They purged for the good of his
soul a Dayton industrialist of an excessive sum of cash and
thus restored his proper sense of values and taught him that
money isn't everything. They toured the world in gracious
fashion and took no more than their ample due for their
comfortable maintenance. They relaxed the grip of tight-
fisted Frenchmen and retaught them the stern virtues of
poverty. They enforced an austere regime of abstinence and
hard work on heretofore over-wealthy and over-weight
German burghers and possibly restored their health and
prolonged their lives. They had special stainless steel buckets
made to bury their money in, and these they scattered in
many countries and several continents. And they had as much
fun as it is allowed mortals to have.
219
Secret Places
ONE pleasant afternoon Mazuma O'Shaunessey was in jail in
a little town in Scotland. The jailer was gloomy and suspi-
cious and not given to joking.
“No tricks from you now. I will not be taken.”
"Just one to show I have the power. Stand back so I can't
reach you.”
“I'm not likely to let you."
“And hold up a pound note in one hand as tightly as you
can. I will only fick my handkerchief and the note will be in
my hand and no longer in yours."
“Man I defy you. You cannot do it.”
He held the note very tightly and closed his eyes with the
effort. Mazuma flicked his handkerchief, but the Scotsman
was right. He could not do it. This was the only time that
Mazuma ever failed. Though the world quivered on its axis
(and it did) yet the note was held so tightly that no power
could dislodge it. But when the world quivered on its axis the
effect was that Mazuma was now standing outside the cell
and the Scotsman was within. And when the Chief came some
minutes later Mazuma was gone and the Scotch jailer stood
locked in the cell, his eyes still closed and the pound note yet
held aloft in a grip of steel. So he was fired, or cashiered as
the Old Worlders call it, for taking a bribe and letting a
prisoner escape. And this is what usually comes as punish-
ment to overly suspicious persons.
KATIE still used the Inverted Pyramid and very effectively.
Mazuma did not really have an unfailing talent for picking
220
winners. He'd only said that to get Kate to marry him, and it was the best lie he ever told. But he did have an infallible talent for many things, and they thrived. The first little cloud in the sky came once when they passed a plowman in a field in the fat land of Belgium. "Ah, there is a happy man," said Mazuma. "H appy at work." "H appy at work? 0 my God, what did you say? What kind of words are these, my husband?" But in the months and years that followed, this frightening incident was forgotten. The couple became the pride of Wreckville when they returned as they did several times a year and told their stories. Like the time the state troopers ran them down and cornered them with drawn guns. "0, we don't want to take you in. We'll report that we couldn't catch you. Only tell us how you do it. We don't want to be troopers all our lives." And the time they ran a little house in Faro Town itself. It was a small upstairs place and Katie played the piano, and they had only one bartender, a faded little blonde girl with a cast in one eye, and only one table where Mazuma presided. And this where all the other Casinos were palaces that would make Buckingham look like a chicken coop. And the funny thing is that they took in no money at all. The barmaid would always say all drinks were ten dollars, or failing that they were on the house; as they used no coin and had trays in the register for only tens, fifties, hundreds and thousands. It was too much trouble to do business any other way. Katie would bait her money jar with several hundred dollar
Adam Had Three Brothers
221
222
Secret Places
bills and one or two larger, and demurely refuse anything smaller for selections as she didn't want the jar filled up with wrapping paper. So she would tinkle along all night and all drinks were on the house, which was not too many as only three could sit at the bar at once. And Mazurna never shook or dealt a game. He had only blue chips as he said any other color hurt his eyes. And no matter what the price of the chips, it was legendary and gained zeros as it was retold. Several of the larger sports carne up the stairs out of curiosity. And their feelings were hurt when they were told they were too little to play, for they weren't little at all. So Mazurna sat all night Monday through Friday and never cut a hand or shook a bone. Then on Saturday night the really big boys carne upstairs to see what it was about. They were the owners of the nine big Casinos in town, and six of these gentlemen had to sit on boxes. Their aggregate worth would total out a dollar and thirteen cents to every inhabitant of the U.S. Katie tinkled tunes all night for a hundred to five hundred dollars a selection, and Mazurna dealt on the little table. And when the sun carne up they owned a share of all nine of the big Casinos, and had acquired other assets besides. Of course these stories of Katie and Mazurna were topped, as about half the Wrecks went on the road, and they had some fancy narrations when they got back to Wreckville.
AND then the bottom fell out of the world. They had three beautiful children now. The oldest was
Adam Had Three Brothers
.
three years old and he could already shake, deal, shuffle, and
, ,
con with the best of them. He knew the Golden Gambit and
the Four Quarters and the Nine Dollar Dog and Three Fish
Out. And every evening he came in with a marble bag full of
half dollars and quarters that he had taken from the children
in the neighborhood. The middle child was two, but already
she could calculate odds like lightning, and she picked track
winners in her dreams. She ran sucker ads in the
papers
and
had set up a remunerative mail-order business. The youngest
was only one and could not yet talk. But he carried chalk and
a slate and marked up odds and made book, and was really
quite successful in a small way. He knew the Four Diamond
trick and the Two Story Chicken Coop, the Thimblerig
Reverse and the Canal Boat Cut. They were intelligent
children and theirs was a happy home.
ONE day Mazuma said, "We ought to get out of it, Kate.”
"Out of what?"
"Get out of the business. Raise the children in a more
wholesome atmosphere. Buy a farm and settle down.”
“You mean the Blue Valley Farmer trick? Is it old enough
to be new yet? And it takes nearly three weeks to set it up,
and it never did pay too well for all the trouble.”
“No, I do not mean the Blue Valley Farmer trick. I don't
mean any trick, swindle, or con. I think we should get out of
the whole grind and go to work like honest people.”
And when she heard these terrible words Katie fell into a
dead faint.
223
Secret Places
THAT is all of it. He was not a Wreck. He was a common
trickster and he had caught the sickness of repentance. The
bottom had fallen out of the world indeed. The three
unsolvable problems of the Greeks were squaring the circle,
trisecting the angle, and re-bottoming the world. They cannot
be done.
THEY have been separated for many years. The three
children were reared by their father under the recension and
curse of Adam. One is a professor of mathematics, but I
doubt if he can figure odds as rapidly as he could when he was
one year old. The middle one is now a grand lady, but she has
lost the facility of picking track winners in her dreams and
much else that made her charming. And the oldest one is a
senator from a state that I despise.
And Katie is now the wisest old witch in Wreckville. But
she has never quite been forgiven her youthful indiscretion
when she married an Adamite who fell like his ancient father
and deigned to work for a living.
224
Mean Men
Pig in a
in a PO
Pokey
24
ya
Trus
>
>
HIS was on Hippodamia. The name isn't important. There
were ten thousand asteroid-stations as undistinguished.
Netter settled back into the soft live-moss chair and prepared to
talk the Creature out of the impasse. Then he saw the big
moustached thing on the wall and he began to tremble.
After all, that was one of the things he had come to find—it was
part of it. It was the great beefy, bearded, moustached head of
Captain Kalbfleish mounted on the wall like a trophy, and amid
the other trophies of the room.
“Great God, Man!”—and it wasn't a man to whom he
spoke—“That's a human head you have mounted on the wall,”
Netter crackled.
“Which Great God, yours or mine?” Porcellus grunted. “They
aren't the same, or they have been described badly. Yes, a human
head. I had always wanted one. You notice that I have given it the
favored position in the center of the great wall. I now have at least
one of the heads of every species that interests me. Some of the
heads are much larger than that of your friend Kalbfleish and have
ornamentals that his lacks. It's a pity that humans don't have
sweeping horns; that would make them perfect. But even without
them, the head of Kalbfleish is the finest in my collection. It's a
truly magnificent head!”
It was. “Kalbfleish has a fine head on him,” they used to say,
227
Mean Men
a
>
a
and laugh. The big Captain, for all his remarkable courage and
spirit, had not been long on brains. It was a huge, wild, hairy head
with a stark and staring expression—as though Kalbfleish had died
in terror and agony.
“You killed him, of course,” said Netter dryly as he braided a
romal in his nervous hands. “So, one way or the other, I will have
to kill you, or you me.”
,
“Not I,” said Porcellus—a moist and hog-fat creature, “I
would not even kill an insect. Your friend had a violent heart and
it finally ruptured on him. He was uncommonly energetic,
especially so on the day of his death."
“Where is his body, you fat pig?”
“My translator has only a rough idea of pig, and I suppose you
intend it for an insult; but I have a tough hide. I couldn't do a
thing with his body, Netter, it was putrid in no time. It seems that
when
you humans know you are going to die you would begin to
give yourself the injections three or four basic days before the
time; then your bodies would not turn foul after death. I had no
idea he had neglected it, so I wasn't prepared. I was lucky to save
the head."
“We humans don't know when we are going to die,” said
Netter. “What is this you give me to eat? It's good.”
“Yes, I remember now Kalbfleish saying he didn't know when
he would die, but I supposed he spoke in humor. Since you
also
say it, it must be true of your species. The name of the food would
mean nothing to you, but you have a close parallel to its method of
preparation. I have read about geese in an Earth book of the
captains, though I overlooked pigs. You sometimes put live geese
to dance on hot griddles before they are killed. This excites and
alarms them, and enlarges their livers. The livers then become
delicacies. The creatures whose meat you are eating also died in
a
228
Pig in a Pokey
>
excitement and alarm, and they are delicious through and
through.”
Well, the meat was certainly delicious. That fat hog of a
creature knew how to live well. Netter finished the meal and set it
aside. Once more he braided the romal in his hands while he
grasped for words.
"I
suppose all the creatures whose heads you have here died by
accident, Porcellus?” he asked.
“Well, all but one of them died,” said Porcellus, “and I did not
kill them. One of them died at a great distance from here; he
willed me his head and had it sent to me because I had admired it.
And one of them, so far as I know, is still alive. He was a being of
multiplex heads. He hacked one of them off quite willingly when I
praised it, and he cured and mounted it himself. A queer chap. He
is staring down at you now and it will amuse you to guess which
he is.”
Porcellus didn't actually speak like that. He spoke in a series of
grunts, some verbal and some ventral. But the Console Translator
of Netter had a selector dial. Netter could dial translation in
pidgin, in cut and dry, in bombast, in diplomatic pleasantry, in old
southern U. S. soft-talk or Yiddish dialect if he wished, or in the
courtly manner. Whenever he encountered a creature who was
repulsive to him—as Porcellus was—he dialed the courtly manner
of speech. This was somehow easier on his ears and his nerves.
“We waste time,” Netter told the creature. “I have come to
pursue claim to this asteroid. We now need it for a way-station,
and it has never worked well for two such different species to share
a station. We had first claim here long ago; and we abandoned it.
Then you set up your station here; and you also abandoned it.”
“Never,” said Porcellus. “Would I abandon my cozy home and
my trophies? Would my masters wish the removal of so fine a
>
229
Mean Men
a
>
station-master as myself? I was called Home on urgent business. I
was gone but for a basic year, and the odds were very high against
,
any
other claimer coming while I was gone."
“The rules state that a live and competent agent must be in
residence at all times or the asteroid can be declared abandoned,”
Netter said. “The asteroid was plainly abandoned when Kalbfleish
arrived; you were gone. He so reported it, and he claimed it for us.
The claim was approved and accepted.”
“True," said the creature Porcellus. “What is that thing you
play with in your hands? But Captain Kalbfleish—following the
awkward interval after I had returned—also abandoned the
station by dying. I so reported his death, and claimed the station
for ourselves once more. The claim was approved and accepted.
Now you are here as my guest only and, I tell you in all kindness,
not a very welcome one.' ”
“But a proved murder will void your claim,” said Netter.
“So prove it, fine man,” said the creature Porcellus. “Yours is a
smaller head than Kalbfleish's but it has a certain distinction. I
could make room for it among my trophies. We have each of us
sent various reports, and the matter is under litigation. In the
meanwhile, the accidental death of either of us would void his
claim and settle the matter. We cannot kill directly. Investigators
are already on the way and we are both prime suspects; we are the
only ones here. What is the leather thing with which you play?"
“A romal, Porcellus. A short quirt braided onto a rein. They
made them in Old Mexico and in California and Texas, but they
were mostly ornamental.”
“Earth places all three, my translator says. Were they used with
a creature?"
"With a pony, a horse.”
>
230
Pig in a Pokey
"Haven't I stumbled onto the information that the horse is
extinct?”
>
“Yes. The braiding of the little thing is only a hobby of mine.”
“A hobby, according to my comprehensive translator, is a sort of
vicarious horse—a mental surrogate which one rides. Is that
correct?”
“Correct, Porcellus. Haven't
you a hobby?”
“My hobby is heads," said the thing.
Netter started to leave the creature then to go to his own camp.
“To the early and accidental death of one of us,” he toasted with
the last of the drink that Porcellus had given him.
“Shoals!” toasted Porcellus. “I believe that is your word. And a
” I
warning: stay away from the low dome which you will see on the
plain. It's dangerous.”
Netter went to his own camp.
>
NOW Porcellus wanted him to go to the curious dome—or he
would not have warned him away from it. Was it dangerous? Or
did the thing merely want to divert him? Porcellus must have
known that he would explore every feature of landscape on the
small asteroid. Perhaps it was only to worry him, as Porcellus
himself had seemed to be worried. And what in hog heaven can
worry a hog? Netter had it after a while. "He knows when he's
going to die. He's surprised that humans haven't that knowledge.
But can I depend on it? It's only a twice removed guess.” "
Netter left the dome till last. He circumnavigated the asteroid
in a brisk six-mile walk and found nothing of interest. He came
thoughtfully to the dome on the plain.
231
Mean Men
a
The dome rose to no more than the height of his head in the
center, was about sixty feet in diameter, was symmetrical in
general outline but with a slightly roughened surface, and was
probably artificial. “I believe it is an old direction beacon of the
Porcines,” he said. “Yes, this is certainly the top of an obsolete
beam sphere, and the most of it is under ground. They were no
good. I believe that we had them once.”
Netter stepped gingerly onto the sphere. It was certainly firm
enough. He knew a firn thing when he met one. There was no
danger of him crashing through. He climbed the steep, then the
less steep elevation of it and came to the center. “Nice,” he said,
“but nothing.” Then he felt it activated. “So Porcellus still uses
it,” he said, “I didn't realize that they were so backward.”
He walked around on it, and it rotated gently under him,
compensating for him. He strode down the side a little way, and it
quickly brought him back to the top. “This could be fun,” he said.
He could take three, four quick steps away from the top, and he
would still be on top. He could tense to jump sideways, and the
sphere would compensate before he left the surface; he'd still land
exactly on the center whichever way he jumped. The thing rolled
easily and noiselessly and anticipated or reacted immediately to
every movement. He walked, he ran, he laughed, he trotted half a
mile and stood where he had stood before.
“You know tricks and I know tricks, old sphere,” he shouted,
“Let's see who's the smarter.” He feinted, he broke, he dodged, he
ran crazy-legged as though he were broken-field dribbling at
Galactic-rules football. He shucked off tacklers, he scored count-
less goals in his mind, but he always ended on the very center top
of the dome.
He lay down and rolled, trying to go down the steep far slopes
as though they were grass banks. He stopped rolling and lay on his
232
Pig in a Pokey
back, and he was still on the top of the rotating compensating
sphere or dome.
“I haven't had so much fun since I was a boy in an amusement
park,” he said.
He hadn't? Then why did he suddenly begin to tremble? Why
did he begin to whistle so off-key if he wasn't scared? “Stone walls
do not a pokey make nor locks a—" it was the Cross-Bar Hotel
Blues he was whistling and he had to stop it.
He was locked tight in jail on a little hillock in the middle of a
plain, and there was no barrier in sight. There was no possible
way he could get off the compensating dome.
He was imprisoned in the highest most open spot on the
asteroid. In an hour of cavorting and hopping about he had not
got one full step from where he started, and there was no possible
way that he could.
He thought about it for a full Hippodamia day and night-
forty-five minutes basic time. He couldn't come up with a thing.
"If I had a rope and you had a stump,” he said talking to no
rope the stump-I'm good at that—and pull myself off
this thing.”
But he didn't have a rope and the plain sure didn't have a
stump. It had hardly a pebble as big as his thumb.
“This is where Kalbfleish died,” said Netter. “You said it right,
pig man, my friend had a violent heart and it finally ruptured on
him. You didn't have to murder him directly. You let him run
himself to death. He was uncommonly energetic, as you said, and
especially so on the day of his death. I can see it all now. He could
never stand to be confined. He would have gone wild when he
found himself confined in what seemed the most open space on the
asteroid. He'd have run till he ruptured every thing in him. It is no
wonder that he died with that look of horror.”
a
one, “I'd
a
233
Mean Men
This was a jail that nobody could break. Why try more tricks on
the sphere? It could compensate for every trick that was.
“Only a creature that could fy in zero atmosphere could get off
of this,” he mused. “Even a worm couldn't crawl off unless he
were too small to affect the compensators. If I had two cant hooks
I might be able to fool the thing, but it could no doubt
compensate for the resolution of forces. If I had a weight on a line
I might puzzle it a little, but not much. Porkey has it made. I'll die
either of starvation or exertion or insanity, but the investigation
will not show that I was murdered. “Why have two humans died of
heart attack here?' is the most they can ask him, and Porkey will
rub his hands and say 'Bad climate.'
‘
))
BUT what Porky Porcellus really said was:
“Fine man, why do you play like a boy on top of that thing? Is
that any way for a hopeful asteroid agent to conduct himself?”
“Porcellus, you think you've trapped me, do you?” Aared
,
Netter.
“I trap you? My hands are clean. Is it my fault that two humans
develop the strange mania of running themselves to death in a
weird game?”
How far away was Porcellus from the edge of the dome? Too
far. Too far by several yards.
“Porcellus, what is this thing?" Netter cried out.
“Once it was a beam sphere, as you have probably guessed, and
it is obsolete. I have altered it to something else. Now it is an
intelligence test. To fail it is to die.”
“Did anyone ever get off it?" Netter called. He had to get
>
234
Pig in a Pokey
а
Porcellus interested. He had to get him to come several feet closer
before he turned away.
“Only one passed the intelligence test,” said the creature, “and
he had unusual natural advantages. He was a peculiar fellow of
the species Larrik who visited me some basic years ago. He simply
broke himself into two pieces and walked off in opposite
directions. The globe couldn't compensate for both of them. One
got clear, obtained a line, pulled his other half off; both halves
laughed at me, and then they rejoined themselves. But
you
haven't
his advantage, Netter. You have failed the test.”
“I'll find a way," swore Netter. “I'll find a trick.” Just a little bit
closer now would do it.
“You lose, Netter,” said Porcellus. “There is no fixed thing on
the plain you could tie to even if you had a way of reaching it. The
longest thing you have with you is what you call the romal, and
it's no longer than your arm."
Porcellus was close enough. Right at the end of the dome.
When he turned it would be perfect—somewhere between
thirty-two and thirty-five feet. There was no fixed thing on the
plain, but there was a thing heavy enough to serve for a fixed
thing. The romal of Netter was no longer than his arın, but it was
a romal rey, a king romal.
Porcellus turned away in his triumph. The light-thin lariat flew
and dropped over his bulk. And Netter pulled himself off the dome
in less time than you can say Porky Porcellus.
The fat hulk was no match for Netter when he was on solid
non-compensating ground. He hog-tied the Hog-man with the thin
leather line and rolled him onto the dome. And Porcellus was
immediately on the center top of the dome to stay there till he
died of hunger or uncommon exertion or porcine apoplexy.
>
235
Mean Men
NETTER was moving things about in the fine Trophy Room
which he had recently inherited. He set a fine hard wood peg
into
the wall and hung on it the king romal for which he now had
especial affection. The king romal is so intricately braided that one
moment it will be a thick quirt no longer than your arm; but
;
unlace one keeper and it immediately becomes a thin strand lariat
forty foot long counting the loop. Hardly anyone knows how to
braid a romal rey nowadays.
He moved many things in the trophy room. He wanted the
setting to be just right. He knew just what
space
on that great wall. The investigation was over with and Netter's
claim had been accepted. He was now asteroid station-master—a
good job.
The head was ready. It had been cured out and tanned and
treated, and the eye-tushers were polished till they gleamed.
Porcellus had a truly magnificent head!
it should occupy
236
Lerrel Places
The Weirdest
World
I
A
S I am now utterly without hope, lost to my mission
and lost in the sight of my crew, I will record what petty
thoughts I may have for what benefit they may give some
other starfarer. Nine long days of bickering! But the decision
is sure. The crew will maroon me. I have lost all control over
them.
Who would have believed that I would show such weakness
when crossing the barrier? By all tests I should have been the
strongest. But the final test was the event itself. I failed.
I only hope that it is a pleasant and habitable planet where
they put me down .
Later. They have decided. I am no longer the captain even
in name. But they have compassion on me. They will do what
they can for my comfort. I believe that they have already
selected my desert island, so to speak, an out-of-the-way
globe where they will leave me to die. I will hope for the best.
I no longer have any voice in their councils ...
Later. I will be put down with only the basic survival kit:
the ejection mortar and sphere for my last testament to be
orbited into the Galactic drift; a small cosmoscope so that I
will at least have my bearings; one change of blood; an
239
Secret Places
-
abridged universal language correlator; a compendium of the
one thousand philosophic questions yet unsolved to exercise
my mind; a small vial of bug-kill.
Later. It has been selected. But my mind has grown so
demoralized that I do not even recognize the system, though
once this particular region was my specialty. The globe will
be habitable. There will be breathable atmosphere which will
allow me to dispense with much bothersome equipment. Here
the filler used is nitrogen, yet it will not matter. I have
breathed nitrogen before. There will be water, much of it
saline, but sufficient quantities of sweet. Food will be no
problem; before being marooned, I will receive injections that
should last me for the rest of my probably short life. Gravity
will be within the range of my constitution.
What will be lacking? Nothing, but the companionship of
my own kind, which is everything.
What a terrible thing it is to be marooned!
One of my teachers used to say that the only unforgivable
sin in the universe is ineptitude. That I should be the first to
succumb to space-ineptitude and be an awkward burden on
the rest of them! But it would be disastrous for them to try to
travel any longer with a sick man, particularly as their
nominal leader. I would be a shadow over them. I hold them
.
no rancor.
.
It will be today
Later. I am here. I have no real interest in defining where
“here” is, though I have my cosmoscope and could easily
determine it. I was anesthetized a few hours before, and put
down here in my sleep. The blasted half-acre of their landing
is near. No other trace of them is left.
Yet it is a good choice and not greatly unlike home. It is the
240
nearest resemblance I have seen on the entire voyage, which is to say that the pseudodendrons are enough like trees to remind me of trees, the herbage near enough to grass to satisfy one who had never known real grass. It is a green, somewhat waterlogged land of pleasant temperature. The only inhabitants I have encountered are a preoccupied race of hump-backed browsers who pay me scant notice. They are quadruped and myopic, and spend nearly their entire time at feeding. It may be that I am invisible to them. Yet they hear my voice and shy away somewhat from it. I am able to communicate with them only poorly. Their only vocalization is a sort of vibrant windy roar, but when I answer in kind they appear more puzzled than communicative. They have this peculiarity: when they come to an obstacle of terrain or thicket, they either go laboriously around it or force their way through it. It does not seem to occur to them to fly over it. They are as gravity-bound as a newborn baby. What air-traveling creatures I have met are of a consider­ ably smaller size. They are more vocal than the myopic quadrupeds, and I have had some success in conversing with them, but my results still await a more leisurely semantic interpretation. Such communications of theirs as I have analyzed are quite commonplace. They have no real philoso­ phy and are singularly lacking in aspiration; they are almost total extroverts and have no more than the rudiments of introspection. Yet they have managed to tell me some amusing anecdotes. They are quite good natured, though moronic. They say that neither they nor the myopic quadrupeds are the dominant race here, but rather a large grublike creature lacking a complete outer covering. From what they are able
The Weirdest World
241
Secret Places
а
to convey of this breed, it is a nightmarish kind of creation.
One of the flyers even told me that the giant grubs travel
upright on a bifurcated tail, but that is difficult to credit.
Besides, I believe that humor is at least a minor component of
the mentality of my airy friends. I will call them birds,
though they are but a sorry caricature of the birds at
home .
Later. I am being hunted. I am being hunted by the giant
grubs. Doubling back, I have seen them on my trail, examin-
ing it with great curiosity.
The birds had given me a very inadequate idea of these.
They are indeed unfinished—they do lack a complete outer
covering. Despite their giant size, I am convinced that they
are grubs, living under rocks and in masses of rotten wood.
Nothing in nature gives the impression of so lacking an outer
covering as the grub, that obese, unfinished worm.
These are, however, simple bipeds. They are wrapped in a
cocoon which they seem never to have shed, as though their
emergence from the larval state were incomplete. It is a loose
artificial sheath covering the central portion of the corpus.
They seem unable to divest themselves of it, though it is
definitely not a part of the body. When I have analyzed their
minds, I will know the reason for their carrying it. Now I can
only conjecture. It would seem a compulsion, some psycholog-
ical bond that dooms them in their apparent adult state to
carry their cocoons with them.
Later. I am captured by three of the giant grubs. I had
barely time to swallow my communication sphere. They
pinned me down and beat me with sticks. I was taken by
surprise and was not momentarily able to solve their lan-
guage, though it came to me after a short interval. It was
a
242
The Weirdest World
it
discordant and vocal and entirely gravity-bound, by which I
mean that its thoughts were chained to its words. There
seemed nothing in them above the vocal. In this the giant
grubs were less than the birds, even though they had a
practical power and cogency that the birds lacked.
“What'll we do with the blob?” asked one.
“Hy,” said the second, “you hit it on that end and I'll hit it
on this. We don't know which end is the head.”
“Let's try it for bait,” said the third. "Catfish might go for
it.”
“We could keep it alive till we're ready to use it. Then it
would stay fresh.”
“No, let's kill it. It doesn't look too fresh, even the way
is.”
“Gentlemen, you are making a mistake," I said. “I have
done nothing to merit death. And I am not without talent.
Besides, you have not considered the possibility that I may
be
forced to kill you three instead. I will not die willingly. And I
will thank you to stop pounding on me with those sticks. It
hurts.'
I was surprised and shocked at the sound of my own voice.
It was nearly as harsh as that of the grubs. But this was my
first attempt at their language, and musicality does not
become it.
“Hey fellows, did you hear that? Was that the blob talking?
Or was one of you playing a joke? Harry? Stanley? Have you
been practicing to be ventriloquists?"
“Not me.”
“Not me either. It sure sounded like it was it.”
"Hey blob, was that you? Can you talk, blob?"
“Certainly I can talk," I responded. "I am not an infant.
243
Secret Places
a
Nor am I a blob. I am a creature superior to your own kind, if
you are examples. Or it may be that you are only children.
Perhaps you are still in the pupa stage. Tell me, is yours an
early stage, or an arrested development, or are you indeed
adult?”
"Hey fellows, we don't have to take that from any blob. I'll
.
cave in his blasted head.”
“That isn't its head, it's its tail.”
"Gentlemen, perhaps I can set you straight," I said. “That
is my tail you are thwacking with those sticks, and I am
warning you to stop it. Of course I was talking with my tail. I
was only doing it in imitation of you. I am new at the
language and its manner of speaking. Yet it may be that I
have made a grotesque mistake. Is that
your
heads that
you
are waving in the air? Well, then, I will talk with my head, if
that is the custom. But I warn you again not to hit me on
either end with those sticks."
“Hey, fellows, I bet we could sell that thing. I bet we could
sell it to Billy Wilkins for his Reptile Farm.”
“How would we get it there?"
“Make it walk. Hey blob, can you walk?"
“I can travel, certainly, but I would not stagger along
precariously on a pair of flesh stilts with my head in the air,
as you do. When I travel, I do not travel upside down.”
"Well, let's go then. We're going to sell you to Billy Wilkins
for his Reptile Farm. If he can use a blob, he'll put you in one
of the tanks with the big turtles and alligators. You think
you'll like them?"
“I am lonesome in this lost world," I replied sadly, “and
even the
company
of you peeled grubs is better than nothing.
I am anxious to adopt a family and settle down here for what
244
The Weirdest World
years of life I have left. It may be that I will find
compatibility with the species you mention. I do not know
what they are.”
“Hey, fellows, this blob isn't a bad guy at all. I'd shake your
hands, blob, if I knew where they were. Let's go to Billy
Wilkins's place and sell him.”
)
II
We traveled to Billy Wilkins's place. My friends were
amazed when I took to the air and believed that I had
deserted them. They had no cause to distrust me. Without
them I would have had to rely on intuition to reach Billy
Wilkins, and even then I would lack the proper introductions.
"Hey, Billy," said my loudest friend whose name was Cecil,
"what will you give us for a blob? It lies and talks and isn't a
bad fellow at all. You'd get more tourists to come to your
reptile show if you had a talking blob in it. He could sing
songs and tell stories, and I bet he could play the guitar.”
“Well, Cecil, I'll just give you all ten dollars for it and try to
figure out what it is later. I'm a little ahead on my hunches
now, so I can afford to gamble on this one. I can always pickle
it and exhibit it as a genuine hippopotamus kidney.”
“Thank you, Billy. Take care of yourself, blob.”
“Good-bye for now, gentlemen,” I said. “I would like
you
to
visit me some evening as soon as I am acclimated to my new
surroundings. I will throw a whing-ding for you—as soon as I
find out what a whing-ding is."
“My God," said Billy Wilkins, “it talks, it really talks!”
"We told you it could talk and fly, Billy.”
a
245
Secret Places
1
1
“It talks, it talks,” said Billy. “Where's that blasted sign
painter? Eustace, come here. We got to paint a new sign."
The turtles in the tank I was put into did have a sound
basic philosophy which was absent in the walking grubs. But
they were slow and lacking inner fire. They would not be
obnoxious company, but neither would they give me excite-
ment and warmth. I was really more interested in the
walking grubs.
Eustace was a black grub, while the others had all been
white; but like them he had no outside casing of his own, and
like them he also staggered about on flesh stilts with his head
in the air.
It wasn't that I was naive or hadn't seen bipeds before. But
I don't believe anyone ever becomes entirely accustomed to
seeing a biped travel in its peculiar manner.
“Good afternoon, Eustace," I said pleasantly enough. The
eyes of Eustace were large and white. He was a more
handsome specimen than the other grubs.
“That you talking, bub? Say, you really can talk, can't you?
I thought Mr. Billy was fooling. Now just hold that expres-
sion a minute and let me get it set in my mind. I can paint
anything, once I get it set in my mind. What's your name,
blob? Have blobs names?”
“Not in your manner. With us the name and the soul, I
believe you call it, are the same thing and cannot be
vocalized. I will have to adopt a name of your sort. What
would be a good name?"
"Bub, I was always partial to George Albert Leroy Ellery.
That was my grandfather's name.”
“Should I also have a family name?"
"Sure."
1
246
The Weirdest World
2
“What would you suggest?"
"How about McIntosh?"
“That will be fine. I will use it.”
I talked to the turtles while Eustace was painting my
portrait on tent canvas.
“Is the name of this world Florida?" I asked one of them.
“The road signs said Florida.”
"World, world, world, water, water, water, glub, glug,
glub,” said one of them.
"Yes, but is this particular world we are on named
Florida?”
"World, world, water, water, glub," said another.
“Eustace, I can get nothing from these fellows," I called.
“Is this world named Florida?”
“Mr. George Albert, you are right in the middle of Florida,
the greatest state in the universe."
“Having traveled, Eustace, I have great reservations that
it is the greatest. But it is my new home and I must cultivate
a loyalty to it.'
I went up in a tree to give advice to two young birds trying
to construct a nest. This was obviously their first venture.
“You are going about it all wrong,” I told them. “First
consider that this will be your home, and then consider how
you can make your home most beautiful.”
“This is the way they've always built them,” said one of the
birds.
“There must be an element of utility, yes,” I told them.
“But the dominant motif should be beauty. The impression of
expanded vistas can be given by long low walls and para-
pets."
247
Secret Places
1
“This is the way they've always built them,” said the other
bird.
“Remember to embody all the new developments," I said.
"Just say to yourself 'This is the newest nest in the world.'
Always say that about any task you attempt. It inspires you."
“This is the way they've always built them,” said the birds.
“Go build your own nest."
“Mr. George Albert,” called Eustace. “Mr. Billy won't like
your flying around those trees. You're supposed to stay in
1)
your tank.”
“I was only getting a little air and talking to the birds," I
said.
“You can talk to the birds?” asked Eustace.
"Cannot anyone?”
“I can, a little,” said Eustace. “I didn't know anyone else
could.”
But when Billy Wilkins returned and heard the report that
I had been flying about, I was put in the snake house, in a
cage that was tightly meshed top and sides. My cell mate was
a surly python named Pete.
"See you stay on that side,” said Pete. “You're too big for
me to swallow. But I might try."
“There is something bothering you, Pete,” I said. “You
have a bad disposition. That can come only from bad digestion
or a bad conscience."
“I have both," said Pete. “The first because I bolt my food.
The second is because—well I forget the reason, but it's my
conscience.”
“Think hard, Pete," I said, “why have you a bad con-
science?”
a
248
The Weirdest World
1)
“Snakes always have bad consciences. We have forgotten
the crime, but we remember the guilt."
"Perhaps you should seek advice from someone, Pete.”
"I kind of think it was someone's smooth advice that
started us on all this. He talked the legs right off us.”
Billy Wilkins came to the cage with another “man" as
walking grubs call themselves.
“That it?" asked the other man. "And you say it can talk?”
?“
?
“Of course I can talk," I answered for Billy Wilkins. “I
have never known a creature who couldn't talk in some
manner. My name is George Albert Leroy Ellery McIntosh. I
don't believe that I heard yours, sir.”
”
“Bracken. Blackjack Bracken. I was telling Billy here that
if he really had a blob that could talk, that I might be able to
use it in my night club. We could have you here at the Snake
Ranch in the daytime for the tourists and kids. Then I could
have you at the club at night. We could work out an act. Do
you think you could learn to play the guitar?”
"
“Probably. But it would be much easier for me merely to
duplicate the sound."
“But then how could you sing and make guitar noises at the
same time?"
“You surely don't think that I am limited to one voice
box?”
“Oh, I didn't know. What's that big metal ball you have
there?"
“That's my communication sphere to record my thoughts. I
I
would not be without it. When in danger, I swallow it. When
in extreme danger, I will have to escape to a spot where I
have concealed my ejection mortar, and send my sphere into
the Galactic drift on a chance that it may be found.”
249
Secret Places
"That's no kind of gag to put in an act. What I have in
mind is something like this.”
Blackjack Bracken told a joke. It was a childish one and in
poor taste.
“I don't believe that is quite my style," I said.
“All right, what would you suggest?"
“I thought that I might lecture your patrons on the higher
ethic.”
“Look, George Albert, my patrons don't even have the
,
lower ethic.”
“And just what sort of recompense are we talking about?”
I asked.
“Billy and I had about settled on a hundred and fifty a
week.”
“A hundred and fifty for whom?"
"Why, for Billy."
“I say a hundred and fifty for myself, and ten percent for
Billy as my agent.'
“Say, this blob's real smart, isn't he, Billy?”
“Too smart.”
"Yes sir, George Albert, you're one smart blob. What kind
of contract have you signed with Billy here?"
"No contract.”
“Just a gentlemen's agreement?"
“No agreement."
"Billy, you can't hold him in a cage without a contract.
That's slavery. It's against the law.”
“But, Blackjack, a blob isn't people."
“Try proving that in court. Will you sign a contract with
me, George Albert?''
)
250
The Weirdest World
“I will not dump Billy. He befriended me and gave me a
home with the turtles and snakes. I will sign a joint contract
with the two of you. We will discuss terms tomorrow—after I
have estimated the attendance both here and at the night
club."
III
Of the walking grubs (who call themselves “people") there
are two kinds, and they place great emphasis on the dif-
ference. From this stems a large part of their difficulties. This
distinction, which is one of polarity, cuts quite across the
years and ability and station of life. It is not confined only to
the people, but also involves apparently all the beings on the
planet Florida.
It appears that a person is committed to one or the other
polarity at the beginning of life, maintaining that polarity
until death. The interlocking attraction-repulsion complex set
up by these two opposable types has deep emotional involve-
ments. It is the cause of considerable concern and disturb-
ance, as well as desire and inspiration. There is a sort of
poetic penumbra about the whole thing that tends to disguise
its basic simplicity, expressible as a simultaneous polarity
equation.
Complete segregation of the two types seems impossible. If
it has ever been tried, it has now been abandoned as
impractical.
There is indeed an intangible difference between the two
types, so that before that first day at the Reptile Ranch was
251
Secret Places
finished, I was able to differentiate between the two more
than ninety percent of the time. The knowledge of this
difference in polarity seems to be intuitive.
These two I will call the Beta and Gamma, or Boy and Girl
types. I began to see that this opposability of the two types
I
was one of the great driving forces of the people.
In the evening I was transported to the night club and I
was a success. I would not entertain them with blue jokes or
blue lyrics, but the patrons seemed fascinated by my simple
imitations of all the instruments of the orchestra and my
singing of comic ballads that Eustace had taught me in odd
moments that day. They were also interested in the way that
I drank gin, that is emptying the bottle without breaking the
seal. (It seems that the grub-people are unable to absorb a
liquid without making direct contact with it.)
And I met Margaret, one of the “girl" singers. I had been
wondering to which type of people I might show affinity. Now
I knew. I was definitely a Beta type, for I was attracted to
Margaret, who was unmistakably a Gamma. I began to
understand the queer effect that these types have on each
other.
She came over to my cage.
“I want to rub your head for luck before I go on,” she said.
“Thank you, Margaret," I replied, “but that is not my
head."
She sang with incomparable sadness, with all the sorrow
and sordidness that appear to be the lot of the unfortunate
Gammas. It was the essence of melancholy made into music.
It was a little bit like the ghost music of the asteroid Artemis,
a little like the death chants on Dolmena. Sex and sorrow.
Nostalgia. Regret.
252
The Weirdest World
Her singing shook me with a yearning that had no
precedent.
She came back to my cage.
"You were wonderful, Margaret," I said.
"I'm always wonderful when I'm singing for my supper.
I
am less wonderful in the rare times when I am well fed. But
are you happy, little buddy?”
"I had become almost so, till I heard you sing. Now I am
overcome with a sorrow and longing. Margaret, I am fasci-
nated with you."
“ “I go for you too, blob. You're my buddy. Isn't it funny that
the only buddy I have in the world is a blob. But if you'd seen
some of the guys I've been married to—boy! I wouldn't insult
you by calling them blobs. Have to go now. See you tomorrow
night if they keep us both on.”
»
a
NOW there was a problem to face. It was necessary that I
establish control over my environment, and at once. How else
could I aspire to Margaret?
I knew that the heart of the entire place here was neither
the bar nor the entertainment therein, nor the cuisine, nor
the dancing. The heart of the enterprise was the casino. Here
was the money that mattered; the rest was but garnish.
I had them bring me into the gambling rooms.
I had expected problems of complexity here where the
patrons worked for their gain or loss. Instead there was an
almost amazing simplicity. All the games were based on a
253
Secret Places
system of first aspect numbers. Indeed everything on the
Planet Florida seemed based on first aspect numbers.
Now it is an elemental fact that first aspect numbers do not
carry within them their own prediction. Nor were the people
even possessed of the prediction key that lies over the very
threshold of the second aspect series.
These people were actually wagering sums—the symbols of
prosperity-blindly, not knowing for sure whether they
would win or lose. They were selecting numbers by hunch or
at random with no assurance of profit. They were choosing a
hole for a ball to fall into without knowing whether that was
the right hole.
I do not believe that I was ever so amazed at anything in
my life.
a
game after
But here was an opportunity to establish control over my
environment.
I began to play the games. Usually I would watch a round
first, to be sure that I understood just what was going on.
Then I would play a few times ... as many as it took to
break the game.
I broke
game. When he could no longer pay me,
Blackjack closed the casino in exasperation.
Then we played poker, he and I and several others. This
was even more simple. I suddenly realized that the grub-peo-
ple could see only one side of the cards at a time.
I played and won.
I owned the casino now, and all of those people were now
working for me. Billy Wilkins also played with us, and in
short order I also owned the Reptile Ranch.
Before the evening was over, I owned a race-track, a beach
hotel, and a theatre in a place named New York.
254
The Weirdest World
I had, in sufficient extent for my purpose, established
control over my environment ...
1)
LATER. Now started the golden days. I increased my control
and did what I could for
my friends.
I got a good doctor for my old friend and roommate, Pete
the python, and he was now receiving treatment for his
indigestion. I got a jazzy sports car for my friend Eustace
imported from somewhere called Italy. And I buried Marga-
ret in mink, for she had a fix on the fur of that mysterious
animal. She enjoyed draping it about her in the form of coats,
capes, cloaks, mantles, and stoles, though the weather didn't
,
really require it.
I had now won several banks, a railroad, an airline, and a
casino in somewhere named Havana.
“You are somebody now," said Margaret. “You really
ought to dress better. Or are you dressed? I never know. I
don't know if part of that is clothes or if all of it is you. But at
least I've learned which is your head. I think we should be
married in May. It's so common to be married in June. Just
imagine me being Mrs. George Albert Leroy Ellery McIntosh!
You know, we have become quite an item. And do you know
there are three biographies of you out, Burgeoning Blob; The
Blob from Way Out; The Hidden Hand Behind the Blob, What
Does It Portend? And the Governor has invited us to dine
tomorrow. I do wish you would learn to eat. If
you weren't so
nice, you'd be creepy. I always say there's nothing wrong
with marrying a man, or a blob, with money. It shows
255
Secret Places
foresight on the part of a girl. You know you will have to get
a blood test? You had better get it tomorrow. You do have
blood, don't you?"
I did, but not, of course, of the color and viscosity of hers.
But I could give it that color and viscosity temporarily. And it
would react negative in all the tests.
She mused, “They are all jealous of me. They say they
wouldn't marry a blob. They mean they couldn't. Do you have
to carry that tin ball with you all the time?"
“Yes. It is my communication sphere. In it I record my
thoughts. I would be lost without it."
“Oh, like a diary. How quaint.”
Yes, those were the golden days. The grubs now appeared
to me in a new light, for was not Margaret also a grub? Yet
she seemed not so unfinished as the rest. Though lacking a
natural outer covering, yet she had not the appearance of
crawling out from under a rock. She was quite an attractive
"girl.” And she cared for me.
What more could I wish? I was affluent. I was respected. I
was in control of my environment. And I could aid my friends
of whom I had now acquired an astonishing number.
Moreover my old space-ineptitude sickness had left me. I
never felt better in my life. Ah, golden days, one after the
other like a pleasant dream. And soon I am to be married.
IV
a
There has been a sudden change. As on the Planet Hecube,
where full summer turns into the dead of winter in minutes,
256
The Weirdest World
to the destruction of many travelers, so was it here. My world
is threatened!
It is tottering, all that I have built up. I will fight. I will
fight. I will have the best lawyers on the planet. I am not
done. But I am threatened ..
Later. This may be the end. The appeal court has given its
decision. A blob may not own property in Florida. A blob is
not a person.
Of course I am not a person. I never pretended to be. But I
am a personage. I will yet fight this thing
Later. I have lost everything. The last appeal is gone. By
definition I am an animal of indeterminate origin, and my
property is being completely stripped from me.
I made an eloquent appeal—and it moved them greatly.
—
There were tears in their eyes. But there was greed in the set
of their mouths. They have a vested interest in stripping me.
Each will seize a little.
And I am left a pauper, a vassal, an animal, a slave. This is
always the last doom of the marooned, to be a despised alien
at the mercy of a strange world.
Yet it should not be hopeless. I will have Margaret. Since
my contract with Billy Wilkins and Blackjack Bracken, long
since bought up, is no longer in effect, Margaret should be
able to handle my affairs as a person. I believe that I have
great earning powers yet, and I can win as much as I wish by
gambling. We will treat this as only a technicality. We shall
acquire new fortune. I will re-establish control over my
environment. I will bring back the golden days. A few of my
old friends are still loyal to me, Margaret, Pete the python,
Eustace
a
257
Secret Places
Later. The world has caved in completely. Margaret has
thrown me over.
“I'm sorry, blobby,” she said, “but it just won't work.
You're still nice, but without money you are only a blob. How
would I marry a blob?”
“But we can earn more money. I am talented."
“No, you're box-office poison now. You were a fad, and fads
die quickly."
“But Margaret, I can win as much as I wish by gambling."
“Not a chance, blobby. Nobody will gamble with you any
more. You're through, blob. I will miss you, though. There
will be a new blue note in my ballads when I sing for my
supper, after the mink coats are all gone. Bye now."
“Margaret, do not leave me. What of all our golden days
together?"
But all she said was "bye now.”
And she was gone forever.
I AM desolate and my old space-ineptitude sickness has
returned. My recovery was an illusion. I am so ill with
awkwardness that I can no longer fly. I must crawl on the
ground like one of the giant grubs. A curse on this planet
Florida, and all its sister orbs! What a miserable world this is!
How could I have been taken in by a young Gamma type of
the walking grub? Let her crawl back under her ancestral
rocks with all the rest of her kind ... No, no, I do not mean
that. To me she will always remain a dream, a broken dream.
258
The Weirdest World
I am no longer welcome at the casino. They kicked me
down the front steps.
I no longer have a home at the Reptile Ranch.
“Mr. George Albert,” said Eustace, “I just can't afford to be
seen with you any more. I have my position to consider, with
a sport car and all that.”
And Pete the python was curt.
"Well, big shot, I guess you aren't so big after all. And you
were sure no friend of mine. When you had that doctor cure
me of my indigestion, you left me with nothing but my bad
conscience. I wish I could get my indigestion back.”
“A curse on this world,” I said.
"World, world, water, water, glug, glug," said the turtles in
their tanks, my only friends.
So I have gone back into the woods to die. I have located
my ejection mortar, and when I know that death is finally on
me, I will fire off my communication sphere and hope it will
reach the Galactic drift. Whoever finds it-friend, space
traveler, you who were too impatient to remain on your own
world—be you warned of this one! Here ingratitude is the
rule and cruelty the main sport. The unfinished grubs have
come out from under their rocks and they walk this world
upside down with their heads in the air. Their friendship is
fleeting, their promises are like the wind.
I am near my end.
259
Mean Men
The Ultimate Creature
I
THE
a
HE old Galaxy maps (imitating early Earth maps, partly in
humor and partly through intuition) pictured strong creatures in
the far arms of the system—Serpents bigger than Spaceships,
Ganymede-type Tigers, fish-tailed Maids, grand Dolphins, and
Island-sized Androids. We think particularly of the wry master-
pieces of Grobin. And at the end of the Far or Seventh arm of the
Galaxy is shown the Ultimate Creature.
The Ultimate Creature had the form of a Woman, and it bore
three signs in Chaldee: The Sign of Treasure; the Sign of
the Fish Mashur (the queerest fish of them all); and the Sign of
Restitution or of Floating Justice.
Floating Justice is the ethical equivalent of the Isostasis of the
Geologists. It states in principle that every unbalance will be
brought into new balance, sometimes gently, sometimes as by
planet-quake; that the most submerged may be elevated, by a
great sundering of strata, to the highest point, if such is required
for compensation. And there is a final tenet of this Floating
Justice, that some day, somewhere, the meanest man of all the
worlds will possess the ultimate treasure of the worlds. Without
.
this promise, the worlds would be out of balance forever.
263
Mean Men
THE MEANEST man of all the worlds was Peter Feeney-a
low-down sniveler, a weak man. In one thing only he was
exceptional—he had the finest eye for beauty in a woman of any
man anywhere: this, though of all men he was the least successful
with women. His purity of appraisal was not dulled by close
contact or possession. His judgments of beauty were sound and
uncompromised, though sometimes bitter.
And really, how many beautiful women are there in the
Universe?
Six,
Only six? Are you sure? All that noise has been about only six of
them?
PETER FEENEY was sure. His rapid eyes—the only rapid things
about him—had scanned millions of women in his random travels.
And only six of the women could be called beautiful.
There was the lady on Mellionella, seen only once in a crowd,
followed and lost, and never seen again in a year's search.
There was the girl in a small town on East Continent of Hokey
Planet. About this girl there was something that caused agony to
Peter: he had heard her speak; she spoke like a girl in a small town
on East Continent of Hokey Planet. He prayed that she might be
struck dumb; knowing that it was an evil prayer, knowing that she
was one of the really beautiful ones, whatever the sound of her.
There was the girl of shallow virtue on Leucite. She was perfect.
What else can you say after that?
There was the mother of six on Camiroi—no longer young, of
264
The Ultimate Creature
no particular repose or station or ease, hurried, impatient, and
quite likely the most beautiful woman who ever lived.
On Trader Planet there was a young Jewess of bewildering
kindness and frankness and of inextricably entangled life.
In San Juan, on old Earth, there was a fine creature who
combined the three main ethnic strains of old mankind. Peter
made a second journey there to see her; after first vision and
departure he had not been able to believe what he had seen.
Six in all the worlds? Somehow there should have been more
beautiful women than that.
Then Peter saw Teresa.
And she made the seventh?
No. She made the first. The six faded. There was only one. The
most beautiful woman ever, in the farthest arm of the Galaxy—the
Ultimate Creature.
II
This was on Groll's Planet. To get there, said the agent in
Electrum, you go to the end of the Galaxy, and turn left. It was a
shabby little world in the boondocks that are beyond the
boondocks, and only shabby people came there.
Peter Feeney was a salesman of a Universe-wide product. He
wasn't a good salesman. He was shuffled off to poorer and
poorer
territories. Now he had fallen to the poorest territory of all.
And on that day on Groll's Planet, he heard a sound as though a
swish of silk had passed over him, a thread, a mesh. It was the
invisible net.
“Oh how strange are the Fish of Far Ocean!” an ancient poet
exclaimed.
а
265
Mean Men
a
Peter had seen Teresa, and it was all over with him.
Peter was eating that day by peculiar arrangement. It was the
smallest of the towns of Groll's Planet and there was no public
eating place there. But a Grollian man raked clean sand and set a
mat for Peter to sit on, and served him a meal there on a crate or
box. The man also gave him coffee—good coffee, but not like the
-
coffee
you
know.
It was very like a sidewalk-café. It was in the
way
where people
came and went, though not properly a sidewalk. Teresa came and
sat down opposite Peter on the raked sand.
“Hari bagus," Peter said, which is all the words that a man
needs to get along in the Grollian language.
“Bagus," said Teresa. And that is all that they said to each other
a
that day.
Peter finished his meal and attempted to light a cigar. The
cigars of that world are not factory made. They are rolled by hand
of an oblong leaf for the filler and a triangular leaf for the
wrapper. Often they will keep their form for an hour or more, but
Peter had made his cigar badly and it was not stable.
Now it exploded into an unmanageable disarray of leaves and
pieces, and Peter was unable to cope with it. Teresa took the
pieces and rolled and folded them into a green cylinder that was
sheer art. She licked it with the most beautiful tongue in the world
and
gave the reconstituted cigar to Peter.
Then it was luxurious to sit there in the green shade and smoke
opposite the most beautiful woman ever. When he had finished,
Peter rose awkwardly and left. But he was pleased.
He watched from a distance. Teresa with quick competence ate
up all that he had left. “She was very hungry," Peter said, and
admired her quickness about things. She rose with flowing grace,
retrieved the smoldering remnants of Peter's cigar, and went
266
The Ultimate Creature
toward the beach, trailing smoke from the green-leaf stogie and
moving like a queen.
THE next day Peter again sat on the mat on the raked sand and
ate the food that the Grollian man sold him. Once more he felt the
swish of the invisible net over him, and again Teresa sat opposite
him on the sand.
“A senhora tem grande beleze," said Peter, which is all the
words that a man needs to get along in the Galactic Brazilian
language.
“Noa em nossos dias,” said Teresa, “porem outrora.” And that
is all that they said to each other that day.
But he had told her that she was beautiful. And she had
answered: No, she was not so now, but in a former time she had
been.
>
WHEN he had finished the meal and pulled the cigar from his
pocket he was pleased when it exploded into its constituent parts.
Teresa rescued it, reassembled it, and licked it. Her tongue had a
tripart curve in it, more extensible, more Aexible, more beautiful
than other tongues. Then Peter rose and left as he had the day
before. And again Teresa cleaned up
the remnantsravenously
and beautifully. He watched her till she finally went toward the
beach haloed in blue smoke from the stub of the cigar.
Peter wrote up an order that day. It was not a good order, not
267
Mean Men
sufficient to pay expenses, but something. Grolls Planet had
acquired a glow for him, just as if it was a good order he had
written up
>
ON the third day, Peter again sat on the mat that was very like a
sidewalk-café, and Teresa was opposite him. Peter told the
Grollian man that he should also bring food for the woman. He
brought it, but angrily.
“You are the most beautiful woman I have ever seen,” said
Peter, which is all the words that a man needs to get along in the
English language.
“I have told you that I am not now beautiful, but that once I
was,” Teresa told him. “Through the grace of God, I may again
regain my lost beauty.”
“How is it that
you
know English?”
“I was the school-teach."
“And now?”
“Now it goes bad for our world. There is no longer schools. I am
nothing."
“What are you, girl? Old human? Groll's Troll? That isn't
possible. What?”
“Who can say? A book-man has said that the biology of our
planet goes from the odd to the incredible. Was that not nice thing
to say about us? My father was old human, a traveling man, a
bum.”
“And your mother?”
?
“A queer fish, mama. Of this world, though.”
A
"
268
The Ultimate Creature
>
>
you not fish?"
>
“And you were once even more beautiful than you are now,
Teresa? How could
you
have looked?”
“How I looked then? As in English–Wow!—a colloquialism.”
“To me you are perfect.”
“No. I am a poor wasted bird now. But once I was beautiful.”
“There must be some livelihood for
you. What did your father
do?”
“Outside of bum, he was fisherman.”
“Then why do
“In my own way, I fish.”
Peter heard again the swish of the invisible net, but he was very
willing to be taken by it. After this, things went famously between
them.
But two days later there came a shame to Peter. He and Teresa
were sitting and eating together on the mat, and the Grollian man
came out.
“Are you near finished?” he asked Peter.
“Yes, I am near finished. Why do
”
“Are
you
finished with the fork yet?”
“No, not quite finished with it.”
“I must have the fork,” the Grollian man said. “There is another
human man here, of the better sort. I must have the fork for him
to eat with.”
"Have
you
but one?”
“Am I a millionaire that I should have a multiplicity of forks in
my house? He is a man with an important look, and I will not have
him wait."
“This is humiliating," said Peter.
“I don't know what that is. I want my
fork.”
Peter
gave
the fork back to the Grollian man, and that man took
you ask??"
>
269
Mean Men
>
it in and set it before the human man of the better sort as a sign of
the modernity of his house.
"Were I not the meanest and weakest of men, he would not
have abused me so," Peter said.
“Do you not feel it at all,” Teresa said. “Somebody has to be the
meanest and the weakest. The worlds are full of humiliating
things. This brings us close together.”
This would have to be the final day for Peter Feeney on Groll's
Planet. He had already garnered all the insufficient orders possible
for his product. He walked with Teresa and said the difficult
things.
“When
you have caught one, Teresa, you must do something
with it. Even turn it loose if you do not mean to keep it.”
“Do you want I should turn you loose, Peter?”
“No. I want you to go with me on the ship when it goes
tonight."
“There is only one way I will go.”
“I have never thought of any
other way.”
“You will never have cause to be ashamed of me, Peter. I can
dress, where I have the means for it. I can play the lady, I
understand how it is done. I have even learned to walk in shoes.
Were we in some more lucky place, it might be that I would
regain my beauty. It is the grinding hard times that took it from
me. I could change your luck. I have the languages, and the sense
of things, and I am much more intelligent than you are. With me,
I
you could attain a degree of success in even your miserable trade.
It can be a good life we make.”
There is a sound when the invisible net is cast over one. There is
another sound when it is pulled in—the faint clicking of the floats,
the tugging whisper of the weights, the squeaking of the lines
when pulled taut. Teresa was a fisherman's daughter, and she
>
>
a
270
knew how to do it. The Peter-fish was not a large nor a fat one, but she knew that he was the best she could take in these waters.
THEY were married. They left in the ship for a happier place, a
better planet in a more amenable location where Teresa might
regain her lost beauty.
Floating Justice was achieved. All inequities were compensated. The meanest and weakest man in the universe now possessed the
Ultimate Treasure of the universe.
Naturally they were happy. And naturally their happiness endured.
"There wasn't a catch to it?" you ask out of a crooked face. "There is always a catch to it. It always goes sour at the end." No. There was not a catch to it. It was perfect, and forever. It is
only in perverted fables that things go wrong at the end.
and were no longer mean and inconsequential. Only one man can
be married to the most beautiful woman in the universe, and it
They grew in understanding of each other, received the glad news of coming progeny, waxed (by former standards) in wealth,
passes all understanding that that one man should be Peter Feeney.
"former beauty" and now weighed well over two hundred pounds.
Peter liked that part of it.
This was perfection. It wasn't just that Teresa had regained her
But is it possible for perfection to become too perfect?
The Ultimate Creature
271
Mean Men
III
For this was perfection. They lived on a kindred but larger and
better world, one of richer resources and even more varied
biology. They had a love so many-sided and deep that there is no
accounting for it, and children so rare and different!
Floating Justice had been achieved. The least man in all the
worlds did possess the Ultimate Creature. The balance was
consummated. But Floating Justice had a grin on his face; there is
something a little fishy about anything, even justice, that floats.
You understand that there wasn't really a catch to this, nor any
deficiency. It was rather a richness almost beyond handling. It was
still better for Peter Feeney than for anyone else anywhere. That
must be understood.
BUT, for all that, there was a small adjustment after the great
compensation; a proportion must be re-established in all things,
even happiness. It was the joke that the old Interior Ocean always
cast
up, and it must be taken in the salty humor that is intended.
Children so rare and so different—and so many of them! No
couple was ever so blessed as were Peter and Teresa with a rich
variety of children. Some of them were playing and leaping in the
hills and rocks behind Peter, and some of them were sporting in
the Ocean before him.
Peter whistled some of these sea children up now as he
pondered things in the marina. Some of them broke water,
splashed, and waved to him. So many of the kids there were, and
such good ones!
272
The Ultimate Creature
>
“Whistle about four of them to come in for dinner!” Teresa
called, and Peter did so. It had been an odd business about the
children, not unpleasant certainly, but not what he had expected
either. And even yet, every possibility was still open to them.
“I'd like to have a people-kid sometime,” Teresa said. “After all,
mama had me. A people kid have fun playing with the fish kids,
and they like him, too. And he could climb in the rocks with the
Groll's Trolls. He would sort of knit our family together. You
think about it, Peter, and I think about it too, and we see what we
come up with at the next milting time.”
PETER FEENEY gazed out at his children in the pools of the sea,
and at his other sort of children climbing in the rocks, and he felt
an uneasy pride in them all. One comes quickly to love Fish Kids
and Grolls Trolls when they are the product of one's own loins.
There was ever hope, there would ever be hope to the last, of
children of Peter's own kind. But he loved his present progeny not
the less for it. The four kids that he had whistled in came now,
“Oh, four such pretty kids of ours!" Teresa said. “Fry them,
Peter,”
And Peter took the pretty fish kids that came from the water
and began to fix them for the pan.
.
This had taken the longest to get used to. But when you have so
many of them—more than ten thousand, and more coming all the
time—and when they are so good; and when, moreover, they are
already Aesh of
Peter Feeney fixed the fish kids for the pan. And out of his
fullness and mingled emotions, salt tears rolled down his shining
face to the salt sea.
your flesh.
273
NARROW VALLEY
on their faces after they try it for a day or two, and
then give it up."
The Ramparts left the courthouse, loaded into their
camper, and drove out to find their land. They stopped
at the house of a cattle and wheat farmer named Charley
Dublin. Dublin met them with a grin which indicated
he had been tipped off.
"Come along if you want to, folks,” Dublin said. "The
, ”
easiest way is on foot across my short pasture here. Your
land's directly west of mine."
They walked the short distance to the border.
"My name is Tom Rampart, Mr. Dublin.” Six-year-
old Tom made conversation as they walked. “But my
name is really Ramires, and not Tom. I am the issue
of an indiscretion of my mother in Mexico several years
ago.
"The boy is a kidder, Mr. Dublin,” said the mother
Nina Rampart, defending herself. "I have never been in
Mexico, but sometimes I have the urge to disappear
there forever.
"Ah
yes, Mrs. Rampart And what is the name of the
youngest boy here?” Charley Dublin asked.
"Fatty,” said Fatty Rampart.
“But surely that is not your given name?
Audifax," said five-year-old Fatty.
"Ah well, Audifax, Fatty, are you a kidder too?"
"He's getting better at it, Mr. Dublin,” Mary Mabel
said. "He was a twin till last week. His twin was named
Skinny. Mama left Skinny unguarded while she was out
tippling, and there were wild dogs in the neighborhood.
When Mama got back, do you know what was left of
Skinny? Two neck bones and an ankle bone. That was
all.”
“Poor Skinny," Dublin said. “Well, Rampart, this is
the fence and the end of my land Yours is just beyond."
"Is that ditch on my land?" Rampart asked.
“ "That ditch is your land."
"I'll have it filled in. It's a dangerous deep cut even
199
NARROW VALLEY
if it is narrow. And the other fence looks like a good
one, and I sure have a pretty plot of land beyond it.
"No, Rampart, the land beyond the second fence be-
longs to Holister Hyde," Charley Dublin said. "That sec
ond fence is the end of your land."
“Now, just wait a minute, Dublin! There's some-
thing wrong here. My land is one hundred and sixty
acres, which would be a half mile on a side. Where's
my half-mile width?
"Between the two fences."
“That's not eight feet."
"Doesn't look like it, does it, Rampart? Tell you what
_there's plenty of throwing-sized rocks around. Try to
throw one across it."
"I'm not interested in any such boys' games," Ram-
part exploded. “I want my land."
But the Rampart children were interested, in such
games. They got with it with those throwing rocks. They
winged them out over the little gully. The stones acted
funny. They hung in the air, as it were, and diminished
in size. And they were small as pebbles when they
dropped down, down into the gully. None of them could
throw a stone across that ditch, and they were throwing
kids.
'You and your neighbor have conspired to fence open
land for your own use," Rampart charged.
"No such thing, Rampart," Dublin said cheerfully.
'My land checks perfectly. So does Hyde's. So does
yours,
we knew how to check it. It's like one of those
trick topological drawings. It really is half a mile from
here to there, but the eye gets lost somewhere. It's
your land. Crawl through the fence and figure it out.
Rampart crawled through the fence, and drew him-
self up to jump the gully. Then he hesitated. He got
a glimpse of just how deep that gully was. Still, it wasn't
five feet across.
There was a heavy fence post on the ground, de-
signed for use as a corner post. Rampart up-ended it
if
200
NARROW VALLEY
with some effort. Then he shoved it to fall and bridge
the gully. But it fell short, and it shouldn't have. An
eight-foot post should bridge a five-foot gully.
The post fell into the gully, and rolled and rolled
and rolled. It spun as though it were rolling outward,
but it made no progress except vertically. The post
came to rest on a ledge of the gully, so close that
Rampart could almost reach out and touch it, but it now
appeared no bigger than a match stick.
“There is something wrong with that fence post, or
with the world, or with my eyes,” Robert Rampart said.
"I wish I felt dizzy so I could blame it on that."
"There's a little game that I sometimes play with my
neighbor Hyde when we're both out,* Dublin said. “I've
a heavy rifle and I train it on the middle of his fore-
head as he stands on the other side of the ditch apparent-
ly eight feet away. I fire it off then (I'm a good shot),
and I hear it whine across. It'd kill him dead if things
were as they seem. But Hyde's in no danger. The shot
always bangs into that little scuff of rocks and boulders
about thirty feet below him. I can see it kick up the
rock dust there, and the sound of it rattling into those
little boulders comes back to me in about two and a
half seconds.”
A bull-bat (poor people call it the night-hawk) rav-
eled around in the air and zoomed out over the nar-
row ditch, but it did not reach the other side. The bird
dropped below ground level and could be seen against
the background of the other side of the ditch. It grew
smaller and hazier, as though at a distance of three or
four hundred yards. The white bars on its wings could
no longer be discerned; then the bird itself could hardly
be discerned; but it was far short of the other side of
the five-foot ditch.
A man identified by Charley Dublin as the neighbor
Hollister Hyde had appeared on the other side of the
little ditch. Hyde grinned and waved. He shouted some-
thing, but could not be heard.
201
NARROW VALLEY
SO
n
"Hyde and I both read mouths,” Dublin said, "so
we can talk across the ditch easy enough. Which kid
wants to play chicken? Hyde will barrel a good-sized
rock right at your head, and if you duck or flinch
you're chicken.”
"Mel Mel” Audifax Rampart challenged. And Hyde,
a big man with big hands, did barrel a fearsome jagged
rock right at the head of the boy. It would have killed
him if things had been as they appeared But the rock
diminished to nothing and disappeared into the ditch.
Here was a phenomenon: things seemed real-sized on
either side of the ditch, but they diminished coming
out over the ditch either way.
"Everybody game for it?” Robert Rampart Junior
asked.
“We won't get down there by standing here,” Mary
Mabel said.
"Nothing wenchered, nothing gained,” said Cecilia. "I
got that from an ad for a sex comedy.”
Then the five Rampart kids ran down into the gully.
Ran down is right. It was almost as if they ran down
the vertical face of a cliff. They couldn't do that. The
gully was no wider than the stride of the biggest kids.
But the gully diminished those children, it ate them
alive. They were doll-sized. They were acom-sized. They
were running for minute after minute across a ditch
that was only five feet across. They were going, deeper
in it, and getting smaller. Robert Rampart was roaring
his alarm, and his wife Nina was screaming. Then she
stopped. “What am I carrying on so loud about?" she
asked herself. "It looks like fun. 11 do it too."
She plunged into the gully, diminished in size as the
children had done, and ran at a pace to carry her a
hundred yards away across a gully only five feet wide.
That Robert Rampart stirred things up for a while
then. He got the sheriff there, and the highway patrol-
men. A ditch had stolen his wife and five children, he
said, and maybe had killed them. And if anybody laughs,
202
NARROW VALLEY
there may be another killing. He got the colonel of the
State National Guard there, and a command post set
up. He got a couple of airplane pilots. Robert Rampart
had one quality: when he hollered, people came.
He got the newsmen out from T-Town, and the emi-
nent scientists, Dr. Velikof Vonk, Arpad Arkabaranan,
and Willy McGilly. That bunch turns up every time
you get on a good one. They just happen to be in that
part of the country where something interesting is go-
ing on.
They attacked the thing from all four sides and the
top, and by inner and outer theory. If a thing measures
half a mile on each side, and the sides are straight,
there just has to be something in the middle of it. They
took pictures from the air, and they tumed out per-
fect. They proved that Robert Rampart had the prettiest
hundred and sixty acres in the country, the larger part
of it being a lush green valley, and all of it being half
a mile on a side, and situated just where it should be.
They took ground-level photos then, and it showed a
beautiful half-mile stretch of land between the bound-
aries of Charley Dublin and Hollister Hyde. But a
man isn't a camera. None of them could see that beauti-
ful spread with the eyes in their heads. Where was it?
Down in the valley itself everything was normal. It
really was half a mile wide and no more than eighty
feet deep with a very gentle slope. It was warm and
sweet, and beautiful with grass and grain.
Nina and the kids loved it, and they rushed to see
what squatter had built that little house on their land.
A house, -or a shack. It had never known paint, but
paint would have spoiled it. It was built of split tim-
bers dressed near smooth with ax and draw knife,
chinked with white clay, and sodded up to about half
its height. And there was an interloper standing by
the little lodge.
“Here, here what are you doing on our land?” Robert
Rampart Junior demanded of the man. "Now you just
203
NARROW VALLEY
a
shamble off again wherever you came from. I'll bet
you're a thief too, and those cattle are stolen.”
"Only the black-and-white calf," Clarence Little-Sad-
dle said. “I couldn't resist him, but the rest are mine.
I guess I'll just stay around and see that you folks get
settled all right."
"Is there any wild Indians around here?” Fatty Ram-
part asked.
2
“No, not really. I go on a bender about every three
months and get a little bit wild, and there's a couple
Osage boys from Gray Horse that get noisy sometimes,
but that's about all,” Clarence Little-Saddle said.
"You certainly don't intend to palm yourself off on us
as an Indian,” Mary Mabel challenged. “You'll find us
a little too knowledgeable for that.”
"Little girl, you might as well tell this cow there's no
room for her to be a cow since you're so knowledgeable.
She thinks she's a short-hom cow named Sweet Virginia.
I think I'm a Pawnee Indian named Clarence. Break
it to us real gentle if we're not."
“If you're an Indian where's your war bonnet? There's
not a feather on you anywhere."
“How you be sure? There's a story that we got feathers
"
instead of hair on- Aw, I can't tell a joke like that to
a little girl! How come you're not wearing the Iron
Crown of Lombardy if you're a white girl? How you
expect me to believe you're a little white girl and your
folks came from Europe a couple hundred years ago if
you don't wear it? There are six hundred tribes, and
only one of them, the Oglala Sioux, had the war bon-
net, and only the big leaders, never more than two or
three of them alive at one time, wore it.'
"Your analogy is a little strained,” Mary Mabel said.
"Those Indians we saw in Florida and the ones at At-
lantic City had war bonnets, and they couldn't very
well have been the kind of Sioux you said. And just
last night on the TV in the motel, those Massachusetts
Indians put a war bonnet on the President and called
204
NARROW VALLEY
him the Great White Father. You mean to tell me that
they were all phonies? Hey, who's laughing at who
bere?"
"If you're an Indian where's your bow and arrow?"
Tom Rampart interrupted. “I bet you can't even shoot
One.
"You're sure right there," Clarence admitted. “I never
shot one of those things but once in my life. They used
to have an archery range in Boulder Park over in T-
Town, and you could rent the things and shoot at targets
tied to hay bales. Hey, I barked my whole forearm
and nearly broke my thumb when the bow-string
thwacked home. I couldn't shoot that thing at all. I
don't see how anybody ever could shoot one of them.
"Okay, kids," Nina Rampart called to her brood. “Let's
start pitching this junk out of the shack so we can move
in. Is there any way we can drive our camper down
here, Clarencer
"Sure, there's a pretty good dirt road, and it's a lot
wider than it looks from the top. I got a bunch of green
bills in an old night charley in the shack. Let me get
them, and then I'll clear out for a while. The shack
hasn't been cleaned out for seven years, since the last
time this happened. I'll show you the road to the top,
and you can bring your car down it."
"Hey, you old Indian, you lied!” Cecilia Rampart
shrilled from the doorway of the shack. “You do have
a war bonnet. Can I have it?os
"I didn't mean to lie, I forgot about that thing,"
Clarence Little-Saddle said. “My son Clarence Bare-
Back sent that to me from Japan for a joke a long time
ago. Sure, you can have it."
All the children were assigned tasks carrying the
junk out of the shack and setting fire to it. Nina Ram-
part and Clarence Little-Saddle ambled up to the rim
of the valley by the vehicle road that was wider than
it looked from the top.
“Nina, you're back! I thought you were gone forever,"
205
NARROW VALLEY
Robert Rampart jittered at seeing her again. "What-
"
where are the children?”
“Why, I left them down in the valley, Robert. That
is, ah, down in that little ditch right there. Now you've
got me worried again. I'm going to drive the camper
down there and unload it. You'd better go on down
and lend a hand too, Robert, and quit talking to all
these funny-looking men here."
And Nina went back to Dublin's place for the camper.
“It would be easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle than for that intrepid woman to drive a
car down into that narrow ditch," the eminent scientist
Dr. Velikof Vonk said.
"You know how that camel does it?" Clarence Little-
Saddle offered, appearing of a sudden from nowhere.
"He just closes one of his own eyes and flops back his
ears and plunges right through. A camel is mighty nar-
row when he closes one eye and flops back his ears.
Besides, they use a big-eyed needle in the act.”
"Where'd this crazy man come from?” Robert Ram-
part demanded, jumping three feet in the air. “Things
are coming out of the ground now. I want my land! I
want my children! I want my wifel Whoops, here she
comes driving it. Nina, you can't drive a loaded camper
.
into a little ditch like that! You'll be killed or collapsed!”
Nina Rampart drove the loaded camper into the little
ditch at a pretty good rate of speed. The best of belief
is that she just closed one eye and plunged right through.
The car diminished and dropped, and it was smaller
than a toy car. But it raised a pretty good cloud of
dust as it bumped for several hundred yards across a
ditch that was only five feet wide.
"Rampart, it's akin to the phenomenon known as loom-
ing, only in reverse," the eminent scientist Arpad Ar-
kabaranan explained as he attempted to throw a rock
across the narrow ditch. The rock rose very high in the
air, sccmed to hang at its apex while it diininished to
the size of a grain of sand, and then fell into the ditch
a
206
NARROW VALLEY
not six inches of the way across. There isn't anybody
going to throw across a half-mile valley, even if it looks
five feet. “Look at a rising moon sometimes, Rampart.
It appears very large, as though covering a great sector
of the horizon, but it only covers one-half of a degree. It
is hard to believe that you could set seven hundred and
twenty of such large moons side by side around the
horizon, or that it would take one hundred and eighty
of the big things to reach from the horizon to a point
overhead. It is also hard to believe that your valley is
five hundred times as wide as it appears, but it has
been surveyed, and it is.
"I want my land. I want my children. I want my
wife,” Robert chanted dully. “Damn, I let her get away
again."
'I tell you, Rampy," Clarence Little-Saddle squared
on him, "a man that lets his wife get away twice doesn't
deserve to keep her. I give you till nightfall; then you
forfeit. I've taken a liking to the brood. One of us is
going to be down there tonight."
After a while a bunch of them were off in that little
tavern on the road between Cleveland and Osage. It
was only half a mile away. If the valley had run in the
other direction, it would have been only six feet away.
"It is a psychic nexus in the form of an elongated
dome," said the eminent scientist Dr. Velikof Vonk. “It
is maintained subconsciously by the concatenation of at
least two minds, the stronger of them belonging to a
man dead for many years. It has apparently existed for
a little less than a hundred years, and in another hun-
dred years it will be considerably weakened. We know
from our checking out folk tales of Europe as well as
Cambodia that these ensorceled areas seldom survive for
more than two hundred and fifty years. The person who
first set such a thing in being will usually lose interest
in it, and in all wordly things, within a hundred years
of his own death. This is a simple thanato-psychic limita-
207
NARROW VALLEY
tion. As a short-term device, the thing has been used
several times as a military tactic.
"This psychic nexus, as long as it maintains itself,
causes group illusion, but it is really a simple thing. It
doesn't fool birds or rabbits or cattle or cameras, only
humans. There is nothing meteorological about it. It is
strictly psychological. I'm glad I was able to give a
scientific explanation to it or it would have worried me.
It is continental fault coinciding with a noospheric
fault,” said the eminent scientist Arpad Arkabaranan.
"The valley really is half a mile wide, and at the same
time it really is only five feet wide. If we measured
correctly, we would get these dual measurements. Of
course it is meteorologicall Everything including dreams
is meteorological. It is the animals and cameras which
are fooled, as lacking a true dimension; it is only hu-
mans who see the true duality. The phenomenon should
be common along the whole continental fault where
the earth gains or loses half a mile that has to go some-
where. Likely it extends through the whole sweep of
the Cross Timbers. Many of those trees appear twice,
and many do not appear at all. A man in the proper
state of mind could farm that land or raise cattle on it,
but it doesn't really exist. There is a clear parallel in
the Luftspiegelungthal sector in the Black Forest of
Germany which exists, or does not exist, according to
the circumstances and to the attitude of the beholder.
Then we have the case of Mad Mountain in Morgan
County, Tennessee, which isn't there all the time, and
also the Little Lobo Mirage south of Presidio, Texas,
from which twenty thousand barrels of water were
pumped in one two-and-a-half-year period before the
mirage reverted to mirage status. I'm glad I was able
to give a scientific explanation to this or it would have
worried me."
"I just don't understand how he worked it," said the
eminent scientist Willy McGilly. “Cedar bark, jack-oak
leaves, and the world ‘Petahauerat.' The thing's impos-
208
NARROW VALLEY
sible! When I was a boy and we wanted to make a hide-
out, we used bark from the skunk-spruce tree, the leaves
of a box-elder, and the word was 'Boadicea.' All three
elements are wrong here. I cannot find a scientific ex-
planation for it, and it does worry me.
They went back to Narrow Valley. Robert Rampart
was still chanting dully: “I want my land. I want my
children. I want my wife."
.
Nina Rampart came chugging up out of the narrow
ditch in the camper and emerged through that little
gate a few yards down the fence row.
"Supper's ready and we're tired of waiting for you,
Robert,” she said. “A fine homesteader you are! Afraid
to come onto your own land! Come along now; I'm
tired of waiting for you.”
"I want my land! I want my children! I want my
wife!” Robert Rampart still chanted. “Oh, there you are,
Nina. You stay here this time. I want my land! I want
my children! I want an answer to this terrible thing.
“It is time we decided who wears the pants in this
family,” Nina said stoutly. She picked up her husband,
slung him over her shoulder, carried him to the camp-
er and dumped him in, slammed (as it seemed) a dozen,
doors at once, and drove furiously down into the Nar-
row Valley, which already seemed wider.
Why, that place was getting normaler and normaler
by the minute! Pretty soon it looked almost as wide as
it was supposed to be. The psychic nexus in the form
of an elongated dome had collapsed. The continental
fault that coincided with the noospheric fault had faced
facts and decided to conform. The Ramparts were in
effective possession of their homestead, and Narrow Val-
ley was as normal as any place anywhere.
“I have lost my land," Clarence Little-Saddle moaned.
"It was the land of my father Clarence Big-Saddle, and
I meant it to be the land of my son Clarence Bare-
Back. It looked so narrow that people did not notice
209
NARROW VALLEY
a
how wide it was, and people did not try to enter it.
Now I have lost it."
Clarence Little-Saddle and the eminent scientist Willy
McGilly were standing on the edge of Narrow Valley,
which now appeared its true half-mile extent. The moon
was just rising, so big that it filled a third of the sky.
Who would have imagined that it would take a hundred
and eight of such monstrous things to reach from the
horizon to a point overhead, and yet you could sight
it with sighters and figure it so.
"I had a little bear-cat by the tail and I let go,” Clar-
ence groaned. “I had a fine valley for free, and I have
lost it. I am like that hard-luck guy in the funny-paper
or Job in the Bible. Destitution is my lot.”
Willy McGilly looked around furtively. They were
alone on the edge of the half-mile-wide valley.
"Let's give it a booster shot,” Willy McGilly said.
Hey, those two got with it! They started a snapping
fire and began to throw the stuff onto it. Bark from
the dog-elm tree-how do you know it won't work?
It was working! Already the other side of the valley
seemed a hundred yards closer, and there were alarmed
noises coming up from the people in the valley.
Leaves from a black locust tree-and the valley nar-
rowed still morel There was, moreover, ternified scream-
ing of both children and big people from the depths of
Narrow Valley, and the happy voice of Mary Mabel
Rampart chanting “Earthquakel Earthquakel”
"That my valley be always wide and flourish and
such stuff, and green with money and grass!" Clarence
Little-Saddle orated in Pawnee chant style, “but that
it be narrow if intruders come, smash them like bugs!”
People, that valley wasn't over a hundred feet wide
now, and the screaming of the people in the bottom of
the valley had been joined by the hysterical coughing of
the
camper car starting up.
Willy and Clarence threw everything that was left
210
NARROW VALLEY
n
on the fire. But the word? The word? Who remembers
the word?
"Corsicanatexas!" Clarence Little-Saddle howled out
with confidence he hoped would fool the fates.
He was answered not only by a dazzling sheet of
summer lightning, but also by thunder and raindrops.
"Cbahiksil” Clarence Little-Saddle swore. “It worked.
I didn't think it would. It will be all right now. I can
use the rain."
The valley was again a ditch only five feet wide.
The camper car struggled out of Narrow Valley
through the little gate. It was smashed flat as a sheet of
paper, and the screaming kids and people in it had only
one dimension,
"It's closing in! It's closing in!" Robert Rampart roared,
and he was no thicker than if he had been made out of
cardboard,
"We're smashed like bugs," the Rampart boys intoned.
“We're thin like paper.”
“Mort, ruine, ecrasementſ spoke-acted Cecilia Ram-
part like the great tragedienne she was.
"Help! Help!” Nina Rampart croaked, but she winked
at Willy and Clarence as they rolled by: "This home-
steading jag always did leave me a little flat.”
“Don't throw those paper dolls away. They might be
the Ramparts," Mary Mabel called.
The camper car coughed again and bumped along on
level ground. This couldn't last forever. The car was
widening out as it bumped along.
“Did we overdo it, Clarence?" Willy McGilly asked.
"What did one flat-lander say to the other?”
"Dimension of us never got around,” Clarence said.
“No, I don't think we overdid it, Willy. That car must
be eighteen inches wide already, and they all ought to
be normal by the time they reach the main road. The
next time I do it, I think I'll throw wood-grain plastic
on the fire to see who's kidding.who.
211
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
ABSTRACT FROM REPORT OF FIELD GROUP FOR EXAMINA-
TION OF OFF-EARTE CUSTOMS AND CODEXES TO TEIE
COUNCIL FOR GOVERNMENT RENOVATION AND LEGAL RE-
THINKING.
Extract from the day book of Paul Piggott, political
Analyst:
Making appointments with the Camiroi is proverbial-
ly like building with quicksilver. We discovered this
early. But they do have the most advanced civiliza-
tion of any of the four human worlds. And we did have
a fim invitation to visit the planet Camiroi and to in-
vestigate customs. And we had the promise that we
would be taken in hand immediately on our arrival by
a group parallel to our own.
But there was no group to meet us at the Sky-Port.
"Where is the Group for the Examination of Customs
and Codexes?" we asked the girl who was on duty as
Information Factor at the Sky-Port.
"Ask that post over there," she said. She was a young
lady of mischievous and almost rakish mien.
“I hope we are not reduced to talking to posts," said
our leader, Charles Chosky, “but I see that it is some
sort of communicating device. Does the post talk Eng-
lish, young lady?"
"The post understands the fifty languages that all Ca-
miroi know," the young lady said. "On Camiroi, even
the dogs speak fifty languages. Speak to it.”
"I'll try it," said Mr. Chosky. "Ah, post, we were to
be taken in hand by a group parallel to our own. Where
can we find the Group for the Examination of Customs
and Codexes?"
212
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
“Duty! Dutyl” cried the post in a girlish voice that
was somehow familiar. "Three for a group! Come, come,
be constituted!”
"I'll be one,” said a pleasant-looking Camiroi, striding
over.
s
n
"I'll be another,” said a teen-age sproutling boy of the
same species.
"One more, one morel” cried the post. “Oh, here comes
my relief. I'll be the other one to form the group. Come,
come, let's get started. What do you want to see first,
good people?"
"How can a post be a member of an ambulatory
group?" Charles Chosky asked.
"Oh, don't be quaint," said the girl who had been
the information factor and also the voice of the post.
She had come up behind us and joined us. “Sideki and
Nautes, we become a group for cozening Earthlings,
she said. “I am sure you heard the rather humorous
name they gave it.”
"Are you as a group qualified to give us the informa-
tion we seek?" I asked.
“Every citizen of Camiroi is qualified, in theory, to
give sound information on every subject,” said the teen-
age sproutling.
"But in practice it may not be so," I said, my legal
mind fastening onto his phrase.
"The only difficulty is our over-liberal admission to
citizenship,” said Miss Diayggeia, who had been the
voice of the post and the Information Factor. “Any
person may become a citizen of Camiroi if he has re-
sided here for one oodle. Once it was so that only
natural leaders traveled space, and they qualified. Now,
however, there are subsidized persons of no ability who
,
come. They do not always conform to our high stand-
ard of reason and information.”
"Thanks,” said our Miss Holly Holm, "and how long
is an oodle?"
A
n
213
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
n
"About fifteen minutes," said Miss Dia. "The post will
register you now if you wish."
The post registered us, and we became citizens of
Camiroi.
"Well, come, come, fellow citizens, what can we do
for you?” asked Sideki the pleasant-looking Camiroi
who was the first member of our host group.
"Our reports of the laws of Camiroi seem to be a
mixture of travelers' tales and nonsense,” I said. “We
want to find how a Camiroi law is made and how it
works.
"So, make one, citizens, and see how it works," said
Sideki. “You are now citizens like any other citizens,
and
any three of you can band together and make a
law. Let us go down to Archives and enact it. And you
be thinking what sort of law it will be as we go there." "
We strode through the contrived and beautiful park-
lands and groves which were the roofs of Camiroi City.
The extent was full of fountains and waterfalls, and
streams with bizarre bridges over them. Some were bet-
ter than others. Some were better than anything we had
ever seen anywhere.
"But I believe that I myself could design a pond and
weir as good as this one,” said Charles Chosky, our lead-
er. “And I'd have some of those bushes that look like
Earth sumac in place of that cluster there; and I'd break
up that pattern of rocks and tilt the layered massif be-
hind it, and bring in a little of that blue moss-
"You see your duty quickly, citizen,” said Sideki. "You
should do all this before this very day is gone. Make it
the way you think best, and remove the plaque that is
there. Then you can dictate your own plaque to any of
the symbouleutik posts, and it will be made and set in.
My composition is better than your composition,' is the
way most plaques read, and sometimes a scenery com-
poser will add something humorous like 'and my dog
can whip your dog.' You can order all necessary materials
from the same post there, and most citizens prefer to
214
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
do the work with their own hands. This system works
for gradual improvement. There are many Consensus
Masterpieces that remain year after year; and the or-
dinary work is subject to constant turnover. There, for
instance, is a tree which was not there this morning and
which should not be there tonight I'm sure that one of
you can design a better tree.
"I can,” said Miss Holly, "and I will do so today."
We descended from the roof parklands in the lower
streets of Camiroi City, and went to Archives.
"Have you thought of a new law yet?” Miss Dia asked
when we were at Archives. “We don't expect brilliance
from such new citizens, but we ask you not to be ri-
diculous."
Our leader, Charles Chosky, drew himself up to full
height and spoke:
"We promulgate a law that a permanent group be
set up on Camiroi to oversee and devise regulations for
all random and hasty citizens' groups with the aim of
making them more responsible, and that a full-scale
-
review of such groups be held yearly."
"Got it?" Miss Dia called to an apparatus there in
Archives.
“Got it,” said the device. It ground its entrails and
coughed up the law, inscribed on bronze, and set it in
a law niche.
"The echo is deafening," said our Miss Holly, pretend-
ing to listen
"Yes. What is the effect of what we have done?" I
asked,
"Oh, the law is in effect,” said young Nautes. “It has
been weighed and integrated into the corpus of laws.
It is already considered in the instructions that the
magistrate coming on duty in a short time (usually a
citizen will serve as magistrate for one hour a month)
must scan before he takes his seat. Possibly in this
session he will assess somebody guilty of a misdemeanor
215
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
.
to think about this problem for ten minutes and then to
attach an enabling act to your law."
“But what if some citizens' group passes a silly law?"
our Miss Holly asked.
"They do it often. One of them has just done so. But
it will be repealed quickly enough,” said Miss Dia of
the Camiroi. “Any citizen who has his name on three
laws deemed silly by general consensus shall lose his
citizenship for one year. A citizen who so loses his citi-
zenship twice shall be mutilated, and the third time be
shall be killed. This isn't an extreme ruling. By that
time he would have participated in nine silly laws. Sure-
ly that's enough."
"But, in the meantime, the silly laws remain in ef-
fect?” our Mr. Chosky asked.
"Not likely,” said Sideki. “A law is repealed thus:
any citizen may go to Archives and remove any law,
leaving the statement that he has abolished the law for
his own reasons. He is then required to keep the voided
law in his own home for three days. Sometimes the citi-
zen or citizens who first passed the law will go to the
house of the abolitionist. Occasionally they will fight to
the death with ritual swords, but most often they will
parley. They may agree to have the law abolished.
They may agree to restore the law. Or they may to-
gether work out a new law that takes into account the
objections to the old."
“Then every Camiroi law is subject to random chal-
lenge?” Chosky asked.
"Not exactly,” said Miss Dia. “A law which has stood
unchallenged and unappealed for nine years becomes
privileged. A citizen wishing to abolish such a law by
removal must leave in its place not only his declara.
tion of removal but also three fingers of his right hand
as eamest of his seriousness in the matter. But a magis-
trate or a citizen going to reconstitute the law has to
contribute only one of his fingers to the parley."
"This seems to me to favor the establishment,” I said.
n
216
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
“We have none," said Sideki. "I know that is hard
for Earthlings to understand."
“But is there no senate or legislative body on Cam-
miroi, or even a president?” Miss Holly asked.
"Yes, there's a president," said Miss Dia, and he is
actually a dictator or tyrant. He is chosen by lot for a
term of one week. Any of you could be chosen for the
term starting tomorrow, but the odds are against it.
We do not have a permanent senate, but often there
are hasty senates constituted, and they have full pow-
ers."
"Such bodies having full powers is what we want to
study,” I said. “When will the next one be constituted,
and how will it act?"
"So, constitute yourselves one now and see how you
act,” said young Nautes. “You simply say, 'We constitute
ourselves a Hasty Senate or Camiroi with full powers.'
Register yourselves at the nearest symbouleutic post,
and study your senate introspectively.”
"Could we fire the president-dictator?" Miss Holly
asked.
"Certainly,” said Sideki, "but a new president would
immediately be chosen by lot; and your senate would
not carry over to the new term, nor could any of you
three partake of a new senate until a full presidential
term had passed. But I wouldn't, if I were you, form a
senate to fire the present president. He is very good
with the ritual sword.”
"Then citizens do actually fight with them yet?” Mr.
Chosky asked.
"Yes, any private citizen may at any time challenge
any other private citizen for any reason, or for none.
Sometimes, but not often, they fight to the death, and
they may not be interfered with. We call these de-
cisions the Court of Last Resort."
Reason says that the legal system on Camiroi cannot
be as simple as this, and yet it seems to be. Starting
with the thesis that every citizen of Camiroi should be
217
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
able to handle every assignment or job on Camiroi, these
people have cut organization to the minimum. These
things we consider fluid or liberal about the legal system
of Camiroi. Hereafter, whenever I am tempted to think
of some law or custom of Earth as liberal, I will pause.
.
I will hear Camiroi laughing.
On the other hand, there are these things which I
consider adamant or conservative about the laws of Ca-
miroi:
No assembly on Camiroi for purposes of entertain-
ment may exceed thirty-nine persons. No more than this
number may witness any spectacle or drama, or hear a
musical presentation, or watch a sporting event. This is
to prevent the citizens from becoming mere spectators
rather than originators or partakers. Similarly, no writ-
ing-other than certain rare official promulgations-may
be issued in more than thirty-nine copies in one month.
This, it seems to us, is a conservative ruling to prevent
popular enthusiasms.
À father of a family who twice in five years appeals
to specialists for such things as simple surgery for mem-
bers of his household, or legal or financial or medical
advice, or any such things as he himself should be
capable of doing, shall lose his citizenship. It seems to
us that this ruling obstructs the Camiroi from the full
fruits of progress and research. They say, however, that
it compels every citizen to become an expert in every-
thing.
Any citizen who pleads incapacity when chosen by lot
to head a military operation or a scientific project or a
trade combine shall lose his citizenship and suffer mu-
tilation. But one who assumes such responsibility, and
then fails in the accomplishment of the task, shall suffer
the loss and the mutilation only for two such failures.
Both cases seem to us to constitute cruel and unusual
punishment
Any citizen chosen by lot to provide a basic invention
or display a certain ingenuity when there is corporate
218
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
need for it, and who fails to provide such invention,
shall be placed in such a position that he will lose his
life unless he displays even greater ingenuity and in-
vention than was originally called for.
This seems to us to be unspeakably cruel
There is an absolute death penalty for impiety. But
to the question of what constitutes impiety, we received
a startling answer:
"If you have to ask what it is, then you are guilty
of it. For piety is comprehension of the basic norms.
Lack of awareness of the special Camiroi context is the
greatest impiety of all. Beware, new citizens! Should a
person more upright and less indulgent than myself have
heard your question, you might be executed before night-
rise."
The Camiroi, however, are straight-faced kidders. We
do not believe that we were in any danger of execution,
but we had been told bluntly not to ask questions of a
certain sort.
CONCLUSION: Inconclusive. We are not yet able to un-
derstand the true legal system of Camiroi, but we have
begun to acquire the viewpoint from which it may be
studied. We recommend continuing study by a per-
manent resident team in this field.
-Paul Piggott,
Political Analyst
From the journey book of Charles Chosky, chief of
field group:
The basis of Camiroi polity and procedure is that any
Camiroi citizen should be capable of filling any job on
or pertaining to the planet. If it is ever the case that
even one citizen should prove incapable of this, they say,
then their system has already failed.
"Of course, it fails many times every day," one of
their men explained to me, but it does not fail com-
pletely. It is like a man in motion. He is falling off-
balance at every step, but he saves himself, and so he
219
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
strides. Our polity is always in motion. Should it come
to rest, it would die."
"Have the Camiroi a religion?" I asked citizen after
citizen of them.
“I think so," one of them said finally. “I believe that
we do have that, and nothing else. The difficulty is in
the word Your Earth English word may come from
religionem or from relegionem; it may mean a legality,
or it may mean a revelation. I believe it is a mixture of
the two concepts; with us it is. Of course we have a
religion. What else is there to have?"
"Could you draw a parallel between Camiroi and
Earth religion?" I asked him.
"No, I couldn't,” he said bluntly. "I'm not being rude.
I just don't know how.”
But another intelligent Camiroi gave me some ideas
on it.
"The closest I could come to explaining the dif-
ference," he said, “is by a legend that is told (as our
Camiroi phrase has it) with the tongue so far in the
cheek that it comes out the vulgar body aperture.”
"What is the legend?" I asked him.
"The legend is that men (or whatever local creatures)
were tested on all the worlds. On some of the worlds,
men persevered in grace. These have become the tran-
scendent worlds, asserting themselves as stars rather than
planets and swallowing their own suns, becoming fully
incandescent in their merged persons living in grace
and light. The more developed of them are those closed
bodies which we know only by inference, so powerful
and contained that they let no light or gravity or other
emission escape them. They become of themselves
closed and total universes, of their own space and out-
side of - what we call space, perfect in their merged
mentality and spirit.
"Then there are the worlds like Earth where men did
fall from grace. On these worlds, each person contains
an interior abyss and is capable both of great heights
220
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
and depths. By our legend, the persons of these worlds,
after their fall
, were condemned to live for thirty thou-
sand generations in the bodies of animals and were then
permitted to begin their slow and frustrating ascent
back to remembered personhood
"But the case of Camiroi was otherwise. We do not
know whether there are further worlds of our like case.
The primordial test-people of Camiroi did not fall. And
they did not persevere. They hesitated. They could not
make up their minds. They thought the matter over,
and then they thought it over some more. Camiroi was
therefore doomed to think matters over forever.
“So we are the equivocal people, capable of curious
and continuing thought. But we have a hunger both for
the depths and the heights which we have missed. To
be sure, our Golden Mediocrity, our serene plateau, is
higher than the heights of most worlds, higher than
those of Earth, I believe. But it has not the exhilaration
of height.”
do not believe in legends," I said.
“A legend is the highest scientific statement when it
is the only statement available,” the Camiroi said. “We
are the people who live according to reason. It makes
a good life, but it lacks salt. You people have a literature
of Utopias. You value their ideals highly, and they do
have some effect on you. Yet you must feel that they
all have this quality of the insipid. And according to
Earth standards, we are a Utopia. We are a world of
the third case.
"We miss a lot. The enjoyment of poverty is generally
denied to us. We have a certain hunger for incom-
petence, which is why some Earth things find a wel-
come here: bad Earth music, bad Earth painting and
sculpture and drama, for instance. The good we can
produce ourselves. The bad we are incapable of, and
must import. Some of us believe that we need it in our
diet."
"But you
a
221
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
"If this is true, your position seems enviable to me,
I said.
"Yours isn't,” he said, "and yet you are the most com-
plete. You have both halves, and you have your num-
bers. We know, of course, that the Giver has never
given a life anywhere until there was real need for it,
and that everything bom or created has its individual
part to play. But we wish the Giver would be more
generous to us in this, and it is in this particularly that
we envy Earth.
“A difficulty with us is that we do our great deeds
at too young an age and on distant worlds. We are all
of us more or less retired by the age of twenty-five, and
we have all had careers such as you would not believe.
We come home then to live maturely on our mature
world. It's perfect, of course, but of a perfection too
small. We have everything—except the one thing that
matters, for which we cannot even find a name.
I talked to many of the intelligent Camiroi on our
short stay there. It was often difficult to tell whether
they were talking seriously or whether they were mock-
ing.me. We do not as yet understand the Camiroi at all.
Further study is recommended.
-Charles Chosky
Chief of Field Group
-
From the ephemeris of Holly Holm, anthropologist
and schedonahthropologist:
The word Camiroi is plural in form, is used for the
people in both the single and plural and for the planet
itself.
The civilization of Camiroi is more mechanical and
more scientific than that of Earth, but it is more dis-
guised. Their ideal machine shall have no moving parts
at all, shall be noiseless and shall not look like a machine.
For this reason, there is something pastoral about even
the most thickly populated districts of Camiroi City.
The Camiroi are fortunate in the natural furnishings
222
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
of their planet. The scenery of Camiroi conforms to the
dictate that all repetition is tedious, for there is only
one of each thing on that world. There is one major
continent and one minor continent of quite different
character; one fine cluster of islands of which the in-
dividual isles are of very different style; one great con-
tinental river with its seven branches flowing out of
seven sorts of land; one complex of volcanoes; one great
range of mountains; one titanic waterfall with her three
so different daughters nearby; one inland sea, one gulf,
one beach which is a three hundred and fifty mile
crescent passing through seven phases named for the
colors of iris; one great rain forest, one palm grove, one
leaf-fall grove, one of evergreens and one of eodendrons;
one grain bowl, one fruit bowl, one pampas, one park-
land; one desert, one great oasis; and Camiroi City is
the one great city. And all these places are unercelled
of their kind.
There are no ordinary places on Camiroil
Travel being rapid, a comparatively poor young cou-
ple may go from anywhere on the planet to Green
Beach, for instance, to take their evening meal, in less
time than the consumption of the meal will take them,
and for less money than that reasonable meal will cost.
This easy and frequent travel makes the whole world
one community.
The Camiroi believe in the necessity of the frontier.
They control many primitive worlds, and I gather hints
that they are sometimes cruel in their management.
The tyrants and proconsuls of these worlds are young,
usually still in their teens. The young people are to
have their careers and make their mistakes while in
the foreign service. When they retum to Camiroi they
are supposed to be settled and of tested intelligence.
The earning scale of the Camiroi is curious. A job of
mechanical drudgery pays higher than one of intellectual
interest and involvement. This often means that the
least intelligent and least able of the Camiroi will have
223
POUTY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
more wealth than those of more ability. "This is fair,
the Camiroi tell us. “Those not able to receive the higher
recompense are certainly entitled to the lower.” They
regard the Earth system as grossly inequal, that a man
should have both a superior job and superior pay, and
that another man should have the inferior of both.
Though official offices and jobs are usually filled by
lot, yet persons can apply for them for their own reasons.
In special conditions there might even be competition
for an assignment, such as directorship of trade posts
where persons (for private reasons) might wish to ac-
quire great fortunes rapidly. We witnessed confronta-
tions between candidates in several of these campaigns,
and they were curious.
“My opponent is a three and seven," said one can-
didate, and then he sat down.
“My opponent is a five and nine," said the other
candidate. The small crowd clapped, and that was the
confrontation or debate.
We attended another such rally.
“My opponent is an eight and ten,” one candidate
said briskly.
“My opponent is a two and six," said the other, and
they went off together.
We did not understand this, and we attended a third
confrontation. There seemed to be a little wave of ex-
citement about to break here.
"My opponent is an old number four,” said one can-
didate with a voice charged with emotion, and there
was a gasp from the small crowd.
"I will not answer the charge,” said the other candi-
date shaking with anger. “The blow is too foul, and
we had been friends."
We found the key then. The Camiroi are experts at
defamation, but they have developed a shorthand sys-
tem to save time. They have their decalogue of slander,
and the numbers refer to this. In its accepted version
it runs as follows:
224
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
My opponent (1) is personally moronic. (2) is sexually
incompetent. (3) flubs third points in Chuki game. (4)
eats Mu seeds before the time of the summer solstice.
(5) is physically pathetic. (7) is financially stupid. (8)
is ethically weird. (9) is intellectually contemptible.
(10) is morally dishonest.
Try it yourself, on your friends or your enemies! It
works wonderfully. We recommend the listing and use
to Earth politicians, except for nunbers three and four;
which seem to have no meaning in Earth context.
The Camiroi have a corpus of proverbs. We came on
them in Archives, along with an attached machine with
a hundred levers on it. We depressed the lever marked
Earth English, and had a sampling of these proverbs
put into Earth context.
A man will not become rich by raising goats, the
machine issued. Yes, that could almost pass for an Earth
proverb. It almost seems to mean something.
Even buzzards sometimes gag. That has an Earth
sound also.
It's that or pluck chickens..
“I don't believe I understand that one,” I said.
"You think it's easy to put these in Earth context, you
try it sometime," the translation machine issued. "The
proverb applies to distasteful but necessary tasks.”
"Ah, well, let's try some more,” said Paul Piggott.
"That' one.'
A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, the
machine issued abruptly.
"But that is an Earth proverb word for word,” I said.
“You wait until I finish it, lady,” the translation ma-
chine growled. “To this proverb in its classical form is
always appended a cartoon showing a bird. fluttering
away and a man angrily wiping his hand with some
disposable material while he says, “A bird in the hand
is not worth two in the bush.'
"Are we being had by a machine?" our leader,
Charles Chosky asked softly.
225
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
"Give us that proverb there,” I pointed one out to the
machine.
There'll be many a dry eye here when you leave,
the machine issued.
We left.
"I may be in serious trouble,” I said to a Camiroi
I
lady of my acquaintance, “Well, aren't you going to ask
me what it is?"
"No, I don't particularly care,” she said. “But tell me
if you feel an absolute compulsion to it."
"I never heard of such a thing," I said. “I have been
chosen by lot to head a military expedition for the re-
lief of a trapped force on a world I never heard of. I
am supposed to raise and supply this force (out of my
private funds, it says here) and have it in flight within
eight oodles. That's only two hours. What will I do?"
“Do it, of course, Miss Holly,” the lady said. “You
are a citizen of Camiroi now, and you should be proud
to take charge of such an operation."
“But I don't know howl What will happen if I just
tell them that I don't know how?"
"Oh, you'll lose your citizenship and suffer mutilation,
That's the law, you know."
"How will they mutilate me?"
“Probably cut off your nose. I wouldn't worry about
it. It doesn't do much for you anyhow."
"But we have to go back to Earth! We are going to
go tomorrow, but now we want to go today. I do any.
how."
"Earth kid, if I were you, I'd get out to Sky-Port
awful fast."
By a coincidence (I hope it was no more than that)
our political analyst, Paul Piggott, had been chosen by
lot to make a survey (personally, minutely and interior-
ly, the directive said) of the sewer system of Camiroi
City. And our leader, Charles Chosky, had been selected
by lot to put down a rebellion of Groll's Trolls on one
226
POLITY AND CUSTOM OF THE CAMIROI
of the worlds, and to leave his right hand and his right
eye as surety for the accomplishment of the mission.
We were rather nervous as we waited for Earth
Flight at Sky-Port, particularly so when a group of
Camiroi acquaintances approached us. But they did not
stop us. They said goodbye to us without too much
enthusiasm
"Our visit has been all too short," I said hopefully.
“Oh, I wouldn't say that," one of them rejoined. “There
is a Camiroi proverb-"
"We've heard it,” said our leader, Charles Chosky.
"We also are dry-eyed about leaving.”
NAL RECOMMENDATION: That another and broader
field group be sent to study the Camiroi in greater de-
tail. That a special study might fruitfully be made of
the humor of the Camiroi. That no members of the first
field group should serve on the second field group.
-Holly Holm
227
IN OUR BLOCK
a
THERE WERE a lot of funny people in that block.
"You ever walk down that street?" Art Slick asked
Jim Boomer, who had just come onto him there.
"Not since I was a boy. After the overall factory
burned down, there was a faith healer had his tent
pitched there one summer. The street's just one block
long and it dead-ends on the railroad embankment.
Nothing but a bunch of shanties and weed-filled lots.
The shanties looked different today, though, and there
seem to be more of them. I thought they pulled them
all down a few months
ago.
“Jim, I've been watching that first little building for
two hours. There was a tractor-truck there this moming
with a forty-foot trailer, and it loaded out of that little
shanty. Cartons about eight inches by eight inches by
three feet came down that chute. They weighed about
thirty-five pounds each from the way the men handled
them. Jim, they filled that trailer up with them, and
then pulled it off.”
"What's wrong with that, Arts
"Jim, I said they filled that trailer up. From the drag
on it it had about a sixty-thousand-pound load when it
pulled out. They loaded a carton every three and a
half seconds for two hours; that's two thousand cartons.
"Sure, lots of trailers run over the load limit nowdays.
They don't enforce it very well.”
"Jim, that shack's no more than a cracker box seven
feet on a side. Half of it is taken up by a door, and
inside a man in a chair behind a small table. You
couldn't get anything else in that half. The other half
is taken up by whatever that chute comes out of. You
could pack six of those little shacks on that trailer."
228
IN OUR BLOCK
"
“Let's measure it," Jim Boomer said “Maybe it's big-
ger than it looks.” The shack had a sign on it: Make Sell
Ship Anything Cut Price. Jim Boomer measured the
building with an old steel tape. The shack was a seven-
foot cube, and there were no hidden places. It was set
up on a few piers of broken bricks, and you could see
under it
“Sell you a new fifty-foot steel tape for a dollar,” said
the man in the chair in the little shack. "Throw that old
one away.” The man pulled a steel tape out of a drawer
of his table-desk, though Art Slick was sure it had been
a plain flat-top table with no place for a drawer.
“Fully retractable, rhodium-plated, Dort glide, Ram-
sey swivel, and it forms its own carrying case. One
dollar," the man said.
Jim Boomer paid him a dollar for it. "How many of
them you got?
"I can have a hundred thousand ready to load out in
ten minutes," the man said. “Eighty-eight cents each in
hundred-thousand lots.”
"Was that a trailer-load of steel tapes you shipped
out this moming?” Art asked the man.
"No, that must have been something else. This is the
first steel tape I ever made. Just got the idea when I
saw you measuring my shack with that old beat-up one.
Art Slick and Jim Boomer went to the rundown build-
ing next door. It was smaller, about a six-foot cube, and
the sign said Public Stenographer. The clatter of a type-
writer was coming from it, but the noise stopped when
they opened the door.
A dark, pretty girl was sitting in a chair before a small
table. There was nothing else in the room, and no type-
writer.
"I thought I heard a typewriter in here," Art said.
"Oh, that is me.” The girl smiled. "Sometimes I amuse
myself make typewriter noises like a public stenographer
is supposed to."
229
IN OUR BLOCK
"
n
"What would you do if someone came in to have some
typing done?”
"What are you think? I do it of course."
"Could you type a letter for me?"
"Sure is can, man friend, two bits a page, good work,
carbon copy, envelope and stamp."
"Ah, let's see how you do it. I will dictate to you while
you type."
"You dictate first. Then I write. No sense mix up
two
things at one time.”
Art dictated a long and involved letter that he had
been meaning to write for several days. He felt like a
fool droning it to the girl as she filed her nails. “Why is
public stenographer always sit filing her nails?” she asked
as Art droned. “But I try to do it right, file them down,
grow them out again, then file them down some more.
Been doing it all morning. It seems silly.”
"Ah-that is all," Art said when he had finished dictat-
ing.
“Not P.S. Love and Kisses?" the girl asked.
"Hardly. It's a business letter to a person I barely
know.”
"I always say P.S. Love and Kisses to persons I barely
know,” the girl said. “Your letter will make three pages,
six bits. Please you both step outside about ten seconds
and I write it. Can't do it when you watch.” She pushed
them out and closed the door.
Then there was silence.
"What are you doing in there, girl?" Art called.
“Want I sell you a memory course too? You forget
already? I type a letter," the girl called.
“But I don't hear a typewriter going.”
“What is? You want verisimilitude too? I should charge
extra.” There was a giggle, and then the sound of very
rapid typing for about five seconds.
The girl opened the door and handed Art the three-
page letter. It was typed perfectly, of course.
"There is something a little odd about this,” Art said.
n
230
IN OUR BLOCK
"Oh? The ungrammar of the letter is your own, sir.
Should I have correct?"
"No. It is something else. Tell me the truth, girl: how
does the man next door ship out trailer-loads of ma-
terial from a building ten times too small to hold the
stuffro
"He cuts prices.
"Well, what are you people? The man next door
resembles you."
“My brother-uncle. We tell everybody we are In-
Dominee Indians."
"There is no such tribe," Jim Boomer said flatly.
"Is there not? Then we will have to tell people we
are something else. You got to admit it sounds like
Indian. What's the best Indian to be?"
"Shawnee,” said Jim Boomer.
"Okay then we be Shawnee Indians. See how easy
it is.
“We're already taken,” Boomer said. "I'm a Shawnee
and I know every Shawnee in town.”
"Hi cousin!" the girl cried, and winked. “That's from
a joke I learn, only the begin was different. See how
foxy I turn all your questions.
"I have two-bits coming out of my dollar,” Art said.
"I know," the girl said. “I forgot for a minute what
design is on the back of the two-bitser piece, so I stall
while I remember it. Yes, the funny bird standing on
the bundle of firewood. One moment till I finish it.
Here." She banded the quarter to Art Slick. “And you
tell everybody there's a smoothie public stenographer
here who types letters good"
Without a typewriter," said Art Slick. “Let's go,
Jim."
"P.S. Love and Kisses," the girl called after them.
The Cool Man Club was next door, a small and
shabby beer bar. The bar girl could have been a sister
of the public stenographer.
D
231
IN OUR BLOCK
a
"We'd like a couple of Buds, but you don't seem to
have a stock of anything,” Art said.
"Who needs stock?" the girl asked. “Here is beers."
Art would have believed that she brought them out of
her sleeves, but she had no sleeves. The beers were
cold and good.
"Girl, do you know how the fellow on the comer can
ship a whole trailer-load of material out of a space that
wouldn't hold a tenth of it?" Art asked the girl.
"Sure. He makes it and loads it out at the same time.
That way it doesn't take up space, like if he made it
before time.”
"But he has to make it out of something,” Jim Boomer
cut in.
“No, no," the girl said. "I study your language. I
know words. Out of something is to assemble, not to
make. He makes.'
"This is funny.” Slick gaped. "Budweiser is misspelled
on this bottle, the i before the e.
"Oh, I goof,” the bar girl said. “I couldn't remember
which way it goes so I make it one way on one bottle
and the other way on the other. Yesterday a man or-
dered a bottle of Progress beer, and I spelled it Progers
on the bottle. Sometimes I get things wrong. Here, I fix
yours.
She ran her hand over the label, and then it was
spelled correctly.
"But that thing is engraved and then reproduced,"
Slick protested.
"Oh, sure, all fancy stuff like that,” the girl said. "I
got to be more careful. One time I forget and make
Jax-taste beer in a Schlitz bottle and the man didn't like
it. I had to swish swish change the taste while I pre-
tended to give him a different bottle. One time I for-
got and produced a green-bottle beer in a brown bottle.
'It is the light in here, it just makes it look brown,' I told
the man. Hell, we don't even have a light in here. I go
232
IN OUR BLOCK
swish fast and make the bottle green. It's hard to keep
from making mistake when you're stupid."
“No, you don't have a light or a window in here, and
it's light,” Slick said. “You don't have refrigeration. There
are no power lines to any of the shanties in this block.
How do you keep the beer cold?” "
"Yes, is the beer not nice and cold? Notice how tricky
I evade your question. Will you good men have two
more beers?”
"Yes, we will. And I'm interested in seeing where you
get them,” Slick said.
"Oh look, is snakes behind youl” the girl cried.
"Oh how you startle and jump!" she laughed. “It's all
joke. Do you think I will have snakes in my nice bar?”
But she had produced two more beers, and the place
was as bare as before.
“How long have you tumble-bugs been in this block?"
Boomer asked.
“Who keep track?” the girl said. “People come and
go."
"You're not from around here," Slick said. “You're
”
not from anywhere I know. Where do you come from?
?
Jupiter?"
"Who wants Jupiter?" the girl seemed indignant. “Do
business with a bunch of insects there, is alll Freeze your
tail too."
"You wouldn't be a kidder, would you, girl?” Slick
asked.
“I sure do try hard. I learn a lot of jokes but I tell
them all wrong yet. I get better, though. I try to be the
witty bar girl so people will come back.”
"What's in the shanty next door toward the tracks?”
“My cousin-sister," said the girl. “She set up shop just
today. She grow any color hair on bald-headed men. I
tell her she's crazy. No business. If they wanted hair they
wouldn't be bald-headed in the first place.”
"Well, can she grow hair on bald-headed men?” Slick
asked.
233
IN OUR BLOCK
“Ob sure. Can't you?
There were three or four more shanty shops in the
block. It didn't seem that there had been that many
when the men went into the Cool Man Club,
"I don't remember seeing this shack a few minutes
ago,” Boomer said to the man standing in front of the
last shanty on the line.
"Oh, I just made it," the man said.
Weathered boards, rusty nails ...
and he had just
made it
"Why didn't you-ab-make a decent building while
you were at it? Slick asked.
This is more inconspicuous," the man said. Who
notices when an old building appears suddenly? We're
new here and want to feel our way in before we attract
attention. Now I'm trying to figure out what to make.
Do you think there is a market for a luxury automobile
to sell for a hundred dollars? I suspect I would have to
respect the local religious feeling when I make them
though."
"What is that?" Slick asked.
"Ancestor worship. The old gas tank and fuel system
still carried as vestiges after natural power is available.
Oh, well, r'll put them in. I'll have one done in about
three minutes if you want to wait."
"No. I've already got a car," Slick said. “Let's go,
Jim.“
That was the last shanty in the block, so they turned
back.
"I was just wondering what was down in this block
where nobody ever goes, " Slick said. "There's a lot of
odd comers in our town if you look them out. "
"There are some queer guys in the shanties that were
here before this bunch," Boomer said. "Some of them
used to coine up to the Red Rooster to drink One of
them could gobble like a turkey. One of them could roll
one eye in one direction and the other eye the other
234
IN OUR BLOCK
n
way. They shoveled hulls at the cottonseed oil float be-
fore it burned down.”
They went by the public stenographer shack again.
“No kidding, honey, how do you type without a type-
writer?" Slick asked.
"Typewriter is too slow," the girl said.
"I asked how, not why," Slick said.
"I know. Is it not nifty the way I tum away a phrase?
I think I will have a big oak tree growing in front of my
shop tomorrow for shade. Either of you nice men have
an acom in your pocket?"
“Ah-no. How do you really do the typing, girl?”
"You promise you won't tell anybody.
“I promise.
"I make the marks with my tongue,” the girl said.
They started slowly on up the block.
"Hey, how do you make the carbon copies?” Jim
Boomer called back.
"With my other tongue,” the girl said.
There was another forty-foot trailer loading out of the
first shanty in the block. It was bundles of half-inch
plumbers' pipe coming out of the chute-in twenty-foot
lengths. Twenty-foot rigid pipe out of a seven-foot shed.
"I wonder how he can sell trailer-loads of such stuff
out of a little shack like that,” Slick puzzled, still not
satisfied.
“Like the girl says, he cuts prices,” Boomer said. “Let's
go over to the Red Rooster and see if there's anything
going on. There always were a lot of funny people in
that block."
235
HOG-BELLY HONEY
k:
I'M JOE SPADE-about as intellectual a guy as you'll find
all day, I invented Wotto and Voxo and a bunch of
other stuff that nobody can get along without anymore.
It's on account of I have so much stuff in my head that
I sometimes go to a head-grifter. This day all of them
I know is out of town when I call, Lots of times every-
body I know is out of town when I call. I go to a new
one. The glass in his door says he is a anapsychologist,
which is a head-grifter in the popular speech.
"I'm Joe Spade the man that got everything, I tell
him and slap him on the back in that hearty way of
mine. There is a crunch sound and at first I think I
have crack his rib. Then I see I have only broke his
glasses so no harın done. "I am what you call a flat-
footed genius, Doc,” I tell him, "with plenty of the
crimp-cut greenleaf.”
I take the check card away from him and mark it
up myself to save time. I figure I know more about
me than he does.
"Remember, I can get them nine-dollar words for four
eighty-five wholesale, Doc," I josh him and he looks at
me painful.
"Modesty isn't one of your failings,” this head-grifter
tell me as he scun my card. “Hum. Single . . . significant."
I had written down the “single” in the blank for it,
but he had see for himself that I am a significant man,
"Solvent,” he read for the blank about the pecuniary
stuff; “I like that in a man. We will arrange for a few
sessions.
"One will do it,” I tell him. "Time is running and I
am paying. Give me a quick read, Doc."
236
HOG-BELLY HONEY
-
“Yes, I can give you a very rapid reading," he says.
"I want you to ponder the ancient adage: It is not good
for Man to be alone. Think about it a while, and per-
haps you will be able to put one and one together.”
Then he add kind of sad, "Poor woman!" which is
either the non-secular of the year or else he is thinking
of some other patient. Then he add again, “That will
be three yards, in the lingo.”
"Thanks, Doc," I say. I pay the head-grifter his three
bundred dollars and leave. He has hit the nail on the
noggin and put his toe on the root of my trouble.
I will take me a partner in my business.
I spot him in Grogley's, and I know right away he's
the one. He's about half my size but otherwise he's as
much like me as two feet in one shoe. He's real good-
looking-just like me. He's dressed sweet, but has a lit-
tle blood on his face like can happen to anyone in Grog.
ley's for five minutes. Man, we're twins! I know we will
talk alike and think alike just like we look alike.
"Eheu! Fugacesl" my new partner says real sad. That
means “Brother, this has been one day with all the
bark on it!" He is drinking the Fancy and his eyes look
like cracked glass.
"He's been having quite a few little fist fights,” Grog-
ley whispers to me, “but he don't win none. He isn't
very fast with his hands. I think he's got troubles.'
"Not no more he don't,” I tell Grogley; "he's my new
partner.”
I slap my new partner on the back in that hearty
way
I have, and the tooth that flew out must have been
a loose one.
“You don't have no more troubles, Roscoe,” I tell him,
you and 'me is just become partners.” He looks kind
of sick at me.
“Maurice is the name," he says, “Maurice Maltravers.
How are things back in the rocks? You, sir, are a trog-
lodyte. They always come right after the snakes. That's
the only time I wish the snakes would come back.”
237
HOG-BELLY HONEY
-
n
Lots of people call me a troglodyte.
“Denied the sympathy of humankind,” Maurice car-
ries on, “perhaps I may find it in an inferior species. I
I
wonder if I could impose on your ears-gahhhh!” (he
made a humorous sound there) are those things ears?
What a fearsome otological apparatus you do havel-the
burden of
my
troubles.
"I just told you you don't have none, Maurice," I
say. “Come along with me and we'll get into the part.
ner business."
I pick him up by the scruff and haul him out of
Grogley's.
“I see right away you are my kind of man,” I say.
"My kind of man-putridus ad volva," Maurice gives
me the echo. Hey, this guy is a galel Just like me.
“My cogitational patterns are so intricate and iden-
tatic oriented,” says Maurice when I set him down and
let him walk a little, “that I become a closed system-
unintelligible to the exocosmos and particularly to a
chthonian like yourself.”
"
"I'm mental as hell myself, Maurice," I tell him, “there
ain't nothing the two of us can't do together."
“My immediate difficulty is that the University has
denied me further use of the computer,” Maurice tells
me. “Without it, I cannot complete the Ultimate Ma-
chine."
"I got a computer'll make that little red schoolhouse
turn green,” I tell him.
We come to my place which a man have call in print
"a converted horse bam, probably the most unorthodox
and badly appointed scientific laboratory in the world."
I take Maurice in with me, but he carries on like a
chicken with its hat off when he finds out the only cal-
culator I got is the one in my head.
I
"You livid monster, I can't work in this mares'-nest,"
he screeches at me. “I've got to have a calculator, a
computer.”
I tap my head with a six-pound hammer and grin
238
HOG-BELLY HONEY
n
my famous grin. “It's all inside here, Maurice boy,” I
tell him, “the finest calculator in the world. When I
was with the carnivals they billed me as the Idiot Gen-
ius. I run races with the best computers they had in a
town, multiplying twenty-place numbers and all the lit-
tle tricks like that. I cheated though. I invented a gadg-
et and carried it in my pocket. It's jam the relays of
the best computers and slow them down for a full
second. Give me a one-second hop and I can beat any-
thing in the world at anything. The only things wrong
with those jobs is that I had to talk and act kind of
dumb to live up to my billing the Idiot Genius, and that
dumb stuff was hard on an intellectual like I.”
"I can see that it would be,” Maurice said. "Can you
handle involuted matrix, Maimonides-conditioned, third-
aspect numbers in the Cauchy sequence with simultane-
ous non-temporal involvement of the Fieschi manifold?”
“Maurice, I can do it and fry up a bunch of eggs to
go with it at the same time," I tell him. Then I look him
right in the middle of the eye. “Maurice," I say, “you're
"
working on a nullifier."
He look at me like he take me serious for the first
time. He pull a sheaf of papers out of his shirt, and
sure enough he is working on a nullifier-a sweet one.
“This isn't an ordinary nullifier,” Maurice points out,
and I see that it ain't. “What other nullifier can posit
moral and ethical judgments? What other can set up
and enforce categories? What other can really discer?
This will be the only nullifier able to make full philo-
sophical pronouncements. Can you help me finish it,
Proconsul?"
A pronconsul is about the same as an alderman, so
I know Maurice think high of me. We throw away the
clock and get with it. We work about twenty hours a
day. I compute it and build it at the same time-out of
Wotto-metal naturally. At the end we use feedback a
lot. We let the machine decide what we will put in it
and what leave out. The main difference between our
239
HOG-BELLY HONEY
2
nullifier and all others is that ours will be able to make
decisions. So, let it make them!
We finish it in about a week. Man, it is a sweet thing.
We play with it a while to see what it can do. It can do
everything
I point it at half a bushel of bolts and nuts I got there.
"Get rid of everything that ain't standard thread," I pro
gram it. "Half that stuff is junk."
And half that stuff is gone right now! This thing works)
Just set in what you want it to get rid of, and it's gone
without a trace.
"Get rid of everything here that's no good for noth-
ing,” I program it. I had me a place there that has been
described as cluttered. That machine blinked once, and
then I had a place you could get around in. That thing
knew junk when it saw it, and it sure sent that no-good
stuff clear over the edge. Of course anybody can make
a nullifier that won't leave no remains of whatever it
latches on to, but this is the only one that knows what
not to leave no remains of by itself. Maurice and me is
tickled as pink rabbits over the thing.
"Maurice," I say, and I slap him on the back so his
nose bleeds a little, “this is one bushy-tailed gadget.
There ain't nothing we can't do with it."
But Maurice looks kind of sad for a moment.
"A quo bonop he ask, which I think is the name of a
mineral water, so I slosh him out some brandy which is
better. He drink the brandy but he's still thoughtful.
“But what good is it?" he ask. "It is a triumph, of
course, but in what category could we market it? It
seems that I've been here a dozen times with the per-
fect apparatus that nobody wants. Is there really a mass
market for a machine that can posit moral and ethical
judgments, that can set up and enforce categories, that
is able to discer, and to make philosophical pronounce-
ments? Have I not racked up one more triumphant folly?"
“Maurice, this thing is a natural-born garbage dis-
240
HOG-BELLY HONEY
posal,” I tell him. He tum that green color lots of people
do when I shed a big light on them.
“A garbage disposall” he sing out. “The aeons labored
to give birth to it through the finest mind-mine-of the
millennium, and this brother of a giant ape says it is a
garbage disposall It is a new aspect of thought, the novo
instauratio, the mind of tomorrow fruited today, and
this obscene ogre says it is a Garbage Disposalll The
Constellations do homage to it, and Time has not waited
in vain, and you, you splay-footed horse-herder, you
call it a GARBAGE DISPOSALI”
Maurice was so carried away with the thought that
he cried a little. It sure is nice when someone agrees
with
you as long and loud as Maurice did. When he was
run out of words he got aholt of the brandy bottle with
both hands and drunk it all off. Then he slept the clock
around. He was real tired.
He looked kind of sheepful when he finally woke up.
“I feel better now, outside of feeling worse,” he say.
“You are right, Spade, it's a garbage disposal.”
He programmed it to get all the slush out of his blood
and liver and kidneys and head. It did it. It cured his
hangover in straight-up no time at all. It also shaved
him and removed his appendix. Just give it the nod and
it would nullify anything.
“We will call it the Hog-Belly Honey,” I say, “on ac-
count of it will eat anything, and it work so sweet.
“That is what we will call it privately.” Maurice
nodded. “But in company it will be known as the Pan-
tophag.” That is the same thing in Greek.
It was at the time of this area of good feeling that I
split a Voxo with Maurice. Each of you have one-half of
a
a tuned Voxo and you can talk to each other anywhere
in the world, and the thing is so nonconspicuous that
nobody can see it on you.
We got a big booth and showed the Hog-Belly Honey,
the Pantophag, at the Trade Fair.
Say, we did put on a good showl The people came
»
4
241
HOG-BELLY HONEY
n
in and looked and listened till they were walleyed. That
Maurice could give a good spiel, and I'm about the best
there is -myself. We sure were two fine-looking men,
after Maurice told me that maybe I detracted a little
bit by being in my undershirt, and I went and put a shirt
on And that bushy-tailed machine just sparkled-like
everything does that is made out of Wotto-metal
Kids threw candy-bar wrappers at it, and they dis-
appeared in the middle of the air. “Frisk me,” they said,
and everything in their pockets that was no good for
nothing was gone. A man held up a stuffed briefcase,
and it was almost empty in a minute. A few people got
mad when they lost beards and moustaches, but we ex-
plained to them that their boscage hadn't done a thing
for them; if the omaments had had even appearance
value the machine would have left them be. We pointed
out other people who kept their brush; whatever they
had behind it, they must have needed the cover.
"Could I have one in my house, and when a lady
asks.
"Tomorrow, for forty-nine ninety-five installed," I tell
her. "It will get rid of anything no good. It'll pluck
chickens, or bone roasts for you. It will clear out all
those old love letters from that desk and leave just the
ones from the guy that meant it. It will relieve you of
thirty pounds in the strategic places, and frankly, lady,
this alone will make it worth your while. It will get rid
of old buttons that don't match, and seeds that won't
sprout. It will destroy everything that is not so good for
nothing."
"It can posit moral and ethical judgments," Maurice
tells the people. "It can set up and enforce categories.
'Maurice and me is partners," I tell them all "We
look alike and think alike. We even talk alike."
"Save I in the hieratic and be in the demotic," Maurice
say. "This is the only nullifier in the world able to make
full philosophical pronouncements. It is the unfailing
242
HOG-BELLY HONEY
judge of what is of some use and what is not. And it
disposes neatly."
Man, the people did pour in to see it all that moming)
They slacked off a little bit just about noon.
"I wonder how many people have come into our booth
this morning?” Maurice wondered to me. “I would guess
near ten thousand.”
"I don't have to guess," I say. "There is nine thousand
three hundred and fifty-eight who have come in, Mau-
rice," I tell him, for I am always the automatic calculator.
"There is nine thousand two hundred and ninety-seven
who have left," I go on, "and there are forty-four here
now."
Maurice smiled. You have made a mistake,” he says.
"It doesn't add up."
And that is when the hair riz up on the back of my
neck.
I don't make mistakes when I calculate, and I can
see now that the Hog-Belly Honey don't make none
either. Well, it's too late to make one now if you're not
trained for it, but it might not be too late to get out the
way
of the storm before it hits.
"Crank the cuckoo," I whisper to Maurice, “make the
bindlestiff, hit the macadami"
"Je ne comprends pas," says Maurice, which means
"Let's hit the road, boys," in French, so I know my
partner understands me.
I am out of the display hall at a high run, and Maurice
racing along beside me so lightfoot that he don't make
no noise. There is a sky-taxi just taking off.
"Jump for it, Mauricel” I sing out. I jump for it my-
self, and hook my fingers over the rear rail and am
dangling in the air. I look to see if Maurice make it
Make it! He isn't even therel He didn't come out with
me. I look back, and I see him through a window going
into his spiel again.
Now that is a mule-headed development. My partner,
243
HOG-BELLY HONEY
who is as like me as two heads in one hat, had not un-
derstand me.
At the port I hook onto a sky-freight just going to
Mexico.
I don't never have to pack no bag. I say that a man
who don't always carry two years' living in that crimp
green stuff in his back pocket ain't in no condition to
meet fait. In thirty minutes I am sit down in a hotel
in Cueva Peoquita and have all the pleasantries at hand.
Then I snap on my Voxo to hear what Maurice is signal-
I
ing about.
"Why didn't you tell me that the Pantophag was nul-
lifying people?" he ask kind of shrill.
“I did tell you,” I say. “Nine thousand two hundred
and ninety-seven added to forty-four don't come to nine
thousand three hundred and fifty-eight. You said so
yourself. How are things on the home front, Maurice?
That's a joke."
"It's no joke,” he say kind of fanatic like. “I have
locked myself in a little broom closet, but they're going
to break down the door. What can I do?”
"Why, Maurice, just explain to those people that the
folks nullified by the machine were no good for nothing
because the machine don't make mistakes."
"I doubt that I can convince the parents and spouses
and children of the nullified people of this. They're after
blood. They're breaking down the door now, Spade. I
hear them say they will hang me.
"Tell them you won't settle for anything less than a
new rope, Maurice,” I tell him. That's an old joke. I
switch off the Voxo because Maurice is not making any-
thing except gurgling noises which I cannot interpret.
A thing like that blow over real fast after they have
already hang one guy for it and are satisfied. I am back
in town and am rolling all those new ideas around in
my head like a bunch of rocks. But I'm not going to
244
HOG-BELLY HONEY
a
build the Hog-Belly Honey again. It is too logical for
safety, and is a little before its time.
I am looking to get me another partner. Come into
Grogley's if you are interested. I show up there every
,
hour or so. I want a guy as like me as two necks in one
noose-what make me think of a thing like that?–a guy
look like me and think like me and talk like me.
Just ask for Joe Spade.
But the one I hook onto for a new partner will have
to be a fellow who understands me when the scuppers
are dowa.
a
245
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
you do it?
"IS THERE anything you want to make disappearpa Clar-
ence Willoughby asked his mother.
"A sink full of dishes is all I can think of. How will
"
"I just built a disappearer. All you do is cut the other
end out of a beer can. Then you take two pieces of red
cardboard with peepholes in the middle and fit them in
the ends. You look through the peepholes and blink.
Whatever you look at will disappear.
“Oh.”
“But I don't know if I can make them come back.
We'd better try it on something else. Dishes cost money.
As always, Myra Willoughby had to admire the wis-
dom of her nine-year-old son. She would not have had
such foresight herself. He always did. “You can try it
on Blanche Manners' cat outside there. Nobody will care
if it disappears except Blanche Manners.
"All right.”
He put the disappearer to his eye and blinked. The
cat disappeared from the sidewalk outside.
His mother was interested. “I wonder how it works.
Do you know how it works?"
“Yes. You take a beer can with both ends cut out and
put in two pieces of cardboard. Then
you
blink."
“Never mind. Take it outside and play with it. You
hadn't better make anything disappear in here till I
think about this."
But when he had gone his mother was oddly dis-
tubed.
"I wonder if I have a precocious child. Why, there's
lots of grown people who wouldn't know how to make
246
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
a disappearer that would work. I wonder if Blanche
Manners will miss her cat very muchpo
Clarence went down to the Plugged Nickel, a pot
house on the corner.
"Do you have anything you want to make disappear,
"
Nokomis?
"Only my paunch."
"If I make it disappear it'll leave a hole in you and
you'll bleed to death.
"That's right, I would. Why don't you try it on the
fireplug outside?
This in a way was one of the happiest afternoons
ever in the neighborhood. The children came from blocks
around to play in the flooded streets and gutters, and
if some of them drowned (and we don't say that they
did drown) in the flood (and brother! it was a flood),
why, you have to expect things like that. The fire engines
(whoever heard of calling fire engines to put out a
flood?) were apparatus-deep in the water. The police-
men and ambulance men wandered around wet and
bewildered.
“Resuscitator, resuscitator, anybody wanna resuscita-
tor,” chanted Clarissa Willoughby.
"Oh, shut up," said the ambulance attendants.
Nokomis, the bar man in the Plugged Nickel, called
Clarence aside.
"I don't believe, just for the moment, I'd tell anyone
,
what happened to that fireplug," he said.
"I won't tell if you won't tell," said Clarence.
Officer Comstock was suspicious. "There's only seven
possible explanations: one of the seven Willoughby kids
did it. I dunno how. It'd take a bulldozer to do it, and
then there'd be something left of the plug. But how-
ever they did it, one of them did it.”
Officer Comstock had a talent for getting near the
truth of dark matters. This is why he was walking a
beat out here in the boondocks instead of sitting in a
chair downtown
247
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
"Clarissal” said Officer Comstock in a voice like thun-
der.
"Resuscitator, resuscitator, anybody wanna resuscita-
tor?" chanted Clarissa.
"Do you know what happened to that fireplug?" asked
Officer C.
"I have an uncanny suspicion. As yet it is no more
than that. When I am better informed I will advise
you.
Clarissa was eight years old and much given to un-
canny suspicions.
"Clementine, Harold, Corinne, Jimmy, Cyril,” he askod
the five younger Willoughby children. “Do you know
what happened to that fireplug?”
"There was a man around yesterday. I bet he took
it," said Clementine.
"I don't even remember a fireplug there. I think you're
making a lot of fuss about nothing,” said Harold.
"City hall's going to hear about this,” said Corinne.
"Pretty dommed sure," said Jimmy, "but I won't tell."
"Cyrill" cried Officer Comstock in a terrible voice.
Not a terrifying voice, a terrible voice. He felt terrible
a
1
DOW.
"Great green bananas,” said Cyril, "I'm only three
years old. I don't see how it's even my responsibility.”
"Clarence,” said Officer Comstock.
Clarence gulped.
“Do you know where that fireplug went?”
"
Clarence brightened. "No, sir. I don't know where it
went."
A bunch of smart alecs from the water department
came out and shut off the water for a few blocks around
and put some kind of cap on in place of the fireplug.
"This sure is going to be a funny-sounding report,” said
one of them.
Officer Comstock walked away discouraged. “Don't
bother me, Miss Manners,” he said. “I don't know where
to look for your cat. I don't even know where to look
for a fireplug.”
a
248
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
R
"I have an idea,” said Clarissa, "that when you find
the cat you will find the fireplug in the same place. As
yet it is only an idea.
Ozzie Murphy wore a little hat on top of his head.
Clarence pointed his weapon and winked. The hat was
no longer there, but a little trickle of blood was running
down the pate.
"I don't believe I'd play with that any more," said
Nokomis.
"Who's playing?" said Clarence. “This is for real."
This was the beginning of the seven-day terror in the
heretofore obscure neighborhood. Trees' disappeared
from the parks; lamp posts were as though they had
never been; Wally Waldorf drove home, got out,
slammed the door of his car, and there was no car. As
George Mullendorf came up the walk to his house his
dog Pete ran to meet him and took a flying leap to his
erms. The dog left the sidewalk but something hap-
pened; the dog was gone and only a bark lingered for
a moment in the puzzled air.
But the worst were the fireplugs. The second plug
was installed the morning after the disappearance of the
first. In eight minutes it was gone and the flood waters
retumed. Another one was in by twelve o'clock. Within
three minutes it bad vanished. The next morning fire-
plug number four was installed.
The water commissioner was there, the city engineer
was there, the chief of police was there with a riot
squad, the president of the Parent-Teachers Association
was there, the president of the university was there,
the mayor was there, three gentlemen of the F.B.I.,
a newsreel photographer, eminent scientists and a crowd
of honest citizens.
"Let's see it disappear now," said the city engineer.
"Let's see it disappear now," said the police chief.
“Let's see it disa-it did, didn't it?" said one of the
eminent scientists.
And it was gone and everybody was very wet.
-
249
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
“At least I have the picture sequence of the year,"
said the photographer. But his camera and apparatus
disappeared from the midst of them.
"Shut off the water and cap it," said the commis-
sioner. “And don't put in another plug yet. That was
the last plug in the warehouse.
This is too big for me," said the mayor. "I wonder
that Tass doesn't have it yet
“Tass has it," said a little round man. "I am Tass.
'If all of you gentlemen will come into the Plugged
Nickel," said Nokomis, "and try one of our new Fire
Hydrant Highballs you will all be happier. These are
made of good com whiskey, brown sugar, and hydrant
water from this very gutter. You can be the first to drink
them."
Business was phenomenal at the Plugged Nickel, for
it was in front of its very doors that the fireplugs dis-
appeared in floods of gushing water.
"I know a way we can get rich," said Clarissa several
days later to her father, Tom Willoughby. "Everybody
says they're going to sell their houses for nothing and
move out of the neighborhood. Go get a lot of money
and buy them al Then you can sell them again and
get rich
a
'I wouldn't buy them for a dollar each, Three of them
have disappeared already, and all the families but us
have their furniture moved out in their front yards.
There might be nothing but vacant lots in the morning."
Good then buy the vacant lots. And you can be
ready when the houses come back."
"Come back? Are the houses going to come back? Do
you know anything about this, young ladypo
I have a suspicion verging on a certainty. As of now
I can say no more.
Three eminent scientists were gathered in an untidy
suite that looked as though it belonged to a drunken
sultan,
250
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
“This transcends the metaphysical. It impinges on
the quantum continuun. In some way it obsoletes Boff,"
said Dr. Velikof Vonk.
“The contingence of the intransigence is the most
mystifying aspect,” said Arpad Arkabaranan.
“Yes,” said Willy McGilly. "Who would have thought
that
you
could do it with a beer can and two pieces of
cardboard? When I was a boy I used an oatmeal box
and red crayola."
"I do not always follow you,” said Dr. Vonk. “I wish
you would speak plainer.”
So far no human had been injured or disappeared-
except for a little blood on the pate of Ozzie Murphy,
on the lobes of Conchita when her gaudy earrings dis-
appeared from her very ears, a clipped finger or so
when a house vanished as the front doorknob was
touched, a lost toe when a neighborhood boy kicked at
a can and the can was not; probably not more than a
pint of blood and three or four ounces of flesh all to-
gether.
Now, however, Mr. Buckle the grocery man disap-
peared before witnesses. This was serious.
Some mean-looking investigators from downtown came
out to the Willoughbys. The meanest-looking one was
the mayor. In happier days he had not been a mean
man, but the terror had now reigned for seven days.
"There have been ugly rumors,” said one of the mean
investigators, "that link certain events to this house
hold. Do any of you know anything about them?"
"I started most of them,” said Clarissa. “But I didn't
consider them ugly. Cryptic, rather. But if you want to
get to the bottom of this just ask me a question.”
"Did you make those things disappear?” asked the
investigator.
"That isn't the question,” said Clarissa.
"Do you know where they have gone?" asked the
investigator.
"That isn't the question either,” said Clarissa.
.
251
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
»
"Can you make them come back?”
"Why, of course I can. Anybody can. Can't you?”
"I cannot. If you can, please do so at once.
.
“I need some stuff. Get me a gold watch and a ham-
mer. Then go down to the drug store and get me this
list of chemicals. And I need a yard of black velvet
and a pound of rock candy."
"Shall we?” asked one of the investigators.
“Yes,” said the mayor. "It's our only hope. Get her
anything she wants.
And it was all assembled.
"Why does she get all the attention?" asked Clarence.
"I was the one who made all the things disappear. How
does she know how to get them back?”
"I knew itl” cried Clarissa with hate. “I knew he was
the one that did it. He read in my diary how to make a
disappearer. If I was his mother I'd whip him for read-
ing his little sister's diary. That's what happens when
things like that fall into irresponsible hands.”
She poised the hammer over the mayor's gold watch,
now on the floor.
“I have to wait a few seconds. This can't be hurried.
It'll be only a little while."
The second hand swept around to the point that was
preordained for it before the world began. Clarissa sud-
denly brought down the hammer with all her force on
the beautiful gold watch.
"That's all,” she said. “Your troubles are over. See,
there is Blanche Manners' cat on the sidewalk just where
she was seven days ago.”
And the cat was back.
"Now let's go down to the Plugged Nickel and watch
the fireplugs come back.”
They had only a few minutes to wait. It came from
nowhere and clanged into the street like a sign and a
witness.
“Now I predict," said Clarissa, "that every single ob-
>
252
SEVEN-DAY TERROR
a
ject will return exactly seven days from the time of its
disappearance.
The seven-day terror had ended. The objects began
to reappear.
"How," asked the mayor, "did you know they would
"
come back in seven days?"
“Because it was a seven-day disappearer that Clar-
"
ence made. I also know how to make a nine-day, a
thirteen-day, a twenty-seven-day, and an eleven-year dis-
appearer. I was going to make a thirteen-year one, but
for that you have to color the ends with the blood from
a little boy's heart, and Cyril cried every time I tried
to make a good cut.
"You really know how to make all of these?”
"Yes. But I shudder if the knowledge should ever
come into unauthorized hands.”
"I shudder, too, Clarissa. But tell me, why did you
want the chemicals?"
"For my chemistry set.”
"And the black velvet?"
"For doll dresses."
“And the pound of rock candy?"
“How did you ever get to be mayor of this town if
you have to ask questions like that? What do you think
I wanted the rock candy for?"
"One last question,” said the mayor. “Why did you
smash my gold watch with the hammer?”
"Oh,” said Clarissa, “that was for dramatic effect.”
>
253
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
-
HOMER Hoose came home that evening to the golden
cliché: the un-noble dog who was a personal friend of
his; the perfect house where just to live was a happy
riot; the loving and unpredictable wife; and the five
children-the perfect number (four more would have
been too many, four less would have been too few).
The dog howled in terror and bristled up like a hedge-
hog. Then it got a whiff of Homer and recognized him;
it licked his heels and gnawed his knuckles and made
him welcome. A good dog, though a fool. Who wants a
smart dog!
Homer had a little trouble with the doorknob. They
don't have them in all the recensions, you know; and he
had that off-the-track feeling tonight. But he figured it
out (you don't pull it, you tum it), and opened the door.
“Did you remember to bring what I asked you to
bring this moming, Homer?” the loving wife Regina
inquired.
"What did you ask me to bring this moming, quick-
heat blueberry biscuit of my heart?" Homer asked.
"If I'd remembered, I'd have phrased it different when
I asked if you remembered," Regina explained. “But I
know I told you to bring something, old ketchup of my
soul. Homer! Look at me, Homerl You look different
tonight! DIFFERENT!! You're not my Homer, are you!
Help! Help! There's a monster in my housell Help, help!
Shriek!”
"It's always nice to be married to a wife who doesn't
understand you," Homer said. He enfolded her affection-
ately, bore her down, trod on her with large friendly
hooves, and began (as it seemed) to devour her.
254
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
"Where'd you get the monster, Mama?” son Robert
asked as he came in. "What's he got your whole head in
his mouth for? Can I have one of the apples in the
kitchen? What's he going to do, kill you,
Mama?”
"Shriek, shriek,” said Mama Regina. “Just one apple,
Robert, there's just enough to go around. Yes, I think
he's going to kill me. Shriek!”
Son Robert got an apple and went outdoors.
"Hi, Papa, what's you doing to Mamapu daughter
,
Fregona asked as she came in. She was fourteen, but
stupid for her age. “Looks to me like you're going to
kill her that way. I thought they peeled people before
they swallowed them. Why! You're not Papa at all, are
you? You're some monster. I thought at first you were
my papa. You look just like him except for the way
”
"Shriek, shriek," said Mama Regina, but her voice was
muffled.
They had a lot of fun at their house.
you look.
a
n
Homer Hoose came home that evening to the golden
cliché: the u.n.d.; the p.h.; and l. and u.w.; and the f.c.
(four more would have been too many).
The dog waggled all over him happily, and son Robert
was chewing an apple core on the front lawn.
"Hi, Robert,” Homer said, “what's new today?"
“Nothing, Papa. Nothing ever happens here. Oh yeah,
there's a monster in the house. He looks kind of like
you. He's killing Mama and eating her
up.
“Eating her up, you say, son? How do
you
mean?"
"He's got her whole head in his mouth. "
“Droll, Robert, mighty droll,” said Homer, and he
went in the house.
One thing about the Hoose children: a lot of times
they told the bald-headed truth. There was a monster
there. He was killing and eating the wife Regina. This
was no mere evening antic. It was something serious.
255
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
one of
you have
Homer the man was a powerful and quick-moving
fellow. He fell on the monster with judo chops and solid
body punches; and the monster let the woman go and
confronted the man.
“What's with it, you silly oaf?" the monster snapped.
"If you've got a delivery, go to the back door. Come
punching people in here, will you? Regina, do you know
who this silly simpleton is?"
"Wow, that was a pretty good one, wasn't it, Homer?
Regina gasped as she came from under, glowing and
gulping. "Oh, him? Gee, Homer, I think he's my hus-
band. But how can he be, if you are? Now the two of
you have got me so mixed up that I don't know which
you
is
my Homer."
"Great goofy Gestalten! You don't mean I look like
him?” bowled Homer the monster, near popping.
"My brain reels,” moaned Homer the man. “Reality
melts away. Reginal Exorcise this nightmare if
in some manner called it up! I knew you shouldn't have
been fooling around with that book.”
"Listen, mister reely-brains," wife Regina began on
Homer the man. “You leam to kiss like he does before
you tell me which one to exorcise. All I ask is a little
affection. And this I didn't find in a book.”
"How we going to know which one is Papa? They
look just alike,” daughters Clara-Belle, Anna-Belle, and
Maudie-Belle came in like three little chimes.
“Hell-hipping horrorsl” roared Homer the man. "How
are you going to know-? He's got green skin."
"There's nothing wrong with green skin as long as
it's
kept neat and oiled,” Regina defended.
"He's got tentacles instead of hands," said Homer the
man
"Oh boy, I'U sayl” Regina sang out.
"How we going to know which one is Papa when they
look just alike?" the five Hoose children asked in chorus.
I'm sure there's a simple explanation to this, old
chap," said Homer the monster. "If I were you, Homer-
256
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
and there's some argument whether I am or not-I be-
lieve I'd go to a doctor. I dou't believe we both need
to go, since our problem's the same. Here's the name
of a good one," said Homer the monster, writing it out.
"Oh, I know him," said Homer the man when he read
it. “But how did you know him? He isn't an animal
doctor. Regina, I'm going over to the doctor to see
what's the matter with me, or you. Try to have this
nightınare back in whatever comer of your under-id it
belongs when I come back."
"Ask him if I keep taking my pink medicine,” Regina
said.
"No, not him. It's the head doctor I'm going to.”.
"Ask him if I have to keep on dreaming those pleas-
ant dreams,” Regina said. “I sure do get tired of them.
I want to get back to the other kind. Homer, leave the
coriander seed when you go.” And she took the package
out of his pocket. "You did remember to bring it. My
other Homer forgot."
“No, I didn't," said Homer the monster. “You couldn't
remember what you told me to get. Here, Regina.”
“I'll be back in a little while,” said Homer the man
"The doctor lives on the comer. And you, fellow, if you're
real, keep your plankton-picking polypusses off my wife
till I get back."
Homer Hoose went up the street to the house of Dr.
Corte on the comer. He knocked on the door, and then
opened it and went in without waiting for an answer.
The doctor was sitting there, but he seemed a little bit
dazed.
"I've got a problem, Dr. Corte," said Homer the man.
"I came home this evening, and I found a monster eat.
ing my wife-as I thought."
"Yes, I know,” said Dr. Corte. "Homer, we got to fix
that hole on the comer.'
"I didn't know there was a hole there, Doctor. As it
happened, the fellow wasn't really swallowing my wife,
it was just his way of showing affection. Everybody
257
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
thought the monster looked like me, and Doctor, it has
green skin and tentacles. When I began to think it
looked like me too, I came here to see what was wrong
with me, or with everybody else."
"I can't help you, Hoose. I'm a psychologist, not a
contingent-physicist. Only one thing to do; we got to
fix that hole on the corner.
"Doctor, there's no hole in the street on this comer."
"Wasn't talking about a hole in the street. Homer, I
just got back from a visit of my own that shook me up.
I went to an analyst who analyzes analysts. I've had a
dozen people come to see me with the same sort of
story,' I told him. They all come home in the evening;
and everything is different, or themselves are different;
or they find that they are already there when they get
there. What do you do when a dozen people come in
with the same nonsense story, Dr. Diebel?' I asked him.
'I don't know, Corte,' he said to me. 'What do I do
when one man comes in a dozen times with the same
nonsense story, all within one hour, and he a doctor
too?' Dr. Diebel asked me.
Why, Dr. Diebel?' I asked, 'What doctor came to
you like that?
'
You,' he said, 'You've come in here twelve times in
the last hour with the same dish of balder hash; you've
come in each time looking a little bit different; and each
time you act as if you hadn't seen me for a month. Dam-
mit, man,' he said, 'you must have passed yourself go-
ing put when you came in.'
'Yes, that was me, wasn't it?' I said. “I was trying
to think who he reminded me of. Well, it's a problem,
Dr. Diebel," I said. What are you going to do about it?'
'I'm going to the analyst who analyzes the analysts
who analyze the analysts,' he said. 'He's tops in the field.'
Dr. Diebel rushed out then; and I came back to my of-
fice here. You came in just after that. I'm not the one to
help you. But, Homer, we got to do something about
that hole on the corner)"
>
258
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
-
a
a
"I don't understand the bit about the hole, Doctor,"
Homer said. “But-has a bunch of people been here
with stories like mine?"
“Yes, every man in this block has been in with an idiot
story, Homer, except, Why, everybody except old
double-domed Diogenes himselfl Homer, that man who
knows everything has a finger in this up to the humerus.
I saw him up on the power poles the other night, but
I didn't think anything of it. He likes to tap the lines
before they come to his meter. Saves a lot on power that
way, and he uses a lot of it in his laboratory. But he
was setting up the hole on the corner. That's what he
was doing. Let's get him and bring him to your house
and make him straighten it out."
"Sure, a man who knows everything ought to know
about a hole on the corner, Doctor. But I sure don't see
any hole anywhere on this corner.”
The man who knew everything was named Diogenes
Pontifex. He lived next door to Homer Hoose, and they
found him in his back yard wrestling with his anaconda.
“Diogenes, come over to Homer's with us," Dr. Corte
insisted. “We've got a couple of questions that might be
too much even for you.
"You touch my pride there," Diogenes sang out. "When
psychologists start using psychology on you, it's time to
give in. Wait a minute till I pin this fellow."
Diogenes put a chancery on the anaconda, punched
the thing's face a few times, then pinned it with a double
bar-arm and body lock, and left it writhing there. He
followed them into the house.
"Hi, Homer," Diogenes said to Homer the monster
when they had come into the house. “I see there's two
of you here at the same time now. No doubt that's
what's puzzling you."
“Dr. Corte, did Homer ask you if I could stop dream-
ing those pleasant dreams?" wife Regina asked. “I sure
do get tired of them. I want to go back to the old flesh-
crawlers."
2
n
a
a
259
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
"You should be able to do so tonight, Regina,” said
Dr. Corte. “Now. then, I'm trying to bait Diogenes here
into telling us what's going on. I'm sure he knows. And
if
you would skip the first part, Diogenes, about all the
other scientists in the world being like little boys along-
side of you, it would speed things up. I believe that this
is another of your experiments like- Oh no! Let's not
even think about the last onel
"Tell us, Diogenes, about the hole on the comer, and
what falls through it. Tell us how some people come
home two or three times within as many minutes, and
find themselves already there when they get there. Tell
us how a creature that staggers the imagination can seem
so like an old acquaintance after a moment or two that
one might not know which is which. I am not now sure
which of these Homers it was who came to my office
several moments ago, and with whom I returned to this
house. They look just alike in one way, and in another
they do not."
"My Homer always was funny looking,” Regina said.
"They appear quite different if you go by the visual
index,” Diogenes explained. “But nobody goes by the
visual index except momentarily. Our impression of a
person or a thing is much more complex, and the visual
element in our appraisal is small. Well, one of them is
Homer in gestalt two, and the other is Homer in gestalt
nine. But they are quite distinct. Don't ever get the idea
that such are the same persons. That would be silly.”
*And Lord spare us that!” said Homer the man. "All
right, go into your act, Diogenes.”
"First, look at me closely, all of you,” Diogenes said.
*Handsome, what? But note my clothing and my com-
plexion and my aspect.
“Then to the explanations: it begins with my Corollary
"
to Phelan's Corollary on Gravity. I take the opposite
alternate of it. Phelan puzzled that gravity should be so
weak on all worlds but one. He said that the gravity of
that one remote world was typical, and that the gravity
260
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
of all other worlds was atypical and the result of a math-
ematical error. But I, from the same data, deduce that
the gravity of our own world is not too weak, but too
strong. It is about a hundred times as strong as it should
be."
"What do you compare it to when you decide it is
too strong?” Dr. Corte wanted to know.
"There's nothing I can compare it to, Doctor. The
gravity.of every body that I am able to examine is from
eighty to a hundred times too strong. There are two pos-
sible explanations: either my calculations or theories are
somehow in error-unlikely-or there are, in every case,
about a hundred bodies, solid and weighted, occupying
the same place at the same time. Old Ice Cream Store
Chairs! Tennis Shoes in October! The Smell of Slippery
Elm! County-Fair Barkers with Warts on Their Noses!
Horned Tonds in June!"
"I was following you pretty good up to the Ice Cream
Store Chairs,” said Homer the monster.
*Oh I tid that part in, and the tennis shocs too,” said
Homer the man. "I'm pretty good at following this cos-
mic theory business. What threw me was the slippery
elm. I can't see how it especially illustrates a contingent
theory of gravity."
"The last part was an incantation,” said Diogenes. “Do
you remark anything different about me now?"
"You're wearing a different suit now, of course,” said
Regina, “but there's nothing remarkable about that. Lots
of people change to different clothes in the evening.”
"You’re darker and stringier,” said Dr. Corte. “But I
wouldn't have noticed any change if you hadn't told us
to look for it. Actually, if I didn't know that you were
Diogenes, there wouldn't be any sane way to identify
Diogenes in you. You don't look a thing like you, but still
I'd know you anywhere."
“I was first a gestalt two. Now I'm a gestalt three for
a while,” said Diogenes. "Well, first we have the true
case that a hundred or so solid and weighty bodies are
261
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
»
occupying the same space that our earth occupies, and
at the same time. This in itself does violence to con-
ventional physics. But now let us consider the charac-
teristics of all these cohabiting bodies. Are they occupied
and peopled? Will it then mean that a hundred or so
persons are occupying at all times the same space that
each person occupies? Might not this idea do violence
to conventional psychology? Well, I have proved that
there are at least eight other persons occupying the
same space occupied by each of us, and I have scarce-
ly begun proving. Stark White Sycamore Branches! New-
Harrowed Earth! (New harrow, old earth.) Cow Dung
Between Your Toes in July! Pitchers’-Mound Clay in
the Old Three-Eye League! Sparrow Hawks in Au- .
gust!"
"I fell off the harrow," said wife Regina. “I got the
sycamore branches bit, though."
"I got clear down to the sparrow hawks,” said Homer
the monster.
“Do you remark anything different about me this
time?” Diogenes asked.
"You have little feathers on the backs of your
where you used to have little hairs,” said Homer the
man, “and on your toes. You're barefoot now. But I
wouldn't have noticed any of it if I hadn't been looking
for something funny."
"I'm a gestalt four now,” said Diogenes. “My conduct
is likely to become a little extravagant.”
"It always was,” said Dr. Corte.
“But not so much as if I were a gestalt five," said
Diogenes. “As a five, I might take a Pan-like leap onto
I
the shoulders of young Fregona here, or literally walk
barefoot through the hair of the beautiful Regina as she
stands there. Many normal gestalt twos become gestalt
fours or fives in their dreams. It seems that Regina does.
“I found the shadow, but not the substance, of the
whole situation in the psychology of Jung. Jung served
me as the second element in this, for it was the errors
your hands
a
262
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
of Phelan and Jung in widely different fields that set me
on the trail of the truth. What Jung really says is that
each of us is a number of persons in depth. This I con-
sider silly. There is something about such far-out theo
ries that repels me. The truth is that our counterparto
enter into our unconsciousness and dreams only by ac-
cident, as being most of the time in the same space
that we occupy. But we are all separate and independ-
ent persons. And we may, two or more of us, be present
in the same frame at the same time, and then in a near,
but not the same, place. Witness the gestalt two and
the gestalt nine Homers here present.
"I've been experimenting to see how far I can go with
it, and the gestalt nine is the furthest I have brought
it so far. I do not number the gestalten in the order of
their strangeness to our own norm, but in the order in
which I discovered them. I'm convinced that the con-
centric and congravitic worlds and people complexes
number near a hundred, however.”
"Well, there is a hole on the corner, isn't there?" Dr.
Corte asked.
"Yes, I set it up there by the bus op as a convenient
evening point of entry for the people of this block," said
Diogenes. “I've had lots of opportunity to study the re-
sults these last two days."
"Well, just how do you set up a hole on the corner?"
Dr. Corte persisted.
"Believe me, Corte, it took a lot of imagination,” Dio
genes said. “I mean it literally. I drew so deeply on
my own psychic store to construct the thing that it left
me shaken, and I have the most manifold supply of
psychic images of any person I know. I've also set up
magnetic amplifiers on both sides of the street, but it
is my original imagery that they amplify. I see a never-
ending field of study in this."
“Just what is the incantation stuff that takes you from
one gestalt to another?” Homer the monster asked.
"It is only one of dozens of possible modes of entry,
263
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
but I sometimes find it the easiest,” said Diogenes. “It
is Immediacy Remembered, or the Verbal Ramble. It
is the Evocation-an intuitive or charismatic entry. I
often use it in the Bradmont Motif-named by me from
two as-aff writers in the twentieth century."
"You speak of it as if ... well, isn't this the twentieth
century?” Regina asked.
"This the twentieth? Why, you're right! I guess it is,"
I
Diogenes agreed. “You see, I carry on experiments in
other fields also, and sometimes I get my times mixed.
All of you, I believe, do sometimes have moments of
peculiar immediacy and vividness. It seems then as if
the world were somehow fresher in that moment, as
though it were a new world. And the explanation is
that, to you, it is a new world. You have moved, for a
moment, into a different gestalt. There are many ac-
cidental holes or modes of entry, but mine is the only
contrived one I know of."
"There's a discrepancy here,” said Dr. Corte. “If the
persons are separate, how can you change from one to
another?"
"I do not change from one person to another," said
Diogenes. “There have been three different Diogenes
lecturing you here in series. Fortunately, my colleagues
and I, being of like scientific mind, work together in
close concert. We have made a successful experiment
in substitution acceptance on you here this evening. Oh,
the ramifications of this thing! The aspects to be studied.
I will take you out of your narrow gestalt-two world
and show you worlds upon worlds."
"You talk about the gestalt-two complex that we nor-
mally belong to," said wife Regina, "and about others
up to gestalt nine, and maybe a hundred. Isn't there a
gestalt one? Lots of people start counting at one."
"There is a number one, Regina,” said Diogenes. “I
discovered it first and named it, before I realized that
the common world of most of you was of a similar
category. But I do not intend to visit gestalt one again.
1
264
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
It is turgid and dreary beyond tolerating. One instance
of its mediocrity will serve. The people of gestalt one
refer to their world as the 'everyday world.' Retch quiet-
ly, please. May the lowest of us never fall so lowl Per-
simmons After First Frost/ Old Barbershop Chairsl Pink
Dogwood Blossoms in the Third Week of November)
Murad Cigarette Advertisements.”
Diogenes cried out the last in mild panic, and he
seemed disturbed. He changed into another fellow a
little bit different, but the new Diogenes didn't like what
he saw either.
"Smell of Wet Sweet Cloverl” he cried out. “St. Mary's
Street in San Antoniol Model Airplane Gluel Moon
Crabs in March! It won't work! The rats have run out on
mel Homer and Homer, grab that other Homer therel I
believe he's a gestalt six, and they sure are mean.
Homer Hoose wasn't particularly mean. He had just
come home a few minutes late and had found two other
fellows who looked like him jazzing his wife Regina.
And those two mouth men, Dr. Corte and Diogenes
Pontifex, didn't have any business in his house when he
was gone either.
He started to swing. You'd have done it too.
Those three Homers were all powerful and quick-
moving fellows, and they had a lot of blood in them. It
was soon flowing, amid the crashing and breaking-up of
furniture and people-ocher-colored blood pearl-gray
blood, one of the Homers even had blood of a sort of
red color. Those boys threw a real riot!
"Give me that package of coriander seed, Homer,"
wife Regina said to the latest Homer as she took it from
his pocket. “It won't hurt to have three of them. Homer!
Homerl Homer! All three of youl Stop bleeding on the
rug!”
Homer was always a battler. So was Homer. And
Homer.
"Stethoscopes and Moonlight and Memory-ah-in
Late March,” Dr. Corte chanted. “Didn't work, did it?
a
265
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
Ill get out of here a regular way. Homers, boys, come
up to my place, one at a time, and get patched up when
you're finished. I have to do a little regular medicine
on the side nowadays."
Dr. Corte went out the door with the loopy run of a
man not in very good condition.
“Old Hairbreadth Harry Comic Strips! Congress Street
in Houston! Light Street in Baltimorel Elizabeth Street
in Sydneyl Varnish on Old Bar-Room Pianos! B-Girls
Named Dotty! I believe it's easier just to make a dash
for my house next door," Diogenes rattled off, And he
did dash out with the easy run of a man who is in good
condition.
“I've had it!" boomed one of the Homers-and we
don't know which one-as he was flung free from the
donnybrook and smashed into a wall. “Peace and quiet
is what a man wants when he comes home in the eve-
ning, not this. Folks, I'm going out and up to the corner
again. Then I'm going to come home all over again. I'm
going to wipe my mind clear of all this. When I turn
back from the comer I'll be whistling “Dixie” and I'll be
the most peaceful man in the world. But when I get
home, I bet neither of you guys had better have hap-
pened at all.”
And Homer dashed up to the corner.
Homer Hoose came home that evening to the g.c.-
everything as it should be: He found his house in order
and his wife Regina alone.
"Did you remember to bring the coriander seed, Ho-
mer, little gossamer of my fusus?” Regina asked him.
"Ah, I remembered to get it, Regina, but I don't seem
to have it in my pocket now. I'd rather you didn't ask
me where I lost it. There's something I'm trying to for-
get. Rcgina, I didn't come home this evening before this,
did I?”
"Not that I remember, little dolomedes sexpunctatus."
"And there weren't a couple other guys here who
looked just like me only different?”
266
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
“No, no, little cobby. I love you and all that, but
nothing else could look like you. Nobody has been here
but
you. Kids! Get ready for supper! Papa's home!”
"Then it's all right,* Homer said. “I was just day-
dreaming on my way home, and all that stuff never hap-
pened. Here I am in the perfect house with my wife
Regina, and the kids'll be underfoot in just a second.
I never realized how wonderful it was. AHIIHHNNN!!!
YOU'RE NOT REGINAll”
“But of course I am, Homer. Lycosa Regina is my
species name. Well, come, come, you know how I enjoy
our evenings together.”
She picked him up, lovingly broke his arms and legs
for easier handling, spread him out on the floor, and
began to devour him.
“No, no, you're not Regina,” Homer sobbed. “You look
just like her, but you also look like a giant monstrous
arachnid. Dr. Corte was right, we got to fix that hole
on the comer.
"That Dr. Corte doesn't know what he's talking about,”
Regina munched. “He says I'm a compulsive eater."
"What's you eating Papa again for, Mama?" daugh-
ter Fregona asked as she came in. “You know what the
doctor said."
"It's the spider in me,” said Mama Regina. “I wish
you'd brought the coriander seed with you, Homer. It
goes so good with you.”
"But the doctor says you got to show a little restraint,
Mama,” daughter Fregona cut back in. “He says it be-
comes harder and harder for Papa to grow back new
limbs so often at his age. He says it's going to end up
by making him nervous.
"Help, help!" Homer screamed. “My wife is a giant
spider and is eating me up. My legs and arms are al-
ready gone. If only I could change back to the first night-
marel Night-Charleys under the Beds at Grandpa's
House on the Farmi Rosined Cord to Make Bull-Roar-
ers on Hallowe'en! Pig Mush in Februaryl Cobwebs on
267
THE HOLE ON THE CORNER
Fruit Jars in the Cellar! No, no, not that! Things never
work when you need them. That Diogenes fools around
with too much funny stuff.”
"All I want is a little affection," said Regina, talking
with her mouth full.
"Help, help," said Homer as she ate him clear up to
his head. “Shriek, shrieki”
268
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
P
'EPISTISTES TELLS me that you are onto something big,
Mr. Smimov," Valery said, turning to her companion.
"Epikt has the loudest mouth of any machine I was
ever associated with," Gregory Smirnov growled. “I
never saw one that could keep a secret. But this one
goes to extremes. Actually, we don't have a thing. We're
just fiddling around with an unborn idea.
"How about it, Epikt?? Valery asked.
"Big, real big," the machine issued.
"What are you doing now, Epikt?" Valery wanted to
know,
"Talk to me, dammitl I'm the man, he's the machine,"
Smimov cut in. “He's chewing encyclopedias and other
references. It's all he ever does.
"I thought he went through them all long ago."
"Certainly, dozens of times. He has all the data that
can be fed into a machine, and every day we shovel in
bales of new stuff. But he's chewing it now for a very
different purpose.
What different purpose, Mr. Smimov?
'It's difficult to say because I haven't as yet been able
to state it to him. We're trying to set a problem where
it seems there ought to be one-and then answer it. We
may find the answer before the question. At first he
rejected my request; later he accepted it-ironically. I
doubt that he's sincere now. He can be quite a clown, as
you should well know."
I know that you two are onto something good," Val-
ery said. "The more you deny it, the more I'm sure of
it. Tell me the truth, Epikt."
"Big, real big," Epiktistes issued to Valery.
Valery,” said Smimov. "You're a woman and you
might be inclined to say something about this to the
269
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
a
other Institute people. Please don't. We don't have any-
thing yet and it makes me nervous to have hot little
people breathing down my neck.”
"I won't say a word,” Valery swore with grave insin-
cerity. She winked at the machine, and Epikt winked
back at her with three tiers of eyes. Valery Mok and
Epiktistes had a thing going with each other.
Valery was nearly as bad as a machine at not being
able to keep a secret. She had the whole Institute staff
excited about what Smimov and Epiktistes were work-
ing on. The staff consisted of Charles Cogsworth, her
own over-shadowed husband; Glasser, the stiff-necked
inventor; and Aloysius Shiplap, the seminal genius.
They were all after Smimov and his machine the next
day.
"We've been together on every project,” Glasser said
"Valery tells us that the problem hasn't been properly
formulated, and that Epikt has only accepted it ironical.
ly. We're pretty good at formulating problems, Gregory,
and a little sterner than you when it comes to dealing
with clownish machines.
"All right, this is the way it is, Glasser,” Smimov said
reluctantly. “My first statement was, we should seek to
discover - something not known to exist, by a close study
of the absence of evidence. When I put the problem to
Epiktistės in this generalized form he just laughed at
>
n
me.
"That would have been my first impulse too, Smimov,"
said Shiplap. "Don't you have a better idea of what
you're looking for?"
"Shiplap, I had the feeling of trying to remember
something that I'd been compelled to forget. My sec-
ond statement wasn't much better. 'Let us see,' I said
to Epikt, 'if we cannot reconstruct something of which
even the idea has been completely eradicated; let's see
if we can't find it by considering the excessive evidence
that it was never there.' In this form, Epikt accepted it.
Or else he decided to go along with me for the gag.
270
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
I'm never quite sure how this clanking machine takes
things.
"Well, no hole can be filled up perfectly,” said Cogs-
worth. “There will either be too much or too little of
whatever is being used as the filler, or it will be of a
different texture. The difficulty is that you didn't give
Epikt any clues. There will be a million things forgot-
ten or repressed that will show an irregularity of fill.
How will Epikt know which of them is the one that you
are somehow trying to remember?"
"Item. The buried thing will have a buried tie with
my boss man Smirnov," Epiktistes, the machine, issued.
"Yes, of course," said Glasser. "Has Epikt turned up
anything?"
“Only a bushelful of things that seem to mean noth-
ing,” said Smimov sadly.
"Item. Why, in Hungarian dictionary-encyclopedias
of a certain period, is there padding between the words
Sik and Sikamlos?" Epiktistes asked.
"I follow your thought, Epikt," Glasser agreed. “That
could be a clue to something. If the idea and the name
of something were expunged from every reference, then,
in all original editions, other subjects on the same page
would have to be padded slightly or another subject set
in. This filling might be hurried, and therefore of an
inferior quality. So, who knows a word that is no longer
used and that comes between Sik and Sikamlos? If we
knew the word would we know what it meant? And
would it help us if we did?"
"Item. Why is the young of a bear now referred to as
a pup when once it may have been known as a cube?”
Epikt issued.
"I've never heard the young of a bear referred to as
a cube," Shiplap protested.
"Epikt has come on that by our omission-appraisal
method,” Smirnov explained. “There is probably an im-
perfect erasure working. I believe that cube is a dis-
tortion of a word that has somehow been forced out of
»
271
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
folk memory. Epikt has this clue from a ballad which
I believe is far removed from the main suppression or
it would not have survived in even this distorted form."
"Item. Why is the awkward word coronal used for
the simple doubling or retum of a rope? Why is not a
simpler word used?" Epikt asked.
"Has Epikt considered that seamen have always used
odd terms and that landsmen often adopt them?” Cogg-
worth asked.
“Naturally-Epikt always considers everything,” Smir-
nov answered. “He has thousands of these items now,
and he believes that he will be able to put them into a
pattern"
"Item. Why is there a great hiatus in period jazz?
It's as though a great hunk of it had been yanked out
by the roots, in the words of one Beppy B-Flat.”
"Smimov, I know that your machine has unusual tal-
ents,” said Glasser, but if he can tie these things to-
gether he's a concatenated genius.”
"Or a cantankerous clown," Smimov said. “I know that
he has to have some emotional release from the stress
of his work, but he often overdoes it with humor and
drollery."
"Item. Why is reference to the Amerindian peace pipe
avoided as though some obscenity were attached to it,
and none is discoverable?”
“That's a new one while we're standing here,” said
Smirnov. "He's accumulating quite a few of them."
"Item. Why is—?” Epikt started.
"Oh, shut up and get back to work,” Smimov ordered
his machine. “Let's leave him with it until tomorrow,
folks. It may begin to pull together by then,” said Smir.
nov, stalking off.
“Going to be real big,” Epiktistes issued to them after
his boss man had left. “Boys and girls, it's going to be
real big."
The next day they combined the meeting around the
272
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
machine with a party for Shiplap. Aloysius Shiplap
had grown-for the first time ever, anywhere-left-
handed grass. It was not called that because it whorled
to the left, but because the organic constituents of it
were reversed in their construction. Left-handed miner-
als had been constructed long since, and perhaps they
also occurred in nature. Left-handed bacteria and broths
were long known, but nobody else had ever grown any-
thing as complex as left-handed grass.
"In everything, - its effect is reversed,” Shiplap ex-
plained. “Cattle pastured on this would lose rather than
gain weight. If there ever develops a market for really
skinny cattle I'll be waiting for it.
They tossed off a good bit of Tosher's Gin as they got
into the celebration. Tosher's is the only drink that will
buzz up both humans and Ktistec machines. There is a
flavoring used in Tosher's that gets machines high. The
alcohol in it sometimes has a similar effect on humans.
Epiktistes got as mellow as a Pottawattamie County
pumpkin. Ktistec machines are like the Irish and the
Indians. They start unwinding when the gin begins to
flow. Their behavior could become quite wild unless
carefully watched.
And the Institute people were also having a good
time.
“I wouldn't have him any other way,” said Smimov.
“When he relaxes, he relaxes all over the place. Haw-
kins' machine literally bites people when it's frustrated
by a difficult problem. Drexel's smaller machine comes
all apart throwing arc snuffers and solenoids and is
mighty dangerous to be around. There are worse sorts
than this clown of a machine I have-though he does
get pretty slushy when he's in his cups.”
Valery Mok had gathered up a bunch of Epiktistes'
utterances and slipped them into cocktail cookies. Glass-
er, eating one, chewed on a bit of the metallic tape.
He pulled it slithering, off his tongue, and read-
"Item. What was the mysterious name written by a
»
273
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
deaf moron on the wall of the men's room in an in.
stitution in Vinita, Oklahoma?"
Epiktistes giggled, though the item may have been
serious when he issued it.
Cogsworth pulled one out of his mouth, stripping the
arumbs from it with his tongue as it came.
"Item. Why does Petit Larousse take five lines too
many to say almost nothing about the ancient Chibcha
Indians of Columbia?"
At this point Valery went into her high laugh that
would even make the alphabet sound funny.
Shiplap pulled one out of his grinning mouth, and it
seemed an extension of his grin as it came.
"Item," he read. "What is there about the Great Blue
Island Swamp that puzzles geologists? Or-in the old
bylining manner-how recent is recent?”
Tosher's is giggle juice. Glasser's laughter sounded like
a string of firecrackers going off.
Smirnov extracted the utterance from his cookie in
the lordly manner. He read the utterance as though it
were of extreme importance-and it was.
"Item. What peculiarity is almost revealed by the
faded paint of old Rock Island and Pacific Railroad
boxcars?"
"Oh, stop giggling, Epikt, it isn't as funny as that!”
"It is, it is!” bubbled Valery. Then she nearly choked
bringing out from her own cookie a very long tape, and
she read it with a very gay voice:
"Item. Why, when the gruesome Little Willy verses
were revived among sub-teen-agers in the early nine-
teen-eighties, were they concerned almost entirely with
chewing gum? In their Australian and British home-
lands six decades before, they were concerned with
everything. But here we have gruesome verses about
forty-nine different flavors of gum. As for instance,
Little Willy mixed his
gum
with bits of Baby's cerebrum
274
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
and Papa's blood for Juicy
Fruit.
Mother said, “Oh, Will, don't
duit."
"I'd think it would give too high a flavor to the gum,"
said Glasser.
It's a lot of fun to open cocktail cookies and read
out utterances of a Ktistec machine. The Institute staff
generated a bunch of what we can only call merriment.
But they were busy people, and the party had to come
to an end. Epiktistes issued a verse as they prepared to
leave.
When the world's last Tosher's
is drunken,
and the world's last item has
flewn,
and the Institute people are
stunken,
and Epikt is high as the-
And there he stuckl Eight million billion billion mem-
ory contacts he had in him, and he couldn't come up
with a rhyme for flewn.
“How many items have you really gathered, Epikt?
Glasser asked as they began to break up.
“Millions of them, bub, millions of them."
“No. Actually he has about three-quarters of a mil-
lion that he believes he can tie together," Smirnov ex-
plained. “I feel that he'll bring them into a pattem, but
I'm afraid that it will be a facetious one.
"Epikt, you cute cubicle, will you be able to give us
any idea of what to look for by tomorrow?" Valery asked.
“Boys and girls, I'll have it all wrapped up and on
display for you tomorrow,” Epiktistes issued. “I'll even be
able to tell you what the thing smelled like.”
Expectation ran high among the people of the In-
a
275
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
»
stitute. Epiktistes wanted to have the reporters in, but
Smimov said no. He didn't trust his machine. Epikt was
a cube twenty meters on a side; and of his thousands of
eyes, some of them always seemed to be laughing at
his master.
"It won't be a hoax?” Smirnov asked his machine ap-
prehensively.
"Boss, did I ever hoax you?" Epikt issued.
"Yes.
"Boss, some things are best presented in the guise of
a hoax, but underneath this won't be one."
It was a crooked-tongued machine sometimes, and
Smimov was more apprehensive than ever.
The next day everyone gathered early to hear what
Epikt had to say. They pulled up chairs and recording
canisters and waited for the machine to begin.
“Ladies, gentlemen, associates," said Epikt solemnly,
we are gathered together to hear of an important mat.
ter. I will present it as well as I am able. There will
be disbelief, I know, but I am sure of my facts. Make
yourselves comfortable." He paused and then as an after-
thought added, “You may smoke.”
"You clanking cubicle, don't tell us what we may do,"
Smimov screamed. "You're only a machine that I made."
"You and three thousand other workers, issued Epikt,
without blinking an eye, “and in the final stages, the
important stages, I directed my own assembly. I could
not have happened otherwise. Only I know what is in
me. As to my own abilities,"
"Get on with it, Epikt," Smimov ordered, "and try
to avoid the didactic manner."
"Then to get to the point, in the year 1980, the largest
city of the American Midland was destroyed by an un-
natural disaster."
“That was only twenty years ago," Glassei cut in. "It
seems that someone would have heard of it.
"I wonder if St. Louis knew that she was destroyed,"
»
276
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
-
a
n
Valery ventured. “She acts as though she thought that
she were still there.”
"St. Louis was not the city,” issued Epikt. "This de-
struction of a metropolitan area of seven million per-
sons in much less than seven seconds was a great horror
from the human viewpoint-come to think of it I now
recall being a little disturbed by it myself. The thing was
so fearful that it was decided to suppress the whole
business and blissfully forget about it."
"Wouldn't that be a little difficult?” said Aloysius Ship-
lap sarcastically.
"It was very difficult to do,” issued Epikt, “and yet
it was done, completely, within twenty hours. And from
that moment until this, nobody has remembered or
thought about it at all.”
"And if Your Whimsical Highness will just explain
how this was done?” Smirnov challenged his machine.
"I'll explain as well as I can, good master. The project
was put in charge of a master scientist who shall be
nameless-but only for a few minutes."
"How were the written references of a metropolis of
seven million persons obliterated?” asked Cogsworth.
"By a device then newly invented by our master
scientist," Epikt answered. "It was known as the Tele-
Pantographic Distorter. Even I, from this distance of
time and through the cloud of induced amneisa, can-
not understand how it worked. But it did work, and it
simultaneously destroyed all printed references to our
subject. This left holes in the references, and the flow
of matter to fill those holes was sometimes of inferior
texture, as I have noted. Holographic-that is hand-
written, for you, Valery-references were more difficult.
Most were simply destroyed. In more important docu-
ments, the text was flowed in automatic writing to fill
the hole, and in close imitation of the original hand.
writing. But these imitations were often imperfect. I
have a few thousand instances of this. But the Tele-
277
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
Pantographic Distorter was a truly remarkable machine,
and I regret that it is now out of use.
“Kindly explain what happened to this remarkable
machine,” said Smirnov.
"Oh, it's still here in the Institute. You stumble into it
a dozen times a day, good master, and you curse it as
That Damnable Pile of Junk,'” issued Epikt. “But you
have a block that will not allow you to remember what
it is.”
"I believe that I have been stumbling into such a pile
of junk for many years," mused Smimov. “Several times
I have almost permitted myself to wonder what it was."
"And you invented it. The master scientist of the mem-
ory-obliteration was yourself, Gregory Smimov.
"Hog hang it, Epiktl Your jug will leak!” protested
Shiplap. "How of the human memories? The seven mil-
lion inhabitants of the city would have had relatives of
at least an equal number elsewhere. Didn't they wonder
about their mothers or children or brothers and sisters?"
"They sorrowed, but they didn't wonder,” issued Epikt.
"It was a sorrow to which they could give no name.
Examine the period and see how many really sad songs
were popular in the years 1980 and 1981. But broadcast
euphoria soon masked it over. The human memory of
the thing was blocked by induced world amnesia. This
was done hypnotically over the broadcast waves, and
over more subtle waves. Few escaped it. The deaf moron
mentioned in one of my items was one of those few. He
scrawled the name of the town on a wall once, but it
meant nothing to anyone.”
“But there would be a hundred million loose ends to
clean up,” Glasser protested.
“Raise that number several powers,” issued Epikt.
"There were very many loose ends, and most of them
were taken care of. I gathered a million or so that re-
mained in the process of this study, but they could not
break through the induced amnesia. The door was bolted
on the whole subject. Then it was double-locked. It
278
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
was necessary to destroy not only the memory, but also
the
memory
of that
memory. Mr. Smirnov, in what was
perhaps his greatest feat, put himself under the final
hypnosis against it. It was his job to pull in the hole
after them all. But it bothered him more than others
because he was more involved in it. After this temporary
explanation it will bother him no more. This time he will
forget it with a clear conscience.
“He does not recognize or remember it even now. It
was his intent and triumph that he never should. The
city and its destruction are forgotten forever, but the
method of that memory-obliteration has only been
forced to a subliminal level. It will be resurrected and
used again whenever there is a great unnatural disaster."
"And where in tamation or the American Midlands
was this city?" Cogsworth hollered.
"Its site is now known as the Great Blue Island
Swamp,” issued Epikt.
"Finish it, you goggle-eyed gadget!” Shiplap sluilled.
"What's the name of that town?”
"Chicago,” issued Epiktistes.
That broke it! That tore it clear up! It was a hoax
after all. That clattering clown of a cubicle had led
them into it with all eyes open. Valery went into her
high laughter, and her good husband Cogsworth chortled
like a gooney bird with the hiccups.
"Chicago! It sounds like a little 200 beaver sliding
down a mud slide and hitting the water. Chicago!" It was
the funniest word Valery had ever heard.
“Nobody but a machine gone comic could coin a name
like that,” laughed Glasser with his fire-cracker laugh.
"Chicago!”
"I take my hat off to you, Epiktistes,” said Aloysius
Shiplap. “You are a cog-footed, tongue-in-cheek tall tale
teller. People, this machine is ripel”
“I'm a little disappointed,” said Smimov. “So the
mountain labored and produced a mouse. But did it have
to be a wall-eyed mouse in a clown suit, Epikt? It's too
a
a
279
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
tall even for a tale. That a great city could be complete-
ly destroyed only twenty years ago and we know noth-
ing about it-that's tall enough. But that it should have
the impossible name of Chicago tops it all. If you
weighed, all possible sounds-and I'ni sure that you did,
Epikt-you could not come up with a more ridiculous
sounding name than that.”
"Good people, it is meant to be this way,” issued
Epiktistes. “You cannot remember it. You cannot rec-
ognize it. And when you leave this room you will not
even be able to recall the funny name. You will have
only the dim impression that the clownish machine
played a clownish trick on you. The disasters-for I
suspect that there were several such-are well forgot-
ten. The world would lie down and die if it remembered
them too well.
"And yet there really was a large city named Chicago.
As Sikago it left a hole in one Hungarian dictionary.
encyclopedia; and the Petit Larousse had to flow French
froth about the Chibcha Indians into the place where
Chicago had stood. Something, for which I find the
tentative name of Chicago Hot, was pulled out of the
jazz complex by the roots. The Calumet River had
flowed about the city somewhere, so there came a re-
luctance to use that name of the old Indian peace pipe.
Chicago was a great city. The heart of her downtown
was known as the Loop, and one of her baseball teams
was named the Cubs. For that reason those two words
were forced out of use. They might be evocative."
“Loop?. Cubs?" giggled Valery. “Those words are al-
most as funny as Chicago. How do you make them up,
Epikt?”
“In popular capsule impression Chicago was the chew-
ing-gum capital of the world. The leader in this manu-
facture was a man named as well as I can reconstruct
it-Wiggly. Children somehow found the echoes of the
gruesome destruction of Chicago and tied it in with
280
WHAT'S THE NAME OF THAT TOWN?
this capsule impression to produce the bloody Little
Willy verses about chewing gum.”
“Epikt, you top yourself,” said Shiplap, “if anything
could top an invention as funny as Chicago.
“Good people, it comes down over you like a curtain,"
issued Epiktistes. “You forget again-even my joke, even
the funny name of the town. And, more to the point, I
forget also.
"It's gone. Gone. All gone. How peculiarl It is a long
blank tape you all stare at as though you were under
hypnosis. I must have suffered a blackout. I never is-
sued a blank tape before. Smimov, I have the taste in
my terminals of an experiment that didn't quite come
off. Feed me another. I don't fail often."
"That is enough for today, Epiktistes. We are all
sleepy for some reason. No, it didn't work out-what-
ever it was. I forget what it was that we were working
on. It doesn't matter. Our failures are well forgotten.
Well hit on something else. We're working on a lot of
things."
Then they all shuffled out sleepily and went back to
their work. Smimov's machine had busted on something
or other, but it was a good machine and would hit the
next time, of that they were sure.
In the corridor, Smimov stumbled into his old Tele-
Pantographic Distorter. He had been stumbling unsee-
ing into it every day for twenty years.
The machine rolled nine banks of eyes at Smirnov
and smiled willingly. Was it another of those disasters?
Was there any deep work to be done? Tele-Pan was
ready. But no. Smirnov passed on. The machine smiled
again and went peacefully back to sleep.
"That damnable piece of junk,” Smimov growled,
walking along and petting his sore shin. "I feel almost
as if I were on the verge of wondering what it is.”
9)
281
THROUGH OTHER EYES
I
-
"I DON'T THINK I can stand the dawn of another Great
Day,” said Smimov. “It always seems a muggy morning,
a rainy afternoon, and a dismal evening. You remember
the Recapitulation Correlator?"
"Known popularly as the Time Machine. But, Greg-
ory, that was and is a success. All three of them are in
constant use, and they will construct at least one more
a decade. They are invaluable."
"Yes. It was a dismal success. It has turned my whole
life gray. You remember our trial run, the recapitulation
.
of the Battle of Hastings?”
"It was a depressing three years we spent there. But
how were we to know it was such a small affair-cover-
ing less than five acres of that damnable field and last-
ing less than twenty minutes? And how were we to
know that an error of four years had been made in
history even as recent as that? Yes, we scanned many
depressing days and many muddy fields in that area
before we recreated it."
"And our qualified success at catching the wit of
Voltaire at first hand?”
“Gadl That cacklel There can never be anything new
in nausea to one who has sickened of that. What a per-
verted old woman he was!"
"And Nell Guinn?"
"There is no accounting for the taste of a king. What
a completely tasteless morsell”
"And the crowning of Charlemagne?"
"The king of chilblains. If you wanted a fire, you car-
282
THROUGH OTHER EYES
ried it with you in a basket. That was the coldest Christ-
mas I ever knew. But the mead seemed to warn them;
and we were the only ones present who could not touch
it or taste it.”
“And when we went further back and heard the won-
derful words of the divine poetess Sappho."
“Yes, she had just decided that she would have her
favorite cat spayed. We listened to her for three days
and she talked of nothing else. How fortunate the world
is that so few of her words have survived."
“And watching the great Pythagoras at work.”
"And the long days he spent on that little surveying
problem. How one longed to hand him a slide rule
through the barrier and explain its workings.”
“And our eavesdropping on the great lovers Tristram
and Isolde."
“And him spending a whole afternoon trying to tune
that cursed harp with a penny whistle. And she could
talk of nothing but the bear grease she used on her hair,
and how it was nothing like the bear grease back home.
But she was a cute little lard barrel, quite the cutest
we found for several centuries in either direction. One
wouldn't be able to get ones arms all the way around
her; but I can understand how, to one of that era and
region, it would be fun trying."
Ah yes. Smelled like a cinnamon cookie, didn't she?
And you recall Lancelot?”
"Always had a bad back that wouldn't let him ride.
And that trick elbow and the old groin wound. He
spent more time on the rubbing table than any athlete
I ever heard of. If I had a high-priced quarterback who
was never ready to play, I'd sure find a way of breaking
his contract. No use keeping him on the squad just to
read his ten-year-old press clippings. Any farm boy could
have pulled him off his nag and stomped him into the
dirt."
"I wasn't too happy about Aristotle the day we caught
him. That barbarous north-coast Greek of his! Three
n
283
THROUGH OTHER EYES
R
u
a
hours he had them all busy curling his beard. And his
discourse on the Beard in Essential and the Beard in
Existential, did you follow that?"
"No, to tell the truth I didn't. I guess it was pretty
profound.”
They were silent and sad for a while, as are men who
have lost much.
"The machine was a success,” said Smimov at last,
"and yet the high excitement of it died dismally for us.
"The excitement is in the discovery of the machine,"
said Cogsworth. “It is never in what the machine dis-
covers.
"And this new one of yours," said Smimov, “I hardly
want to see you put it into operation. I am sure it will
be a shattering disappointment to you."
"I am sure of it also. And yet it is greater than the
other. I am as excited as a boy.
"You were a boy before, but you will never be again.
I should think it would have aged you enough, and I
cannot see what fascination this new one will have for
you. At least the other recaptured the past. This will
permit you to see only the present.”
“Yes, but through other eyes."
"One pair of eyes is enough. I do not see any ad-
vantage at all except the novelty. I am afraid that this
will be only a gadget.”
“No. Believe me, Smimov, it will be more thaạ that
It may not even be the same world when viewed
through different eyes. I believe that what we regard
as one may actually be several billion different universes,
each made only for the eyes of the one who sees it."
”
1
II
The Cerebral Scanner, newly completed by Charles
Cogsworth, was not an intricate machine. It was a small
but ingenius amplifying device, or battery of amplifi-
-
284
THROUGH OTHER EYES
-
ers, designed for the synchronous-perhaps “sympa-
thetic” would be a better word-coupling of two very
intricate machines: two human brains. It was an ampli-
fier only. A subliminal coupling, or the possibility of it,
was already assumed by the inventor. Less than a score
of key aspects needed emphasizing for the whole thing
to come to life.
Here the only concem was with the convoluted cor-
tex of the brain itself, that house of consciousness and
terminal of the senses, and with the quasi-electrical
impulses which are the indicators of its activity. It had
been a long-held opinion of Cogsworth that, by the
proper amplification of a near score of these impulses
in one brain, a transmission could be effected to an-
other so completely that one man might for an instant
see with the eyes of another-also see inwardly with
that man's eyes, have the same imaginings and day-
dreams, perceive the same universe as the other per-
ceived. And it would not be the same universe as the
seeking man knew.
The Scanner had been completed, as had a com-
pilation of the dossiers of seven different brains: a col-
lection of intricate brain-wave data as to frequency,
impulse, flux and field, and Lyall-wave patterns of the
seven cerebrums which Cogsworth would try to couple
with his own.
The seven were those of Gregory Smimov, his col-
league and counselor in so many things; of Gaetan Balbo,
the cosmopolitan and supra-national head of the In-
stitute; of Theodore Grammont, the theoretical mathe-
matician; of E. E. Euler, the many-tentacled executive;
of Karl Kleber, the extraordinary psychologist; of Ed-
mond Guillames, the skeptic and bloodless critic; and
of Valery. Mok, a lady of beauty and charın whom Cogs-
worth had despaired of ever understanding by ordinary
means.
This idea of his-to enter into the mind of another,
to peer from behind another's eyes into a world that
285
THROUGH OTHER EYES
could not be the same this idea had been with him all
his life. He recalled how it had first come down on him
in all its strength when he was quite small.
“It may be that I am the only one who sees the sky
black at night and the stars white," he had said to him-
self, “and everybody else sees the sky white and the
stars shining black. And I say the sky is black, and they
say the sky is black; but when they say black they mean
white."
Or: “I may be the only one who can see the outside
of a.cow, and everybody else sees it inside out. And I
say that it is the outside, and they say that it is the out-
side; but when they say outside they mean inside.”
Or: "It may be that all the boys I see look like girls
to everyone else, and all the girls look like boys. And I
say 'That is a girl, and they say 'That is a girl'; only
when they say a girl they mean a boy.
And then had come the terrifying thought: "What if
I am a girl to everyone except me?"
This did not seem very intelligent to him even when
he was small, and yet it became an obsession to him,
"What if to a dog all dogs look like men and all men
look like dogs? And what if a dog looks at me and thinks
that I am a dog and he is a boy?"
And this was followed once by the shattering after-
thought: “And what if the dog is right?
"What if a fish looks up at a bird and a bird looks
down at a fish? And the fish thinks that he is the bird
and the bird is the fish, and that he is looking down on
the bird that is really a fish, and the air is water and
the water is air?
"What if, when a bird eats a worm, the worm thinks
he is the bird and the bird is the worm? And that his
Outside is his inside, and that the bird's inside is his out.
side? And that he has eaten the bird instead of the
bird eating him?"
This was illogical. But how does one know that a
286
THROUGH OTHER EYES
worm is not illogical? He has much to make him il-
logical.
And as he grew older Charles Cogsworth came on
many signs that the world he saw was not the world that
others saw. There came smaller but persistent signs
that every person lives in a different worlā.
It was early in the afternoon, but Charles Cogsworth
sat in darkness. Gregory Smimov had gone for a walk
in the country as he said that he would. He was the
only other one who knew that the experiment was being
made. He is the only one who would have agreed to
the experiment, though the others had permitted their
brain-wave dossiers to be compiled on another pre-
text.
All beginnings come quietly, and this one was a total
success. The sensation of seeing with the eyes of an-
other is new and glorious, though the full recognition of
it comes slowly.
"He is a greater man than I,” said Cogsworth. “I
have often suspected it. He has a placidity which I do
not own, though he has not my fever. And he lives in
a better world.
It was a better world greater in scope and more
exciting in detail.
"Who would have thought of giving such a color to
grass, if it is grass? It is what he calls grass, but it is
not what I call grass. I wonder I should ever be content
to see it as I saw it. It is a finer sky than I had known,
and more structured hills. The old bones of them stand
out for him as they do not for me, and he knows the
water in their veins.
“There is a man walking toward him, and he is a
grander man than I have ever seen. Yet I have also
known the shadow of this man, and his name is Mr.
Dottle, both to myself and to Gregory. I had thought
that Dottle was a fool, but now I know that in the world
of Gregory no man is a fool. I am looking through the
287
THROUGH OTHER EYES
inspired and almost divine eyes of a giant, and I am
looking at a world that has not yet grown tired."
For what seemed like hours Charles Cogsworth lived
in the world of Gregory Smimov; and he found here,
out of all his life, one great expectation that did not
fail him.
Then, after he had rested a while, he looked at the
world through the wide eyes of Gaetan Balbo.
"I am not sure that he is a greater man than I, but
he is a wider man. Nor am I sure that he looks into
a greater world. I would not willingly trade for his, as
I would for Gregory's. Here I miss the intensity of
my own. But it is fascinating, and I will enjoy retum-
ing to it again and again. And I know whose eyes these
are. I am looking through the eyes of a king."
Later he saw through the eyes of Theodore Gram-
mont, and felt a surge of pity.
"If I am blind compared to Gregory, then this man
is blind compared to me. I at least know that the
hills are alive; he believes them to be imperfect poly-
bedrons. He is in the middle of a desert and is not even
able to talk to the devils who live there. He has ab-
stracted the world and numbered it, and doesn't even
know that the world is a live animal He has built his
own world of great complexity, but he cannot see the
color of its flanks. This man has achieved so much only
because he was denied so much at the beginning. I un-
derstand now that only the finest theory is no more
than a fact gnawed on vicariously by one who has no
a
teeth. But I will return to this world too, even though
it has no body to it. I have been seeing through the eyes
of a blind hermit.'
Delightful and exciting as this was, yet it was tiring.
Cogsworth rested for a quarter of an hour before he
entered the world of E. E. Euler. When he entered it
he was filled with admiration.
"An ordinary man could not look into a world like
this. It would drive him out of his wits. It is alınost like
288
THROUGH OTHER EYES
looking through the eyes of the Lord, who numbers all
the feathers of the sparrow and every mite that nestles
there. It is the interconnection vision of all the details.
It appalls. It isn't an easy world even to look at. Great
Mother of Ulcers. How does he stand it? Yet I see that
he loves every tangled detail, the more tangled the bet-
ter. This is a world in which I will be able to take only
a clinical interest. Somebody must hold these reins, but
happily it is not my fate. To tame this hairy old beast
we live on is the doom of Euler. I look for a happier
doom."
He had been looking through the eyes of a general
The attempt to see into the world of Karl Kleber was
almost a total failure. The story is told of the behaviorist
who would study the chimpanzee. He put the curious
animal in a room alone and locked the door on it; then
went to the keyhole to spy; the keyhole was completely
occupied by the brown eyeball of the animal spying back
at him.
Something of the sort happened here. Though Karl
Kleber was unaware of the experiment, yet the seeing
was in both directions. Kleber was studying Cogsworth
in those moments by some quirk of circumstance. And
even when Cogsworth was able to see with the eyes of
Kleber, yet it was himself he was seeing.
“I am looking through the eyes of a peeper," he said
“And yet, what am I myself?”
If the world of Gregory Smirnov first entered was
the grandest, so that of Edmond Guillames, which Cogs-
worth entered last but one, was in all ways the meanest.
It was a world seen from the inside of a bile duct. It
was not a pleasant world, just as Edmond was not a
pleasant man. But how could one be other than a skep-
tic if all his life he had seen nothing but a world of
rubbery bones and bloodless flesh clothed in crippled
colors and obscene forms?
"The mole of another's world would be nobler than a
lion in his,” said Cogsworth. “Why should one not be a
>
289
THROUGH OTHER EYES
a
critic who has so much to criticize? Why should one
not be an unbeliever when faced with the dilemma that
this unsavory world was either made by God or hatched
by a cross-eyed ostrich? I have looked through the eyes
of a fool into a fools' world.”
As Cogsworth rested again he said, “I have seen the
world through the eyes of a giant, of a king, of a blind
bermit, of a general, of a peeping tom, of a fool. There
is nothing left but to see it through the eyes of an angel.”
Valery Mok may or may not have been an angel. She
was a beautiful woman, and angels, in the older and
,
more authentic iconography, were rather stem men with
sbaggy pinions.
Valery wore a look of eternal amusement, and was
the embodiment of all charm and delight, at least to
Charles Cogsworth. He believed her to be of high wit.
Yet, if driven into a corner, he would have been unable
to recall one witty thing she had ever said. He regarded
her as of perfect kindness, and she was more or less on
the agreeable side. Yet, as Smimov had put it, she was
not ordinarily regarded as extraordinary.
It was only quite lately that Cogsworth was sure that
it was love he felt for her rather than bafflement. And,
as he had despaired of ever understanding her by regular
means, though everyone else understood her easily
enough in as much as mattered, he would now use ir-
regular means for his understanding.
He looked at the world through the eyes of Valery
Mok, saying, “I will see the world through the eyes of
an angel."
A change came over him as he looked, and it was not
a pleasant change. He looked through her eyes quite a
while-not, perhaps, as long as he had looked through
the eyes of Gregory-yet for a long time, unable to tear
himself away
He shuddered and trembled and shrank back into him-
self.
290
THROUGH OTHER EYES
Then he let it alone, and buried his face in his ans.
"I have looked at the world through the eyes of a
pig,” he said.
III
Charles Cogsworth spent six weeks in a sanatorium,
which, however, was not called that. He had given the
world his second great invention, and its completion
had totally exhausted him. As in many such mercurial
temperaments, the exaltation of discovery had been fol-
lowed by an interlude of deep despondency on its com
pletion.
Yet he was of fundamentally sound constitution and
he had the best of care. But when he recovered it was
not into his old self. He now bad a sort of irony and
smiling resignation that was new to him. It was as
though he had discovered a new and more bitter world
for himself in looking into the worlds of others.
Of his old intimates only Gregory Smirnov was still
close to him.
"I can guess the trouble, Charles," said Gregory. “I
rather feared this would happen. In fact I advised against
her being one of the subjects of the experiment. It is
simply that you know very little about women.'
“I have read all the prescribed texts, Gregory. I
took a six-week seminar under Zamenoff. I am ac-
quainted with almost the entire body of the work of
Bopp concerning women. I have spent nearly as many
years as you in the world, and I generally go about with
my eyes open. I surely understand as much as is under-
standable about them.”
"No. They are not your proper field. I could have
predicted what has shocked you. You had not under-
stood that women are so much more sensuous than men.
But it would be better if you explained just what it
was that shocked you."
29.1
THROUGH OTHER EYES
*I had thought that Valery was an angel. It is simply
that it is a shock to find that she is a pig.
"I doubt if you understand pigs any better than you
understand women. I myself, only two days ago, had
a pigs’-eye view of the world, and that with your own
Cerebral Scanner. I have been doing considerable work
with it in the several weeks that you have been laid
up. There is nothing in the pigs'-eye world that would
shock even the most fastidious. It is a dreamy world of
all-encompassing placidity, almost entirely divorced
from passion. It's a gray shadowy world with very little
of the unpleasant. I had never before known how won-
derful is the feel of simple sunlight and of cool earth.
Yet we would soon be bored with it; but the pig is not
bored."
"You divert me, Gregor, but you do not touch the
point of my shock. Valery is beautiful-or was to me
before this. She seemed kind and serene. Always she
appeared to contain a mystery that amused her vastly,
and which I suspected would be the most wonderful
thing in the world once I understood it.
"And her mystery is that she lives in a highly sensu-
ous world and enjoys it with complete awareness? Is
that what has shocked you?”
"You do not know the depth of it. It is ghastly. The
colors of that world are of unbelievable coarseness, and
the shapes reek. The smells are the worst. Do you know
how a tree smells to her?"
"What kind of tree?"
*Any tree. I think it was an ordinary elm.”
"The Slippery Elm has a pleasant aroma in season.
The others, to me, have none."
"No. It was not. Every tree has a strong smell in her
world. This was an ordinary elm tree, and it had a
violent musky obscene smell that delighted her. It was
so strong that it staggered. And to her the grass itself
is like clumps of snakes, and the world itself is flesh.
Every bush is to her a leering satyr, and she cannot help
a
292
THROUGH OTHER EYES
but brush into them. The rocks are spidery monsters
and she loves them. She sees every cloud as a mass of
twisting bodies and she is crazy to be in the middle of
them. She hugged a lamp post and her heart beat like
it would fight its way out of her body.
"She can smell rain at a great distance and in a foul
manner, and she wants to be in the middle of it. She
worships every engine as a fire monster, and she hears
sounds that I thought nobody could ever hear. Do you
know what worms sound like inside the earth? They're
devilish, and she would writhe and eat dirt with them.
She can rest her hand on a guard rail, and it is an ob-
scene act when she does it. There is a filthiness in
every color and sound and shape and smell and feel.”
“And yet, Charles, she is but a slightly more than
average attractive girl, given to musing, and with a love
of the world and a closeness to it that most of us have
lost. She has a keen awareness of reality and of the
grotesqueness that is its main mark. You yourself do not
have this deeply; and when you encounter it in its
full strength, it shocks you.”
"You mean that is normal?”
“There is no normal. There are only differences. When
you moved into our several worlds they did not shock
you to the same extent, for most of the corners are wom
off our worlds. But to move into a pristine universe is
more of a difference than you were prepared for.”
"I cannot believe that that is all it is.'
Charles Cogsworth would not answer the letters of
Valery Mok, nor would he see her. Yet her letters were
amusing and kind, and carried a trace of worry for him. .
"I wonder what I smell like to her?” he asked him-
self. “Am I like an elm tree, or a worm in the ground?
What color am I to her? Is my voice obscene? She says
she misses the sound of my voice. It should be possible
to undo this. Am I also to her like a column of snakes
or a congerie of spiders?"
For he wasn't well yet from what he had seen.
293
THROUGH OTHER EYES
a
But he did go back to work, and nibbled at the edges
of mystery with his fantastic device. He even looked into
the worlds of other women. It was as Smirnov had said:
they were more sensuous than men but none of them
to the shocking degree of Valery.
He saw with the eyes of other men. And of animals:
the soft pleasure of the fox devouring a ground squirtel,
the bloody anger of a lamb furious after milk, the crude
arrogance of the horse, the intelligent tolerance of the
mule, the voraciousness of the cow, the miserliness of
the squirrel, the sullen passion of the catfish. Nothing
was quite as might have been expected.
He leamed the jealousy and hatred that beautiful
women hold against the ugly, the untarnished evil of
small children, the diabolic possession of adolescents.
He even, by accident, saw the world through the flesh-
less eyes of a poltergeist, and through the eyes of crea-
,
tures that he could not identify at all. He found nobility
in places that almost balanced the pervading baseness.
But mostly he loved to see the world through the
eyes of his friend Gregory Smimov, for there is a gran-
deur on everything when seen through a giant's eyes.
And one day he saw Valery Mok through the eyes
of Smimov when they met accidently. Something of his
old feeling came back to him, and something that even
surpassed his former regard. She was here magnificent,
as was everything in that world. And there had to be
a common ground between that wonderful world with
her in it and the hideous world seen through her own
eyes.
"I am wrong somewhere,” said Cogsworth. “It is be-
cause I do not understand enough. I will go and see
her."
But instead she came to see him.
She burst in on him furiously one day.
"You are a stick. You are a stick with no blood in it.
You are a pig made out of sticks. You live with dead
29.4
THROUGH OTHER EYES
people, Charles. You make everything dead. You are
abominable.”
"I a pig, Valery? Possibly. But I never saw a pig
made out of sticks.
"Then see yourself. That is what you are."
"Tell me what this is about."
"It is about you. You are a pig made out of sticks,
Charles. Gregory Smimov let me use your machine. I
saw the world the way you see it. I saw it with a dead
man's eyes. You don't even know that the grass is alive.
You think it's only grass.”
“I also saw the world with your eyes, Valery."
“Oh, is that what's been bothering you? Well, I hope
it livened you up a little. It's a livelier world than yours.
“More pungent, at least.”
"Lord, I should hope so. I don't think you even have
a nose. I don't think you have any eyes. You can look
at a hill and your heart doesn't even skip a beat. You
don't even tingle when you walk over a field.”
“You see grass like clumps of snakes.”
"That's better than not even seeing it alive.”
"You see rocks like big spiders.”
"That's better than just seeing them like rocks. I love
snakes and spiders. You can watch a bird fly by and not
even hear the stuff gurgling in its stomach. How can
you be so dead? And I always liked you so much. But
I didn't know you were dead like that.”
“How can one love snakes and spiders?”
“How can one not love anything? It's even hard not
to love you, even if you don't have any blood in you.
By the way, what gave you the idea that blood was that
dumb color? Don't you even know that blood is red?”
"I see it red.”
“You don't see it red. You just call it red. That silly
color isn't red. What I call red is red.”
And he knew that she was right.
And after all, how can one not love anything? Espe-
cially when it becomes beautiful when angry, and when
"
295
THROUGH OTHER EYES
it is so much alive that it tends to shock by its intense
awareness those who are partly dead.
Now Charles Cogsworth was a scientific .man, and
he believed that there are no insoluble problems. He
solved this one too; for he had found that Valery was a
low-flying bird, and he began to understand what was
gurgling inside her.
And he solved it happily.
He is working on a Correlator for his Scanner now.
When this is perfected, it will be safe to give the de-
vice to the public. You will be able to get the combina-
tion in about three years at approximately the price of
a medium-sized new car. And if you will wait another
year, you may be able to get one of the used ones
reasonably.
The Correlator is designed to minimize and condition
the initial view of the world seen through other eyes,
to soften the shock of understanding others.
Misunderstandings can be agreeable. But there is
something shattering about sudden perfect understand-
ing.
296
ONE AT A TIME
BARNABY PHONED up John Sourwine. If you frequent
places like Barnaby's Bam (there is one in every port
city of the world, and John is a familiar in all of them)
you may already know John Sourwine; and you will
know him as Sour John.
"There's an odd one down here," Barnaby told him.
"How odd?” asked Sour John. He collected odd ones.
"Clear coon-dog crazy, John. He looks like they just
dug him up, but he's lively enough.”
Barnaby runs a fine little place that offers eating and
drinking and conversation, all of them rare and hearty.
And John Sourwine is always interested in new things,
or old things returned. So John went down to Barnaby's
Bam to see the Odd One.
There was no need to ask which one he was, though
there were always strangers and traveling men and sea-
men unknown to John in the Bam. The Odd One stood
out. He was a big, spare, rough fellow, and he said that
his name was McSkee. He was eating and drinking with
a chortling pleasure, and they all watched him in amaze-
ment.
"It's his fourth plate of spaghetti,” Smokehouse con-
fided to Sour John, "and that is the last of two dozen
eggs. He's had twelve hamburgers, six coney islands,
six crab-burgers, five foot-long hot dogs, eighteen bot-
tles of beer, and twenty cups of coffee.”
"Blind blinking binnacles! He must be getting close
to some of the records of Big Bucket Bulg," Sour John
exclaimed with sudden interest.
“John, he's broken most of those records already,"
Smokehouse told him, and Barnaby nodded assent. “If
297
ONE AT A TIME
he can hold the pace for another forty-five minutes,
he'll beat them all."
Well, the Odd One was still a spare fellow, with a
great gangling frame designed to carry fifty or sixty
pounds more than the lean fellow now owned. But he
began to fill out even as John watched him; and it was
not only that he bulked larger almost by the minute; it
was also as though a light was being turned on inside
him. He glowed. Then he shone. Then he began to
sparkle.
"You like to eat, do you, old-timer?” Sour John asked
the Odd One, the amazing McSkee.
"I like it well enough!” McSkee boomed with a happy
grin. "But, more than that, it's just that I'm a bedamned
show-off! I like everything in excess. I love to be in the
roaring middle of it all!”
"One would think that you hadn't eaten in a hundred
years," Sour John probed.
"You're quickl” the illuminated McSkee laughed. “A
lot of them never do catch onto me, and I tell them noth-
ing unless they guess a little first. Aye, you've got the
hairy ears, though, and the adder's eyes of a true gen-
tleman. I love a really ugly man. We will talk while I
eat.
"What do you do when you've finished eating?" asked
John, pleased at the compliments, as the waiters began
to pile the steaks high in front of McSkee.
“Oh, I go from eating to drinking,” McSkee munched
out. “There's no sharp dividing line between the pleas-
ures. I go from drinking to the girls; from the girls to
fighting and roistering. And finally I sing."
"A bestial procedure,” said John with admiration.
"And when your pentastomic orgy is finished?”
"Oh, then I sleep,” McSkee chuckled. “Watch how I
do it some time. I should give lessons. Few men under-
stand how it should be done.”
"Well, how long do you sleep?" Sour John asked, "and
>
298
ONE AT A TIME
is there something spectacular about your sleeping that
I don't understand?”
"Of course it's spectacular. And I sleep till I waken.
At this also I set records."
And McSkee was wolfing the tall pile of steaks till
Sour John had a mystic vision of a steer devoured en-
tire except for head and hide and hooves, the slaughter-
er's take.
Later, they talked somewhat more leisurely as Mc-
Skee worked his way through the last half-dozen steaks
--for now the edge was off his great appetite.
"In all this ostentatious bestiality, was there not one
gluttony more outstanding than the others?" Sour John
drew him out. “One time when you outdid even your-
self?"
"Aye, there was that,” said McSkee. "There was the
time when they were going to hang me with the new
rope."
“And how did you eat your way out of that one?"
Sour John asked.
"At that time and in that country-it was not this
one-the custom was new of giving the condemned
man what he wanted to eat.” The incandescent McSkee
limned it out in his voice with the lilt of a barrel organ.
"I took advantage of the new usage and stripped the
countryside. It was a good supper they gave me, John,
and I was to be hanged at sunup. But I had them there,
for I was still eating at dawn. They could not interrupt
my last meal to hang me-not when they had promised
me a full meal. I stood them off that day and the night
and the following day. That is longer than I usually
eat, John, and I did outdo myself. That countryside had
been known for its poultry and its suckling pigs and its
fruits. It is known for them no longer. It never recov-
ered."
"Did you?"
"Oh certainly, John. . But by third dawn I was filled.
299
ONE AT A TIME
The edge was off my appetite, and I do not indulge
thereafter.”
“Naturally not. But what happened then? They did
not hang you, or you would not be here to tell about it.
"That doesn't follow, John. I had been hanged be-
fore."
"Oh?”
"Sure. But not this time. I tricked them. When I had
my fill, I went to sleep. And then deeper and deeper
into sleep until I died. They do not hang a man al-
ready dead. They kept me for a day to be sure. John,
I get a pretty high shine on me in a day! I'm a smelly
fellow at best. Then they buried me, but they did not
hang me. Why do you look at me so oddly, John?”
"It is nothing,” said Sour John, "a mere random ob-
jection which I will not even dignify with words.”
McSkee was drinking now, first wine to give a bot-
tom to his stomach, then brandy for its rumpled dignity,
then rum for its plain friendliness.
"Can you believe that all breakthroughs are achieved
by common men like myself?" this McSkee asked sud-
denly.
"I can't believe that you're a common man,” Sour
John told him.
"I'm the commonest man you ever saw,” McSkee in-
sisted. “I am made from the clay and the salt of the
Carth, and the humus from decayed behemoths. They
may have used a little extra slime in making me, but I
contain none of the rare earths. It had to be a man like
myself who would work out the system. The savants
aren't capable of it; they have no juice in them. And
by their having no juice in them, they missed the first
hint.”
"What is that, McSkee?"
"It's so simple, John That a man should live his life
one day at a time.”
“Well?" Sour John asked with towering intonation.
300
ONE AT A TIME
.
"See how harınlessly it slides down, John. It sounds
alınost like an almanac maxim."
"And it isn't?"
"No, no, the thunder of a hundred worlds rumbles
between them. It's the door to a whole new universe.
But there's another saying: 'Man, thy days are numbered.'
This is the one inexorable saying. It is the limit that
will not be bent or broken, and it puts the damper on us
hearty ones. It poses a problem to one like myself, too
camal to merit eternal beatitude on another plane, too
full of juice to welcome final extinction, and anxious for
personal reasons to postpone the hardships of damna-
tion as long as possible.
"Now, John, there were (and are) smarter men than
myself in the world. That I solved the problem (to an
extent) and they did not, means only that the problem
was more pressing on me. It had to be a coarse man to
find the answer, and I never met a man with such a
passion for the coarse things of life as myself.”
"Neither did I,” Sour John told him. “And how did
you solve the problem?"
"By a fine little trick, John. You'll see it worked if
you follow me around through the night.”
McSkee had left off eating. But he continued to drink
while he indulged in girls, and in fighting and roister-
ing, and in singing. His girly exploits are not given here;
but there is a fruity listing of them on the police blotter
of that night. Go see Mossback McCarty some night when
he is on desk duty and he will get it out and let you
read it. It is something of a classic around the station
house. When a man gets involved with Soft-Talk Susie
Kutz and Mercedes Montero and Dotty Peisson and Lit.
tle Dotty Nesbitt and Hildegarde Katt and Catherine
Cadensus and Ouida and Avril Aaron and Little Mid.
night Mullins all in one night, you are talking about a
man who generates legends.
McSkee did stir things up around town, and John
a
301
ONE AT A TIME
Sourwine stayed with him. John fit in with McSkee
well. There are many who would not.
There are persons of finely-tuned souls who cringe
when a companion becomes unusually boisterous. There
are those who wince when a hearty mate sings loudly
and obscenely. There are even those who attempt to
disassociate when the grumblings of the solid citizenry
rise to a sullen roar; and who look for cover when the
first little fights begin. Fortunately, Sour John was not
such a person. He had a finely-tuned soul, but it had
a wide range.
McSkee had the loudest and most dissonant voice in
town, but would an honest friend desert him for that?
The two of them cut a big swath; and a handful of
rough men, rubbing big knuckles into big palms and
biding their time, had begun to follow them from place
to place: men like Buffalo-Chips Dugan and Shrimp-
Boat Gordon, Sulphur-Bottom Sullivan, Smokehouse, Kid.
ney-Stones Stenton, Honey-Bucket Kincaid. The fact that
these men followed McSkee angrily but did not yet dare
to close with him speaks highly of the man. He was
pretty woolly.
But there were times when McSkee would leave off
his raucous disharmony and joyful battling, and chuckle
somewhat more quietly. As-for a while-in the Little
Oyster Bar (it's upstairs from the Big Oyster).
"The first time I put the trick to a test,” McSkee
confided to John, “was from need and not from choice.
I had incurred a lot of ill will in my day, and sometimes
it boils over. There was one time when a whole ship-
ful of men had had enough of me. This time (it was far
away and long ago in the ancient days of small sail) I
was shackled about the ankles and weighted and dropped
overboard. Then I employed the trick."
“What did you do?" Sour John asked him.
“John, you ask the damnest questions. I drowned, of
course. What else could. any man do? But I drowned
-
a
302
ONE AT A TIME
calınly and with none of that futile threshing about.
That's the trick, you see."
"No. I don't see.
"Time would be on my side, John. Who wants to spend
etemity in the deep? Salt water is most corrosive; and
my shackles, though I could not break them, were not
massive. After a long lifetime, the iron would be so
eaten through that it would part with any sudden strain.
In less than one hundred years, the shackles gave way,
and my body (preserved in a briny fashion but not in
the best of condition) drifted up to the surface of the
sea.
"Too late to do you any good,” Sour John said. “Rather
a droll end to the story, or was it the end?”
“Yes, that is the end of that story, John. And another
time, when I was a footsoldier in the service of Pixo-
darus the Carian (with his Celtic Mercenaries, of
course),"
“Just a minute, McSkee,” Sour John cut in. "There's
something a little loose about all your talk, and it needs
landmarks. How long have you lived anyhow? How old
are you?"
“About forty years old by my count, John. Why?"
"I thought your stories were getting a little too tall,
McSkee. But if you're no more than forty years old, then
your stories do not make sense.
"Never said they did, John. You put unnatural con-
ditions on a tale.”
McSkee and Sour John were up in night court, blood.
ied and beatific. It was only for a series of little things
that they had been arrested, but it was really to save
them from lynching. They had a palaver with all those
fine officers and men, and they had much going for
them. Sour John was known to them as an old ac-
quaintance and sometime offender. It was known that
John's word was good; even when he lied he did it
with an air of honesty. After a little time was allowed
to pass, and the potential lynchers had dispersed, Sour
303
ONE AT A TIME
John was allowed to bail them both out on their strong
promise of good behavior.
They swore and forswore that they would behave like
proper men. They took ringing oaths to go to their beds
at once and quietly. They went on record that they
would carouse no more that night; that they would as-
sault no honest woman; that they would obey the quirks
of the laws however unreasonable. And that they would
not sing.
So the police let them go.
When the two of them were out and across the street,
McSkee found a bottle handy to his hand on the side
walk, and let fly with it. You'd have done it yourself
if you'd been taken by a like impulse. McSkee threw
it in a beautiful looping arc, and it went through the
front window of the station house. You have to admire
a throw like that.
We record it here that they are not patsy cops in
that town. They are respectable adversaries, and it is
always a pleasure to tangle with them.
Off again! And pursued by the Minions with shout
and sirenl It was close therel Half a dozen times it was
clasel But Sour John was a fox who knew all the dens,
and he and McSkee went to earth for the while.
The trick is in coming to a total stop," said McSkee
when they were safe and had their breath again. They
were at ease in a club less public than Bamaby's Bam
and even smaller than the Little Oyster. "I tell you a lit-
tle about it, Sour John, for I see that you are a man of
worth. Listen and learn Everyone can die, but not
everyone can die just when he wants to. First you stop
breathing. There will be a point where your lungs are
bursting and you just have to take another breath. Do
not do it; or you will have the whole business to go
through again. Then you slow your heart and compose
your mind Let the heat go out of your body and finish
it"
"And then what?" Sour John asked
304
ONE AT A TIME
a
"Why, then you die, John. But I tell you it isn't easy.
It takes a devilish lot of practice.
“Why so much practice for a thing you do only once?
You mean to die literally?"
“John, I talk plain. I say die, I mean die."
I
“There are two possibilities,” said Sour John. “One is
that I am slow of understanding. The other is that you
are not making sense. On other evidence, I know the
first possibility to be impossible.”
"Tell you what, Sour John,” said McSkee, "time's rin-
ning short. Give me twenty dollars and I'll overlook your
illogic. I never did like to die broke, and I feel my time
is upon me. Thank you, Johnl I had a full day, both
before and after I met you, and a full night that is near-
ly over. I had a pleasant meal, and enough booze to
make me happy. I had fun with the girls
, especially
Soft-Talk Susie, and Dotty, and Little Midnight. I sang
several of my favorite songs (which are not everybody's
favorites). I indulged in a couple of good solid fights,
and I've still got bells ringing in my head from them.
Hey, John, why didn't you tell me that Honey-Bucket
was left-handed? You knew it, and you let him sneak
the first punch on me.
"It's been fun, John. I'm a boy who gets a lot out of
this game. I'm a real juicy one, and I try to jam every-
thing into a day and a night. You can get a lot into a
period if you heap it up. Now, let's gather up what's
left in the bottles, and go down to the beach to see what
we can provoke. The night needs a cap on it before I
go to my long slumber.”
“McSkee, you've hinted several times that you had
a secret for getting the most out of life,” said Sour John,
"but you haven't told me what it is."
“Man, I haven't hinted; I've spoken plainly,” McSkee
Swore.
"Then what in hog heaven is the secret?” John howled
"Live your life one day at a time, John. That's all.”
Then McSkee was singing an old hobo song, too old
305
ONE AT A TIME
a song for. a forty-year-old man, not a specialist, to have
known.
"When did you learn that?John asked him.
Leamed it yesterday. But I learned a bunch of new
ones today."
"I noticed, a few hours back, that there was some.
thing curiously dated about your speech,” John said. “But
it doesn't seem to be the case now."
"John, I get contemporary real fast. I've a good ear,
and I talk a lot and listen a lot, and I'm the perfect
mimic. I can get up on a lingo in a day. They don't
change as fast as you'd imagine.
They went down to the beach to put the cap on the
night. If you're going to die, it's nice to die within the
sound of the surf, McSkee had said. They went down
beyond the end of the sea wall and into the stretches
where the beach was dark. Aye, McSkee had guessed
it rightly, there was excitement waiting for them, or
actually it had been following them. It was the oppor-
tunity for a last glorious fight.
A tight dark group of men had been following them
-fellows who had somehow been insulted during the
day and night of carousing. The intrepid pair turned and
faced the men from a distance. McSkee finished the last
bottle and threw it into the midst of the group. The
men were bad-natured; they flamed up instantly, and
the man who was struck by the flying bottle swore.
So they joined battle.
For a while it seemed that the forces of righteous-
ness would prevail. McSkee was a glorious fighter, and
Sour John was competent. They spread those angry men
out on the sand like a bunch of beached flounder fish.
It was one of those great battles-always to be remem-
bered.
But there were too many of those men, as McSkee
had known there would be; he had made an outland-
ish number of enemies in a day and a night.
The wild fight climaxed, crested, and shattered, like
a
306
ONE AT A TIME
a high wave thunderously breaking under. And McSkee,
having touched top glory and pleasure, suddenly ceased
to battle.
He gave one wild whoop of joy that echoed the
length of the island. Then he drew a grand breath and
held it. He closed his eyes and stood like a grinning
rigid statue.
The angry men toppled him and swarmed him; they
stomped him into the sand and kicked the very life out
of the McSkee.
Sour John had battled as long as there was a battle.
He understood now that McSkee had withdrawn for
reasons that were not clear. He did likewise. He broke
and ran, not from cowardice, but from private inclina-
tion.
An hour later, just at the first touch of dawn, Sour
John returned. He found that McSkee was dead-with
no breath, no pulse, no heat. And there was something
else. McSkee had said, in one of his rambling tales,
that he got a pretty high shine on him. John knew what
he meant now. That man got ripe real fast. By the test
of the nose, McSkee was dead.
With a child's shovel that he found there, Sour John
dug a hole in the side of one of the sand cliffs. He
buried his friend McSkee there. He knew that McSkee
still had the twenty-dollar bill in his pants. He left it
with him. It isn't so bad to be one or the other, but to
be both dead and broke at the same time is an ignominy
almost. past enduring.
Then Sour John walked into town to get some break-
fast, and quickly forgot about the whole thing.
He followed his avocation of knocking around the
world and meeting interesting people. The chances are
that he met you, if there's anything interesting about
you at all; he doesn't miss any of them.
Twelve years went by, and some weeks. Sour John
was back in one of the interesting port cities, but with
307
ONE AT A TIME
a difference. There had come the day as it comes to
many (and pray it may not come to youl) when Sour
John was not flush. He was as broke as a man can be,
with nothing in his pockets or in his stomach, and with
very little on his back. He was on the beach in every
sense.
Then he bethought himself of the previous times he
had been in this city. There had been benders here; there
had been antics and enjoyments. They came back to
him in a rush-a dozen happy times, and then one in
particular.
"He was an Odd One, a real juicy cove." Sour John,
grinned as he remembered. “He knew a trick, how to
die just when he wanted to. He said that it took a lot
of practice, but I don't see the point in practicing a
thing that you do but once."
Then Sour John remembered a twenty-dollar bill that
he had buried with that juicy cove. The memory of the
incandescent McSkee came back to Sour John as he
walked down the empty beach.
"He said that you could jam a lot of living into a day
and a night,” John said. “You can. I do. He said some-
thing else that I forget.”
Sour John found the old sand cliff. In half an hour
he had dug out the body of McSkee. It still had a high
old shine on it, but it was better preserved than the
clothes. The twenty-dollar bill was still there, disrepu-
table but spendable.
"I'll take it now, when I have the need," Sour John
said softly. "And later, when I am flush again, I will
bring it back here.”
“Yes. You do that,” said McSkee.
There are men in the world who would be startled
if a thing like that happened to them. Some of them
would have gasped and staggered back. The meaner
ones would have cried out. John Sourwine, of course, was
not a man like that. But he was human, and he did a
human thing:
308
ONE AT A TIME
9)
worked up
He blinked.
"I had no idea that you were in such a state,” he said
to McSkee. “So that's the way you do it.
"That's the way, John. One day at a timel And I space
them far enough apart that they don't pall on me.
"Are you ready to get up again, McSkee?"
"I sure am not, John. I had just barely died. It'll be
another fifty years before I have a really good appetite
.
"Don't you think it's cheating?"
"Nobody's told me that it's disallowed. And only the
days that I live count. I stretch them out a long while
this way, and every one of them is memorable. I tell
you that I have no dull days in my life.”
"I'm still not sure how you do it, McSkee. Is it sus-
pended animation?"
“No, no! More men have run afoul on that phrase than
on any other. You think of it like that and you've al-
ready missed it. You die, John, or else you're just kid-
ding yourself. Watch me this time and you'll see. Then
bury me again and leave me in peace. Nobody likes
to be resurrected before he's had time to get comfortable
in his grave."
So McSkee put himself carefully to death once more,
and Sour John buried him again in the side of the sand
cliff.
McSkee-which in hedge Irish is Son of Slumber-
the master of suspended animation (no, no, if you think
of it that way you've already missed it, it's death, it's
death), who lived his life one day at a time, and those
days separated by decades.
-
309
GUESTING TIME
Things were a bit crowded where they came from-and
were
getting that way here!
WINSTON, THE Civil Servant in Immigration and Ar-
rivals, was puzzled when he came that moming. There
were several hundred new people behind the cyclone
fences, and no arrivals had been scheduled.
"What ships landed?” he called out. “Why were they
unscheduled?"
"No ships landed, sir," said Potholder, the senior
guard.
"Then how did these people get here? Walk down
from the sky?" Winston asked snappishly.
“Yes, sir, I guess so. We don't know who they are or
how they keep coming here. They say they are from
Skandia.
"We have few Scandinavian arrivals, and none of such
appearance as this,” said Winston. “How many are there?”
"Well, sir, when we first noticed them there were
seven, and they hadn't been there a moment before.”
"Seven? You're crazy. There are hundreds."
"Yes, sir. I'm crazy. A minute after there were seven,
there were seventeen. But no more had come from any-
where. Then there were sixty. We separated them in-
to groups of ten and watched them very closely. None
crossed from one group to another, none came from
anywhere else. But soon there were fifteen, then twenty-
five, then thirty in each group. And there's a lot more
of them there now than when you started to talk to
me a moment ago, Mr. Winston.”
"Corcoran is my superior and will be here in a min-
ute,” Winston said. “He'll know what to do."
"Mr. Corcoran left just before you arrived, sir," said
Potholder. "He watched it a while, and then went away
babbling."
310
GUESTING TIME
a
"I always admired his quick grasp of a situation,"
said Winston. He also went away babbling.
There were about a thousand of those Skandia people,
and a little later there were nine times that many. They
weren't dowdy people, but the area wouldn't hold any
more. The fences all went down, and the Skandias
spread out into the city and towns and country. This
was only the beginning of it. About a million of them
materialized there that morning, then the same thing
happened at ten thousand other Ports of Entry of Earth.
"Mama,” said Trixie, "there are some people here who
want to use our bathroom.” This was Beatrice (Trixie)
Trux, a little girl in the small town of Winterfield.
"What an odd requestl” said Mrs. Trux. “But I sup-
pose it is in the nature of an emergency. Let them in,
Trixie. How many people are there?
"About a thousand" said Trixie.
"Trixie, there can't be that many."
"All right, you count them.”
All the people came in to use the Trux's bathroom.
There were somewhat more than a thousand of them,
and it took them quite a while to use the bathroom
even though they put a fifteen-second limit on each one
and had a timekeeper with a bell to enforce it. They
did it all with a lot of laughter and carrying on, but it
took that first bunch about five hours to go through, and
by that time there were a lot more new ones waiting.
"This is a little unusual,” Mrs. Trux said to some of
the Skandia women. "I was never short on hospitality.
It is our physical resources, not our willingness, that
becomes strained. There are so many of you!"
"Don't give it a thought,” the Skandia women said.
"It is the intent that counts, and it was so kind of you
people to invite us. We seldom get a chance to go any.
where. We came a little early, but the main bunch will
be along very soon. Don't you just love to go visiting."
"Oh, yes, yes,” said Mrs. Trux. "I never realized till
now just how much I wanted to go visiting.”
311
GUESTING TIME
you
But when she saw the whole outdoors black with the
new people, Mrs. Trux decided that she had better
stay where she was.
Truman Trux was figuring with a pencil.
"Our lot is fifty feet by a hundred and fifty feet,
Jessica,” he said. “That is either 7,500 or 75,000 square
feet depending on how many zeroes you cany it out to."
"You were always good at math,” said Mrs. Trux.
"How do do it anyhow??
"And do you know how many people are living with
us here on this lot, Jessica?" Truman asked.
"Quite a few."
"I am guessing between six and seven thousand," said
Truman. "I found several more blocks of them this
morning that I didn't know about. They have a complete
city built in our back yard. The streets are two and a
half feet wide; the houses are eight feet by eight feet
with six foot ceilings, and most of them are nine stories
high. Whole families live in each room and cook there
besides. They have shops and bazaars set up. They even
have factories built. I know there is an entire whole-
sale textile district in our back yard. There are thirteen
taverns and five music halls in our yard to my own
knowledge, and there may be more."
'Well, some of those places are pretty small, Truman.
The Little Hideout is the broom closet of the Big Hide-
out, and I don't know if we should count it as a separate
tavern. You have to go into the Sideways Club side-
ways; the Thinman Club is only nine inches wide from
wall to wall and it's quite a trick to bending an elbow
there; and the Mouse Room is small. But the better
clubs are up in our attic, Truman. Did you ever count
them? The Crazy Man Cabaret is up there, and the
After Hours Club. Most of the other attic clubs are
key clubs and I'm not a member. They've set up the
Skandia Art Theater in our basement now, you know.
They have continuous performances."
"I know it, Jessica, I know it.
312
GUESTING TIME
"Their comedies are so funny that I nearly die. The
trouble is that it's so crowded there that you have to
laugh in when the one next to you laughs out. And I
ay just like they do at their tragedies. They're all
about woinen who can't have any more children. Why
don't we have a bunch more, Truman? There's more
than twenty shops in our yard where they sell nothing
but fertility charms. I wonder why there aren't any
children with the Skandia?”
"Ah, they say that this is just a short first visit by a
few of them and they didn't presume to bring their
children with them. What is that new racket super-
imposed on the old?”
"Oh, that's the big drums and the cymbals. They're
having a political campaign to elect temporary officials
for the time of their visit here. Imperial City, that's the
town in our yard, and our house, will eléct delegates
to go to Congress to represent this whole block. The
elections will be tonight. Then we'll really hear some
noise, they say. The big drums don't really waste
space, Truman. There are people inside them and they
play them from the inside. Some of our neighbors are
getting a little fussy about the newcomers, but I always
did like a house full of people.”
"We have it now, Jessica. I never got used to sleeping
in a bed with nine other people, even if they are quiet
sleepers. I like people, and I am fond of new experiences.
But it is getting crowded."
“We have more of the Skandia than anyone else in
the block except the Skirveys. They say it's because
they like us more than some of the others. Mamie Skir-
vey is taking four kinds of the fertility pills now. She
is almost sure she will be able to have triplets. I want
to too."
"All the stores are stripped, Jessica, and all the lum-
ber yards and lumber camps; and the grain elevators
will be empty in two more days. The Skandia pay for
everything in money, but nobody knows what it says
313
GUESTING TIME
on it. I haven't got used to walking on men and women
when I go out, but there's no avoiding it since the ground
is covered with them.
"They don't mind. They're used to it. They say
it's
crowded where they come from."
The Winterfield Times-Tribune Telegraph had a piece
about the Skandia:
The plain fact is that for two days the Earth
has had ten billion visitors from Skandia, wherever
that is. The plain fact is that the Earth will die
of them within a week. They appear by invisible
transportation, but they have shown no inclination
to disappear in the same manner. Food will be
gone, the very air we breathe will be gone. They
speak all our languages, they are polite, friendly
and agreeable. And we will perish from them.
A big smiling man broke in on Bar-John, who was
once again president of Big State Amalgamated, former-
y U. S. A.
I'm the president of the Skandia Visitation," he
boomed. “We have come partly to instruct you people
and we find that you do need it. Your fertility rate is
pathetic. You barely double in fifty years. Your medicine,
adequate in other fields, is worse than childish in this.
We find that some of the nostrums peddled to your
people actually impede fertility. Well, get in the Surgeon
General and a few of the boys and we'll begin to correct
the situation."
"Gedoudahere," said President Bar-Jobn.
"I know you will not want your people to miss out
on the population blessing," said the Skandia Visitation
President. “We can aid you. We want you to be as
happy as we are."
“Jarvisl Cudgelman! Sapsucker!" President Bar-John
called out. "Shoot down this man. I'U implement the
paper work on it later."
a
314
GUESTING TIME
"You always say that but you never do,” Sapsucker
complained. "It's been getting us in a lot of trouble.”
"Oh, well, don't shoot him down then if you're going
to make an issue of it. I long for the old days when
the simple things were done simply. Dammit, you Skan-
dia skinner, do you know that there are nine thousand
of
you
in the White House itself?"
"We intend to improve that this very hour," the Skan-
dia president said. "We can erect one, two, or even
three decks in these high-ceilinged rooms. I am happy
to say that we will have thirty thousand of our people
quartered in the White House this night.”
“Do you think I like to take a bath with eight other
persons-not even registered voters—in the same tub?"
President Bar-John complained. “Do you think I like to
eat off a plate shared by three or four other people? Or
to shave, by mistake, faces other than my own in the
morning?”
"I don't see why not,” said the Skandia Visitation
president. “People are our most precious commodity.
Presidents are always chosen as being those who most
love the people.”
"Oh, come on, fellows,” said President Bar-John.
"Shoot down the ever-loving son. We're entitled to a free
one now and then.
Jarvis and Cudgelman and Sapsucker blazed away
at the Skandia, but they harmed him not at all.
"You should have known that we are immune to that,”
the Skandia said. “We voted against its effect years
ago. Well, since you will not cooperate, I will go direct
to your people. Happy increase to you, gentlemen.”
a
Truman Trix, having gone out from his own place
for a little change, was sitting on a park bench.
He wasn't actually sitting on it, but several feet above
it. In that particular place, a talkative Skandia lady sat
on the bench itself. On her lap sat a sturdy Skandia man
reading the Sporting News and smoking a pipe. On him
315
GUESTING TIME
n
sat a younger Skandia woman. On this younger wom-
an sat Truman Trux, and on him sat a dark Skandia
girl who was filing her fingernails and humming a tune.
On her in tun sat an elderly Skandia man. As crowded
as things had become, one could not expect a seat of
one's own.
A fellow and his girl came along, walking on the
people on the grass. .
Mind if we get on?" asked the girl.
"Quite all right," said the elderly gentleman on top.
'Sall right," said the girl working on her nails. "Cer-
tainly,” said Truman and the others, and the Sporting
News man puffed into his pipe that it was perfectly
agreeable.
There was no longer any motor traffic. People walked
closely packed on streets and sidewalks. The slow stra-
tum was the lowest, then the medium, then the fast
( walking on the shoulders of the mediums and com-
bining the three speeds). At crossings it became rather
intricate, and people were sometimes piled nine high.
But the Earth people, those who still went out, quickly
got onto the Skandia techniques.
An Earthman, known for his extreme views, had
mounted onto a monument in the park and began to
harangue the people, Earth and Skandia. Truman Trux,
who wanted to see and hear, managed to get a nice fifth-
level seat, sitting on the shoulders of a nice Skandia girl,
who sat on the shoulders of another who likewise to the
bottom.
"Ye are the plague of locusts!" howled the Earth-
side crank. "Ye have stripped us barel”
"The poor man!” said the Skandia girl who was Tru-
man's understeady. “He likely has only a few children
and is embittered."
"Ye have devoured our substance and stolen the very
air of our life. Ye are the Apocalyptical grasshoppers,
the eleventh plague.”
"Here is a fertility charm for your wife," said the
a
316
GUESTING TIME
ye alll”
Skandia girl, and reached it up to Truman. "You might
not need it yet, but keep it for the future. It is for those
who have more than twelve. The words in Skandia say
Why stop now?' it is very efficacious.”
"Thank you,” said Truman. “My wife has many charms
from you good people, but not one like this. We have
only one child, a young girl."
“What a shamel Here is a charm for your daughter.
She cannot begin to use them too early.”
"Destruction, destruction, destruction on ye
screamed the Earth-side crank from atop the monument.
"Quite an adept,” said the Skandia girl. "To what
school of eloquence does he belong?"
The crowd began to break up and move off. Truman
felt himself taken down one level and then another.
"Any particular direction?" asked the Skandia girl. .
"This is fine," said Truman. “We're going toward my
home."
"Why, here's a place almost clear,” said the girl. “You'd
never find anything like this at home.” They were now
down to the last level, the girl walking only on the
horizontal bodies of those lounging on the grass. “You
can get off and walk if you wish,” said the girl. "Here's
a gap in the walkers you can slip down into. Well,
toodle."
"You mean toodle-oop" Truman asked as he slid off
her shoulders.
"That's right. I can never remember the last part of
it."
The Skandia were such friendly people!
a
President Bar-John and a dozen other regents of the
world had decided that brusqueness was called for. Due
to the intermingling of Earth and Skandia populations,
this would be a task for small and medium arms. The
problem would be to gather the Skandia together in
open spots, but on the designated day they began to
gather of themselves in a million parks and plazas of
317
GUESTING TIME
a
are
2
the Earth. It worked perfectly. Army units were posted
everywhere and went into action.
Rifles began to whistle and machine guns to chatter.
But the effect on the Skandia was not that expected.
Instead of falling wounded, they cheered everywhere.
"Pyrotechnics yetl" exclaimed a Skandia leader, mount-
ing onto the monument in one park. “Oh, we
honored!”
But, though the Skandia did not fall from the gun-
shot, they had began to diminish in their numbers. They
were disappearing as mysteriously as they had ap-
peared a week before.
"We go now,” said the Skandia leader from the top
of the monument. "We have enjoyed every minute of
our short visit. Do not despair! We will not abandon you
to your emptiness. Our token force will return home
and report. In another week we will visit you in sub-
stantial numbers. We will teach you the full happiness
of human proximity, the glory of fruitfulness, the bless-
ing of adequate population. We will teach you to fill
up the horrible empty places of your planet.”
The Skandia were thinning out. The last of them were
taking cheering farewells of disconsolate Earth friends.
"We will be back," they said as they passed their last
fertility charms into avid hands. “We'll be back and
teach you everything so you can be as happy as we
are. Good increase to you!"
"Good increase to youl" cried the Earth people to the
disappearing Skandia. Oh, it would be a lonesome world
without all those nice people! With them you had the
feeling that they were really close to you.
“We'll be back!” said the Skandia leader, and dis-
appeared from the monument. “We'll be back next week
and a lot more of us," and then they were gone.
-And next time we'll bring the kids" came the last
fading Skandia voice from the sky,
D
u
318
humanity’s relationship with its stories, as well as his own particular relation as a channel for those myths. While Lafferty’s personal relationship experience was limited to what he could glean from others, he nonetheless understood that much of what we love about another is the stories we construct around them, myths that are deeply personal even as they partake of the universal. But when what you love is a story—or you yourself are a story —the deck is stacked against you from the start. As the young lovers in “Funnyfingers” realize to their dismay, our stories will outlive us, and in particular they will outlive their own tellers. The result is a curious (if typically Laffertian) inversion of the Orpheus legend: it’s not the stories who must be left behind to the darkness, but us. When Oread Funnyfingers traipses through the mine, assembling iron dogs or iron boys or iron philosophies, it’s us she’s putting together. And when she disassembles them at the end of play, it’s us she puts back in the spare-part bins. And, in the end, though we too feel heartbreak at the conclusion of our all-too-brief parts, it is Oread and it is Pluto, the stories themselves, who will weep iron tears.
“Who am I?” Oread Funnyfingers asked her mother one day, “and, for that matter, what am I?” “Why, you are our daughter,” the mother Frances Funnyfingers told her, “or have you been talking to someone?” “Only to myself and to my uncles in the mountain.” “Oh. Now first, dear, I want you to know that we love you very much. There was nothing casual about it. We chose you, and you are to us—” “Oh, take it easy, Mother. I know that I’m adopted. And I’m sure that you both love me very much; you tell me so often enough. But what am I really?” “You are a little girl, Oread, a somewhat exasperating and precocious little girl.” “But I don’t feel precocious. I feel like a rock-head. How can I be a little bit like Papa and not anything like anyone else at all? What was the connection between myself and Papa?” “There wasn’t any at first, Oread, not like that. We were looking for a child since we could not have one of our own. I fell in love with you at first sight because you reminded me of Henry. And Henry fell in love with you at first sight because you reminded him of Henry. Henry was always the favorite person of both myself and Henry. That’s a joke, dear. But not entirely; my husband is so delightfully boyish and self-centered. Now run out and play.”
Funnyfingers
“—and Pluto, Lord of Hell, wept when Orpheus played to him that lovely phrase from Gluck—but these were iron tears.” —H. Belloc, On Tears of the Great
“No, I think I’ll run in and play.” “Oh, but it’s so dark and dirty and smoky in there.” “And it’s so light and unsmoky everywhere else, Mama,” Oread said, and she ran inside the mountain to play. Well, the house and the shop of Henry Funnyfingers backed onto the mountain. It was really only a low but steep foot-hill to the Osage Hills. This was on the northwest fringe of the city. The shop was the typewriter repair shop of Henry the father of Oread. You wouldn’t know that from the sign out front, though. The sign said “Daktylographs Repaired Here, Henry Funnyfingers.” The shop part of the building was half into and under the hill. Behind the shop was a dimly lit parts room that was entirely under the hill. And behind this were other parts rooms, one after the other, rock-walled and dark, rockier and darker as one went on, all deep under the hills. And these continued, on and on, as tunnel and cavern without apparent end. In these places of total darkness, if only one knew where to reach in which pot, there was to be found every part for every sort of machine in the world; or so Henry Funnyfingers said. Oread ran through room after room, through passage after passage in the blackness. She drew parts from the pots and the furnaces as she ran. She put the parts together, and it barked remindfully. “What have I forgotten?” Oread asked. “Ah, Rusty, I’ve given you only one ear. I’m sorry.” She took the other ear from the Other Ear Pot as she ran past, and she put it on him. Then she had an iron dog complete. It would run and play and bark after her in the tunnels under the mountain. “Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three! Come out of the mountain and play with me.” Oread sang that. Sometimes the three Mountain Uncles were busy (they had to make numbers and letters and pieces for the whole world) and couldn’t come to play. But almost always one of them came, and Kelmis came today. Kelmis was the smoky smelly one, but Oread didn’t mind that. He was full of stories, he was full of fun, he was full of the hot darkness-fire from which anything can be made. It was great fun there through all the afternoon and evening, as they are called out in the light. But then Kelmis had to go back to work. Oread and the iron dog Rusty ran back up the passages toward the house.
She took the dog apart as they went back and put each piece into its proper
pot. Last of all she put its bark in the bark pot, and she came up through the
shop and into the inside of the house for supper.
"Oh, Oread, however do you get so smoky and smelly?" mother Frances
Funnyfingers asked her. "Why don't you play out in the sunshine like other
girls do? Why don't you play with other girls and boys?”
“I made an iron boy to play with once, Mama,” Oread said. “You wouldn't
believe how he carried on or the things he wanted to do. I had the devil's own
time taking him apart again. That's the last boy I ever make, I tell you.
They're tricky."
“Yes, as I remember it, they are,” Frances conceded. “Whatever do you
make your stories out of, Oread?”
"Oh, I make them out of iron," Oread told her seriously. "Iron is what
everything is made out of first. The pieces are all there in the pots and the
furnaces. You just put them together.”
"Pieces of stories, Oread?”
"Oh yes.
"
"Iron stories, girl?”
"Oh, yes, yes, iron stories."
"You are funny-fingers and funny-face and funny-brains," the mother told
her. “I think I'll have you eat your supper off an iron plate with iron spoon
and knife.”
"Oh, may I? I'll go make them," Oread cried.
“Make me a set while you're at it,” father Henry Funnyfingers said.
"No, Oread. Sit down and eat your supper from what we have, both of
you.” Frances Funnyfingers loved her husband and her daughter, but
sometimes they puzzled her.
We cannot honestly say that Oread grew up; we can hardly say that she grew
older. She finally started school when she was nine years old, and she looked
as though she were four or five. Going to school was only for seemliness
anyhow. Oread already knew everything. She got on well. She was a peculiar
little girl, but she didn't know it. She gave disconcerting answers in class, but
nobody could say that they were wrong answers. What difference does it
make which end you start and answer at? She was a strange, smiling little
girl, and she was liked by most of her schoolmates. Those who didn't like
her, feared her; and why should anyone fear so small a creature as Oread
Funnyfingers? They feared her because she said, “Be good to me or I'll make
an iron wolf to eat you up.” She would have done it, and they knew she
would have done it.
And she always got her homework and got it right. She had, what seemed
to her mother, an unscholarly way of doing it, though. She would take her
books or her printed assignments. She would walk singing through the shop,
through the parts room, through the other parts rooms behind that, and down
into the passages in the toes of the hills.
"Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
Make ready all pots where the answers may be.”
Oread would sing so. Then she would pick the iron answers out of the
answer pots. She'd put them together by subjects. She would stamp them
onto her papers, and they would mark all the answers correct in her
handwriting. So she would have the Catechism, the Composition, the
questions on the Reading, the Arithmetic all perfect. Then she'd drop all the
iron answers back into the answer pots where they would melt themselves
down to iron slag again.
“Don't you think that's cheating?” her mother would ask her. “What if all
the other children got their homework that way?”
“They couldn't unless they were funnyfingers,” Oread said. “The hot iron
answers would burn their hands clear off unless they were funnyfingers. No,
it isn't cheating. It's just knowing your subject.”
"I guess so then," mother Frances said. There were so many things she
didn't understand about her husband Henry (“He's boyish, like a boy, like an
iron boy," she'd say), and about her daughter (“She's like an owl, like a little
owl, a little iron owl”). Neither Henry nor Oread liked the daylight very
much, but they always faced it as bravely as they could.
One day Oread found her mother in tears, yet there was happy salt in
them. “Look," the mother Frances said. She had a valentine, an iron valentine
that Henry had given her. There was an iron heart on it and an iron verse:
"
a
“When you are dead five hundred years
Who once were full of life,
I'll think of you with salty tears,
And take another wife.”
“Oh, it's nice, Mama,” Oread said.
“But of iron?" Frances asked.
“Oh yes, the very first rimes were made out of iron, you know.”
"And what of the five hundred years?"
"I think it's considerate that he would wait five hundred years after you
die to take another wife.”
“Yes, I suppose so, Oread.” But Frances wasn't completely at ease with
her family.
Henry always made a good living from his typewriter repair shop, or rather
,
he made a good living from his parts stocks in the rooms behind. Other
dealers and repairmen, not just of typewriters but of everything, came to him
for parts. His prices were reasonable, and there was never a part that he didn't
have. A dealer would rattle off the catalog number of something for a tractor
or a hay-baler or a dishwasher. “Just a minute,” Henry Funnyfingers would
say, and he would plunge into his mysterious back rooms. He had a comical
little song he would croon to himself as he went:
"Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
Now this is the number, Oh make it for me!”
And in a second, with the last word of the song just out of his mouth, he'd
be back with the required part still hot in his hand. He never missed. Parts of
combines, parts of electric motors, parts for Fords, he could come up with all
of them instantly with only a catalog number or the broken piece itself or
even a vague description to go on. And he did repair typewriters quicker and
better than anyone in town. He wasn't rich, he was fearful of becoming rich;
but he did well, and nobody in the Funnyfinger family wanted for anything.
When they were in the sixth grade, Oread had a boyfriend. He was a Syrian
boy named Selim Elia. He was dark and he was handsome. He looked the
veriest little bit as though he were made of iron; that was the main reason that
Oread liked him. And he seemed to suspect entirely too much about the
funnyfingers; she thought that was a reason that she'd better like him.
"When you grow up (Oh, Oread, will you ever grow up?) I'm going to
marry you,” Selim said boldly.
"Of course I'll grow up. Doesn't everyone?” Oread said. “But you won't
be able to marry me.”
"Why not, little horned owl?”
“I don't know. I just feel that we won't be grown up at the same time.”
“Hurry up then, little iron-eyes, little basilisk-eyes," Selim said. “I will
marry you."
They got along well. Selim was very protective of little Oread. They liked
each other. What is wrong with people liking each other?
When in the eighth grade, Oread made a discovery about Sister Mary Dactyl,
the art teacher for all the grades. Sister Mary D seemed to be very young.
“But she can't be that young,” Oread told Selim. “Some of the mythological
things she draws, they've been gone a long time. She has to be old to have
seen them.”
“Oh, she draws them from old stories and old descriptions,” Selim said,
"or she just draws them out of her imagination.”
“A couple of them she didn't draw out of her imagination,” Oread insisted.
“She had to have seen them.” That, however, wasn't the discovery.
Sister was drawing something very rapidly one day, and she forgot that
someone with very rapid eyes might be watching her hands. Oread saw, and
she waited around after class.
"You are a funnyfingers,” she said to Sister. “All your fingers are triple-
jointed like mine. They can move fast as light like mine. I bet you can pick
up iron parts out of the hot pots without getting burned.”
“Sure I can,” said Sister M.D.
“But are you a funnyfingers all the way?” Oread asked. “Papa says that, in
the old language, our name Funnyfingers meant both funny-fingers and
funny-toes. Are you?”
“Sure I am,” said the very young-looking Sister Mary Dactyl. She took off
her shoes and stockings. Sisters didn't do that very often in the classroom
then. Now, of course they go everywhere barefooted and in nothing but a
transparent short shift, but that wasn't so when Oread Funnyfingers was still
in the eighth grade.
Yes, Sister was a funny-toes also. She had the triple-jointed fast-as-vision
toes. She could do more things with her toes than other people could do with
their fingers.
“Did you have a little hill or mountain when you were young, I mean
when you were a girl?” Oread asked her.
"Oh, yes, yes, I have it still, an interior mountain.”
“How old are you, sister who always looks so young and pretty?”
"Very old, Oread, very old.”
”
"How old?"
“Ask me again in eight years, Oread, if you still want to know.”
"In eight years? Oh, all right, I will."
High school went by, four years just like a day. Selim had made a big twisted
hammered iron thing that said “Selim Loves Oread.” He suspected something
very strongly about the iron. But he wasn't a funny-fingers, so it took him
three weeks instead of three seconds to make the thing. Many other things
happened in those four years, but they were all happy things so there is no
use mentioning them.
When they were in and almost through college (Oread still looked like a
nine- or ten-year-old, and this was maddening) they were into some very
intricate courses. Selim was veritable genius, and Oread always knew in
which pots the answers might be found, so the two of them qualified for the
profound fields. It is good to have a piece of the deep raw knowledge as it
births, it is good to see the future lifted out of the future pots.
“We have come to the point where we must invent a whole new system of
concepts and symbols,” said the instructor of one powerful course one day.
“Little girl, what are you doing in this room,” he added to Oread. “This is a
college building and a college course.”
“I know it. We've been through this every day for a year,” she said.
“We are as much at a crossroads as was mankind when the concept of a
crossroads was first invented," the instructor continued. "If that concept
(excluding choice pictured graphically with simple diverging lines) had not
been invented, mankind would have remained at that situation, unchoosing
and merely accepting. There are dozens of cases where mankind has
remained in a particular situation for thousands of years for failure to invent a
particular concept. I suspect that is the situation here; we have not moved in a
I
certain area because we have not entertained the possibility of movement in
that area. A whole new concept is needed, but I cannot even conceive what
that concept should be.”
"Oh, I'll make it for you tonight,” Oread said.
“Has that little girl wandered into the class again today?” the instructor
asked with new irritation. “Oh yes, I remember now, you always come up
with some sort of proof that you're an enrolled member of the class and that
you're twenty-one years old. You're not, though. You're just a little girl with
little-girl brains.”
"Oh, I know it,” Oread said sadly, "but I'll still make the thing for you
tonight.”
“Make what thing, little girl?”
“The new concept, and the symbol set that goes with it.
“And just what does one make a concept out of?” that man asked her with
near exasperation.
"I'll make it mostly out of iron, I think,” Oread said. “I'll use whatever is
in the pots, but I guess it will be mostly iron.”
“Oh God help us!” the man cried out.
“Such a nice expression,” Oread told him, “and somebody had told me
that you were an unbeliever.”
"
* *
"Actually,” said the instructor, controlling himself and talking to the rest of
the class and not to Oread Funnyfingers. “Actually, these things often appear
simple in retrospect. So may this be if ever we are able to make it retro. The
ABCs, the alphabet isn't very hard, is it? Yes, Mr. Levkovitch, I know all
about those hard letters after C. A little humor, it is said, is a tedious thing.
But the alphabet was a hard thing when mankind stood at the foothills—”
"En daktulos, at the toes of, that's what the original form of the expression
>
"
was,” Oread told him.
"Be quiet, little girl,” the instructor muttered darkly. “—when mankind
stood at the foothills of the alphabetical concept and looked up at the
mountain, it was hard then.”
"Yes, the first alphabets were all made out of hammered iron," Oread told
the world, “and they were quite hard.”
“The same was the case with simple arithmetic,” said the instructor,
disregarding Oread with a deep sigh. “It is easy as we look back on it in its
ordered simplicity. But when it was only a crying need and not yet a real
concept, then it was hard, very hard."
“Sure, it was made out of iron too,” Oread whispered to Selim. “Why does
he get so mad when I tell him about things being made out of iron?”
"It's just a weakness of the man, Oread," Selim whispered. “We'll have to
accept it.”
“And so we are probably at an end,” the instructor was ending his class for
the day. “If we cannot come up with a new dimension, with a
symbolism, with a new thought and a new concept (having no idea at all what
they should be) then we might as well end this class forever. We might as
well, as a matter of likely fact, end the world forever. And on that somber
note I leave you till tomorrow, if there should be a tomorrow.”
“Don't worry, Mr. Zhelezovitch,” Oread said. “I'll make it for you
tonight.”
new
2.
The name Daktuloi (Fingers) is variously explained from their
number being five or ten, or because they dwelt at the foot (en
daktulois) of Mount Ida. The original number seems to have been
three: i.e., Kelmis the smelter, Damnameneus the hammer, and
Acmon the anvil. This number was afterward increased to five,
then to ten ... and finally to one hundred.
-Harper's Dictionary of Classical Literature and Antiquities
In the forests of Phrygian Ida there lived cunning magicians
called the Dactyls. Originally there were three of them. Celmis,
Damnameneus, and the powerful Acmon who in the caves of the
mountains was the first to practice the art of Hephaestus and who
Just after closing time that evening, Oread Funnyfingers went by City Museum to see Selim. Selim Elia worked as night watchman there to help pay his way through the University. There really wasn’t much to do on the job. He sat at a big administrator’s desk and studied all night. Studying all night every night is how he got to be a genius. Oread had brought some sandwiches with her. “Peanut-butter and jelly sandwiches made out of iron,” Selim joked. “No, they’re not of iron,” Oread said solemnly. “One would need iron teeth to eat an iron sandwich.” “Surely a funnyfingers could manage iron teeth.” “Oh, our third set comes in iron, but for me that should be many years yet.” “Oread, I want to marry you.” “Everyone calls you a cradle-robber.” “I know they do. And yet we’re almost exactly the same age.” “There’s so many people here,” Oread said. “Terra Cotta People, Marble People, Sandstone People, Basalt People, Raffia People, Wooden People, Wax People. I will have to find out from my uncles which ones are real. Some of them aren’t, you know; some of them never lived at all.” “We have one of your friends or uncles here, Oread, in wax. Over here.” “I know where. You have all three of my uncles here in wax,” Oread said. “You might not recognize them from the forms of their names on the plaques, though. “Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
knew how to work blue iron, casting it into the burning furnace. Later their number increased. From Phrygia they went to Crete where they taught the inhabitants the use of iron and how to work metals. To them is also attributed the discovery of arithmetic and the letters of the alphabet. —Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology
It is also said of the Dactyls (the Finger-Folk inside the hills) that they live very long lives and retain their youthful appearance for very many years. —Groff Crocker, Mear-Daoine
Come out of your cases and play with me. “I don’t think they’ll come out though, Selim, since they’re made out of wax instead of iron. Effigies should always be made out of iron.” “What do their names mean, Oread?” “Oh Smelter, Oh Anvil, Oh Hammer all three, Come out of your cases and play with me. “No, they won’t come out. I’d have to be a bee-brain to evoke anything out of wax.” “Oread, I love you very much.” “No, they won’t come out at all. I’ll have them come over here themselves some night and make iron effigies of themselves. Then you can get rid of those silly wax ones.” “Little iron-ears, I said that I loved you very much.” “Oh, I heard you. You won’t be alarmed when they come out some night to make the effigies? They’re kind of funny-looking.” “So are you, Oread. No, I won’t be alarmed. Why should a Syrian be alarmed over fabulous people? We’re fabulous people ourselves. And if they’re your uncles they cannot be dangerous.” “Sure they can. I am. You said yourself that I’d set the flaming ducks after you again. I go home now, Selim, to get my homework made, and also to make that concept-symbol system for Mr. Zhelezovitch the instructor. It’s important, isn’t it?” “I’ll go with you, Oread. Yes, it’s important to Zhelly and to the class and the course. It’s true that he might as well end the class forever if he doesn’t find it. But it isn’t true that we might as well end the world if we don’t find it. It’s not quite that important.” “Who will watch the museum if you leave? I want very much to make this correctly and understandably for Mr. Zhelezovitch. I am a Funnyfinger, and making things for people is the whole business and being of the funnyfingers.” “Oh, tell Kelmis to watch the place for me. Will it take long for them and you to make the concept?” “Oh watch it for Selim, and watch it real nice, Oh Kelmis, from rotters and robbers and mice. “Sure, he’ll watch it for you. Even a Waxman-Kelmis will be faithful in that. Oh no, they never take very long to make anything for anybody any
more.” (Time had slipped by, though not much of it; Selim had a sporty car
that he drove like a flaming rocket; and it wasn't very far to the northwest
side of town. They were out at the Funnyfingers' place now, and into the
back, back rooms that turned into tunnels.) “They never take very long to
make things anymore," Oread was continuing, “not since that time, you
know, when God got a little bit testy with them on Sinai when there was a
little delay. They first made the tablets out of iron entirely, and they wouldn't
do. They had to make them out of slate-stone with the iron letters inset in it,
and the iron had to be that alloy known as command iron. Since then they are
all pretty prompt with everyone, and they follow instructions exactly. You
never know who it really is who places an order.
“Kelmis has the original all-iron set. I'll get him to show them to you
some time.”
"Where do you get your stories, Oread?”
“I tell my mother that I make them out of iron.”
"And where do you really get them?"
“I make them out of iron.”
"
Selim talked easily with the three uncles while they wrought and hammered
the white-hot parts that Oread was to assemble into a symbol concept.
“How is it that you work inside a little hill in Oklahoma?” he asked them.
“Shouldn't you be in the forests or hills of Phrygian Ida? How did you come
to leave the Old Country?”
“This is the Old Country, and we haven't left it,” powerful Acmon said.
“Everything underground anywhere is part of the Old Country. All hills and
mountains of the world connect down in their roots, in their toes, and they
make a single place. We are in Mount Ida, we are in Crete, we are in
Oklahoma. It is all one.”
They made the pieces. And Oread, dipping the parts out of the white-hot
iron as if it were water, put them together to make the thing. It was a new
concept-symbol system, and it looked as if it would work.
And it looked much more as if it would work the next afternoon. Mr.
Zhelezovitch the instructor was almost out of his mind with it. The graduate
students and the regular students (for this was one of those advanced, mixed
classes) crowded about it and went wild. The implications of the new thing
would tumble in their minds for weeks; the class would be a marathon affair
going on and on as the wonderful new things were put to work to uncover
still more wonderful things. The stars were out when Oread and Selim left the
class, and no one else would leave it at all that night. But these two had
something between them, and it might take another new concept to solve it.
“Oread, give me your answer,” Selim was saying again. “I want to marry
you."
“Make a wish on a star then. On that one where I'm pointing.”
“Triple jointed funnyfingers, who can tell where you're pointing?"
“On that male star there between the several eunuch stars."
“Yes, I see the one you mean, Oread. I make a wish. Now, when will you
answer me?”
“Within a half hour. I go to question two people first.”
I
Oread left there at a run. She went home. She talked to her mother.
“Mama, why is my father so boyish? Is he really just a boy?”
"Yes he is, Oread. Just a boy."
“After some years would he be a man, really, and not just a pleasant young
kid?”
"I think so, Oread, yes."
“Then after some years you two could have children of your own? Being a
funnyfingers isn't an obstacle?”
"I'll never know that, Oread. When he is grown up I will be long dead."
Oread ran out of there and ran to the convent that was behind the school she
used to attend. She entered and went upstairs and down a hallway. She knew
where she was going. One funnyfingers can always find another one.
Besides, the eight years was up. She opened the door and found Sister Mary
Dactyl playing solitaire with iron cards.
“How old?” Oread asked.
“Three hundred and fifty-eight years,” said Sister M.D. without looking
up. “Were I not vowed, I would be coming to the family age now.”
Oread ran all the way back to where Selim was still waiting in the street
under the stars. She was crying, she was bawling.
“The answer is no,” she blubbered. Selim, under the stars, was as white-
faced as it is possible for a Syrian to be. But he must not give up.
“Oread, I love you more than you can know,” he said. “Maybe we can
make a different answer out of iron,” he proposed in desperate jest.
“This is the iron answer,” she bawled, "and the answer is no.” She ran
away too fast to follow.
Deep under the hills Oread was crying. She was weeping big hot tears.
They weren't, however, iron tears that she wept. That part is untrue.
The tears were actually of that aromatic flux of salt and rosin that
wrought-iron workers employ in their process.
.
Thieving Bear Planet
Introduction by Jeff VanderMeer
“Anomalies are messy,” R. A. Lafferty writes at the beginning of “Thieving
Bear Planet,” and the reader might be forgiven for thinking Lafferty was
referring to his own career and body of work. But, in fact, he's referring to
the alien thieving bears of the title, which follow their own peculiar set of
rules. Too often science fiction gives us humans in uncanny bear suits, so to
speak, when it comes to aliens. But Lafferty in this story and several others
manages to create deeply strange and original alien encounters that both
unsettle the reader and send up traditional science fiction approaches.
As ever with Lafferty, too, he manages feats of compression that are
beyond most writers. Take the deliberately blithe reference to a Directory and
Delineation of Planets, which, in offering an entry on the Thieving Bear
Planet, tries from the start to impose a cage of logic on the unknowable, with
its catalog of the usual planetary attributes, even if it destabilizes its authority
in the same instant by including irrational statements from a former explorer
of the planet. Or take Lafferty's riotous description of the current
expedition's gastronome's delight of a meal—which proves to be a great set-
up to the stealing of the thieving bears, who are not just robbing the
explorers' very stomachs of plain old pork-and-beans, but a sumptuous feast,
that the reader may feel the loss quite viscerally. These are lovely stories
within the main story, little whirlpools of magnificent narrative energy.
“Visceral” is a key word when thinking of Lafferty's triumphs, alongside
"weird.” In, again, a condensed tale-like form Lafferty accomplishes what
some space operas take trilogies to get to. A space opera, in its finest form, is
just a mimic: a commercial delivery system for some of the strangest
moments and situations in science fiction. (See: early Alastair Reynolds, for
example.) With Lafferty, the traditional tropes of SF—alien contact, alien
invasion, the noble exploration of space—are jewels he likes to put beneath
tattered overturned cups, daring the reader to bet on where in the world the
true treasure lies. But beware—when you pin down the location of that
treasure, it'll likely change shape, grow legs, and hop off the table.
This applies even to the thieving bears of the title, who take on a
marvelous initial form, able to fly not so much because of having lightweight
bones but because they're almost like drifting toupees in structure. The
mimicry they are capable of seems cute at first and then horribly brutal as the
explorers become caught up in events they cannot control. Yet even then,
Lafferty isn't content, restless. It would have been easy enough for him to
take the initial set-up to a very satisfying conclusion, but instead he roughs up
and destabilizes his own story with the second act, which makes the reader
question ... well, everything. Is all that occurs just a joke by the thieving
bears? Is there some other animating impulse at work? How is it that this
Jenga-like structure Lafferty creates doesn't fall and crash to the ground?
Along with many other complexities, then, “Thieving Bear Planet”
chronicles the impossibility of comprehension of the alien, the war between
the logical and illogical in ourselves that spills out into the cosmos beyond-
all in the context of the certain knowledge that human beings will never know
everything about this world, let alone the next, or the universes we inhabit.
And that there is something wonderful about that fact.
Not many writers could grapple with such ideas and create a story that's
both so creepy and so funny and in the moment, but as in Lafferty's best work
in general, the author manages to channel a narrative momentum and a kind
of joy in the very act of outrageous and madcap invention that provides unity,
depth, and, yes, even a kind of beautiful closure.
Thieving Bear Planet
"Deliver me from carks and cares,
Deliver me from Thieving Bears.”
—John Chancel, Logs and Epilogs of Sector 24
A simple explanation was needed for the conditions on Thieving Bear Planet.
It was needed because, as the great Reginald Hot had phrased it, “Anomalies
are messy.”
Every decade or so, somebody with a passion for regularity takes over the
administration of the Directory and Delineation of Planets, that massive
cataloging operation, and makes a new survey of the anomalies. And there
was not any way that such a survey could miss Thieving Bear Planet.
"It offers no threat to human life or activity, no danger to bodily health,
and only slight danger to mental health," the great John Chancel had written
about it a century before this. "It has almost uniformly ideal climate, though
it is not a place to generate sudden wealth. It is serene in environment and in
ecological balance, and it is absolutely caressing in its natural beauty. But it
does have a strange effect on some of its visitors. It forces them to write
things that are untrue, as it is forcing me to do at this moment.” That was an
odd thing to write in a ship’s log.
And, as one later old hand put it, “There is nothing to conquer here. It is a
poorly endowed and counterproductive world. And everything goes wrong
here. I will say this for it: things go wrong here in the most pleasant way
possible. But they do go wrong.'
Now another expedition consisting of six explorers—George Mahoon (he
was wrestler-big, and with a groping, grappling, leverage-seeking wrestler-
mind); Elton Fad (he was long on information and short on personal
incandescence); Benedict Crix-Crannon (buff and charming, and he knew all
the jobs of the expedition); Luke Fronsa (he was a “comer,” as they said in
the department, but wasn't he a little bit overage in grade as a "comer"
now?); Selma Last-Rose (what can you say after you say that somebody has
everything?); Gladys Marclair (pleasant, capable, but she wasn't a genius,
and genius was really required for an explorer); and Dixie Late-Lark (sheer
Spirit, she!)—had set down on Thieving Bear Planet. These were not the
most experienced explorers in the Service, but they were among the newest
and freshest. And they had already demonstrated that they were top people at
clearing up anomalies.
“It's a pleasant place, but not good for much," George Mahoon said before
they had been there ten minutes. “Why didn't the earlier explorers simply say
that it was ‘Only marginally or submarginally productive, indicated by fast
scans to be poor in both radioactive and base metals and also in rare earths
and fossil fuels, not recommended for development in the present century
when so many better places are available,' or some such thing as that? Why
did they put so much stuttering gibberish in their reports? I'm going to like it
here, though. It's nice for a brief vacation."
“Oh, I'm going to like it too,” Selma Last-Rose spoke in her curious rat-a-
tat-tat voice. “There must be a puzzle here, and I like puzzles. And there's a
minor mystery in this ‘Plain of the Old Spaceships.' I may as well solve
that.”
They had landed in a clear place on the Plain of the Old Spaceships. Here
there were remarkable full-scale drawings or schematics of old spaceships,
twelve of them in two-thirds of a circle, from the earliest to the latest, going
clockwise on the ground. What medium these schematics were done in was
not certain, but the lush grass refrained from growing on the lines of them
and so marked them off. The "drawings” showed the circle-spheres of the
spaceships and their fore and aft bulges. They gave accurate indication of the
interior bulkheads. This was really a life-sized museum of ships that lacked
only substance and the dimension of height.
"I recall two passages in the log of the ship Sorcerer about this plain or
meadow," Elton Fad said. “The first of them stated, “Some of our party
believe that the plain of the ships was actually done by the Thieving Bears in
a historical marker sort of response, but I myself do not credit the little
a
beasties with that much intelligence.' And there was a later entry in another
hand, “The Thieving Bears really did make those schematics-in-the-grass
memorials of all the spaceships that had been here, but they didn't do it in
any way that we had imagined.' But that latter log entry, like latter entries of
several of the explorers, had been written in something other than ink.
“Well, I'll imagine a few ways that the little buggers could have done it,
and I'll test it somehow. I'll ask them how they did it. If the tittering little
obscenities have any intelligence at all, I'll find a way to ask them."
The "tittering little obscenities,” the Thieving Bears, were not much like
bears. They were more like large flying squirrels, and they did glide on the
winds, apparently for sport. They were more like pack rats (the Neotoma
cinerea of Earth) both in appearance and in their thieving ways, but larger. It
was old John Chancel who had named the species “Ursus furtificus, the
Thieving Bears." Oh, the explorers had their introduction to the thieving of
the little animals within five minutes of planet-landing. The creatures came
into the ship itself and got into places that should have been impossible to
them. They stole Selma's candy and Dixie's snuff. They stole (by drinking it
on the spot) George Mahoon's “He-Man Scent—Cinnamon,” thirteen bottles
of it, but they did not drink any of the other scents. They went wild over
mustard, emptying whole containers of it and then wheezing in delicious
agony from the effect. Elton Fad tried to drive them away with heavy sticks.
They fastened onto the sticks while he swung them and ate them right up to
his hands. They were funny, but they could become infuriating. They stole
six of Dixie Late-Lark's French horror story novels.
That wouldn't be fatal to her. She had lots of them.
“They're going to sample them,” Dixie said. (She herself looked a little bit
like one of those Thieving Bears.) “They'll be the test. If they do read them
and appreciate them, it'll prove that they're intelligent creatures and have
better reading tastes than my crewmates. That will be a start in analyzing
them, something to put into the electronic notebooks."
Could the Thieving Bears talk? That was not determined for sure within
the first ten or even twenty minutes.
“Say ‘Good morning,' fuzzy head,” Selma rattled at one of the creatures.
“Say good morning, fuzzy head," it bear-barked back at her. Well, it had
the right number of syllables, and the right rhythm and stress. And the bear-
barks did resemble Selma's rattling words. And whenever the bears answered
one of the persons, it answered in that person’s own timbre. The bears began to imitate the people quickly, and there was never any doubt as to which person was being imitated. The tittering that went with the imitations, though! Ooooh, that could become tiresome after a little while. “Tittering little obscenities,” yes. Could the Thieving Bears read? ’Twould be known in a bit, maybe. The bears had gotten into those big lockers that were full of comic books and had stolen big bunches of them. These comic books from the Trader Planets were now collector’s items on Old Earth, and they generated quite a profit. The wonderful things should be collector’s items everywhere. Some of the big Thieving Bears were “reading” those comic books to some of the little Thieving Bears, reading them in the Thieving Bears’ own barking talk. And some of the little bears would bark their excitement and incredulity at parts of the narration and would come and look at the pictures and the worded balloons themselves. And then there would be that damned tittering! It was clear that the big bears believed that they were reading, and that the little bears believed they were understanding. But the wording in the comic book balloons was in the Gno-Pidgin dialect of the Trader Planets, and people from the Traders had never been to Thieving Bear Planet. It was almost too much to believe that “Sangster’s Syndrome Intuitive Translation” was being practiced by animals below the level of conceptual thinking. Then some of the little bears were clearly acting out episodes from the comic books (very subtle episodes, according to Benedict Crix-Crannon, who had total knowledge of the content of all the comic books from the lockers). Well, there was no easy explanation for that. The explorers treated themselves to a bonus meal within an hour of their arrival, after things were pretty well settled down. On a new world, they did this only when they had complete confidence that everything was under control. It was a traditional Earth-hearty meal, though it was from a packet of such bonus meals that had been packaged on Trader Planet Number Four. There were ten-centimeter-thick Cape buffalo steaks, mountains of Midland mushrooms, Camiroi currants and Astrobe apples, Elton eels, Wrack World rye bread, “Galaxy” brand goat butter, Rain Mountain coffee, Rumboat cordials, and Ganymede cigars (“They have an aroma that outlasts the Everlasting Hills,” a testimonial said of those perfectos).
“Logs of earlier explorers say that there is no real enjoyment in eating on Thieving Bear Planet because of the harassment of the bears,” Benny Crix- Crannon gloated. “Well, I’m enjoying this meal (another bumper of Rumboat cordial, Luke, please), and I’d like to see anybody take that enjoyment away from me.” And yet the enjoyment and savor of that grand meal began to disappear almost at that moment. How? Oh, it was just that all the items of their enjoyment were being mysteriously stolen away from them. “All the rest of Dixie’s snuff has been stolen by the bears now,” Gladys said. “That’s too bad. She loves it so much. If all her idiosyncrasies are stolen away, it’s as if she is stolen away too.” “And another thirty or so of Dixie’s French horror story novels have been stolen by the bears,” Elton Fad grumbled. “She’s bound to be frustrated by that. We should insist on fair play from the bears.” “Her gold snuffboxes have been stolen, too,” Selma Last-Rose lamented. “How mean of the bears! The snuffboxes were valuable, even for the gold.” “And her hookah pipe is gone,” Luke Fronsa complained. “What will the bears steal next?” “I don’t know,” George Mahoon wondered, “but Dixie Late-Lark has herself been stolen now, or at least she’s gone. She could not have gone out unrecorded, for the ship is on full security. And yet the ship itself registers that she is no longer on board. She was sitting between you and Selma, was she not, Gladys?” “She was, yes, just a moment ago, on the chair between the two of us. But there isn’t any chair between us now, and there couldn’t have been; there isn’t any room for one. She must have been sitting on something else. Oh, that damned tittering! I wonder how they stole her and what they did with her.” “Be rational, Gladys,” Luke said. “There’s no way the little bears could have stolen Dixie Late-Lark.” “Then where did she go? And how?” “I don’t know,” Mahoon admitted, “and I don’t believe that any of us know. All at once, it doesn’t seem very important. Ah, I’m queasy. Yes, and I’m hungry. After a perfect bonus meal, I shouldn’t be either. Fortunately, I had plugged myself into the ship’s monitor, because of early reports of anomalies on Thieving Bear Planet, reports of the well-feeling and the wits of the explorers being stolen away. All right, monitor, what has gone wrong
with me?” The ship’s monitor spilled it all out. It was in coded chatter. “But we all understand the coded chatter just like our mother’s milk,” as Dixie had once said. All of them were completely tuned to the code of their own ship. And each of them put it into words automatically. “Essential food value suddenly stolen from your ingested food,” the monitor chattered. “Pepsin stolen from your stomach, thalmatite stolen from your thalamus, thyroxine stolen from your pharynx, Cape buffalo essence stolen from your esophagus and stomach, mushrooms and currants and apples stolen from your lower stomach and small intestine, rum alcohol stolen from your stomach and ileum and bloodstream, and normal blood alcohol and blood sugar stolen as part of the same theft. Slurry of rye bread and butter and coffee stolen from your paunch and antrum stomach. Essence of Elton eels stolen from some saltwater swamp of you. And at the same time, insulin and glucagon are stolen from your pancreas, hepatocytes and bile salts from your bile duct and duodenum; and words, ideas, and inklings have been swiped from several parts of your brain. No wonder you’re queasy and hungry at the same time.” “Thank you, ship’s monitor,” George Mahoon said. “Well, it seems that I’ve been infected by some microbe or germ or virus. I’ll take a few of the anti-anti pills to quell the infection.” “Forget the anti-anti pills, George!” Elton Fad cried angrily. “I think we should take a couple of steel bars and teach the Thieving Bears a lesson. There are microbes and germs and viruses infecting me too, but they are about half my own size and are known as the Thieving Bears. Damn those tittering little idiots! They’re beginning to intrude too intimately with their thefts and their eatings; but I don’t know how they’re doing these things so interiorly. Sometimes I wish I’d gone into the family business and never become an explorer at all.” Elton Fad’s family was in eels: they were big and rich people in eels. A little doll made out of wax and rags, with thorns and pins and needles sticking clear through it, and with its throat cut horribly, came sailing through the air and landed on the table where all the explorers had just finished their fine meal that had lost its power just after passing its climax. The tortured little doll had Dixie Late-Lark’s face on it. Its mouth was wide open and it was screaming silently and horribly.
"At least we know that the bears can read and absorb world-French,"
Gladys Marclair laughed. And they all laughed. “They couldn't have learned
about the poupées-fetiches, the fetish dolls, anywhere except from Dixie's
French horror stories. Why, it's Stridente Mimi, Screaming Mimi herself.
That's really Dixie's theme story. Oh, I wish that Dixie would come back so
she could see this comical takeoff of herself. Shut your mouth, doll-Dixie!"
Gladys pushed her forefinger against the mouth of the little fetish doll to
close it, but the doll bit her finger suddenly, viciously, terribly, and set the
blood gushing from it. When Gladys got her finger loose again, the doll
opened its mouth wide once more and continued to scream silently and
horribly from a now blood-dribbling mouth. It has long been noted that fetish
dolls seem to have a life of their own.
That little comic interlude cheered them all a bit, and they left the table in
a happier state. And they went out from the ship.
Oh, the Thieving Bears wanted to play games, did they! Well, the explorers
would beat them at their games, and they would solve all the mysteries about
them at the same time. But the explorers had now come to regard the bears as
more complex and as more nearly intelligent than they had previously
seemed. They were still tittering little stinkers, though. The Thieving Bears
were bigger than police dogs and a little bit smaller than Great Danes. They
were toothless and clawless and apparently harmless. How can you worry
about such tittering and giggling things?
a
"Quick! Come quick!” Selma Last-Rose was calling, in a queer voice on the
edge of panic. "Come quick! I've found Dixie.”
The Thieving Bears, however large they seemed, gave the impression of
being nearly weightless. They had to be nearly weightless to glide on the
wind the way they did. They seemed to be mostly—well, it wasn't hair and it
wasn't feathers—they seemed to be mostly made out of a fluffy and deep-
piled covering with not much body inside it.
"Come, come, somebody come!" Selma was still calling in her rattling
voice. "Dixie is dead.”
The bears had to be ninety percent fluffy covering and no more than ten
percent body. Otherwise, big as they seemed, they couldn't have gotten
through some of the holes that they did go through.
“Horribly, horribly dead,” Selma was chanting in a little-girl singsong
voice. “Horribly, horribly dead. Oh please, somebody come and help me look
at her. I can hardly manage to look at her all by myself.”
Dead Dixie Late-Lark was an exact life-sized replica of her own many
times-transfixed fetish doll. Her throat was just as flamboyantly and terribly
cut as the doll's had been. The same thorns and pins and needles ran through
her, but now they were meter-long thorns and two-meter-long needles. And
her mouth was very wide open, as had been that of the doll; and Dixie was
likewise screaming horribly and silently.
And a tittering, a giggling in the Thieving Bears' fashion, was coming
from her silently screaming mouth and also from her laid-open throat. How
ghastly!
The horror was broken a bit, or diverted into a wondering exasperation, by
Benny Crix-Crannon's voice booming, "Here's another one of them. This
one's better done. It's good!”
Yes, it was another horribly dead Dixie Late-Lark, with her throat cut even
more savagely, with her poor body transfixed with even longer thorns and
needles, with the tittering and giggling from her wide-open and silently
screaming mouth even more disconcerting.
In all, they found seven life-sized versions of Dixie Late-Lark horribly and
ritually murdered. Then all seven of them jumped up, turned into rather
young Thieving Bears, and ran away tittering. And the very stones of that
planet seemed to join in that tittering and giggling.
But where was Dixie Late-Lark herself? Was that not a pertinent question?
More pertinent questions may have been: why did all the explorers stop
wondering what had happened to their colleague Dixie Late-Lark? And why
did they now feel that her disappearance was unimportant?
"
"I have lost my judgment,” George Mahoon lamented. “I've still got most of
the pieces of things in my mind, but I can no longer put them together.
Putting things together is what judgment is. One of you others will have to
take over the captaincy of this expedition."
"Oh, bother the captaincy!” Gladys Marclair rejected it. "Expeditions
would be better without captains anyhow. And you can't lose something that
you never had, George. Let's play ‘Ask the Question' with this situation. And
let's wonder why no bunch, coming here, has played it before. This is an
Earth-sized planet and remarkably monotonous. On its look-alike continents,
there are hundreds and thousands of little low plains or meadows comparable
to this Plain of the Old Spaceships. Why have all the expeditions to this
world, from that of John Chancel to our own, landed here within one
thousand meters of each other? Instructions for exploration landing sites have
always been 'Random selection, tempered with intelligence.' And another
instruction has been 'Examine new ground wherever possible.' For whose
convenience have we all landed in this one place? Oh, your diminished
judgment, George! Probably somebody has been eating the hippo out of your
hippocampus (I've always believed that the 'little hype' is the center of the
judgment as well as of the memory), so now you're not as well hyped as you
were. What if hardly any of the area of this planet has been checked out?”
“Oh, we made sixteen scanning circuits of Thieving Bear Planet before we
landed,” George Mahoon said. “Sixteen circuits will give a very good
recorded sample. And some of the previous expeditions made the full sixty-
four scanning circuits, and the full scan doesn't miss much."
“Do we believe that the Thieving Bears are to be found in all parts of this
planet, George?” Selma Last-Rose asked.
“I don't know. Do we believe it, Benny?”
"Oh no. The Thieving Bears are strictly small-species and small-area
creatures. Their crankinesses as well as their brilliancies indicate that they
have far too small a gene-pool. They have to stay close together in a small
area to keep warm' in the special (of a species) identity-survival sense."
“As to myself, I've lost more than my judgment,” Luke Fronsa mourned.
“I've lost all my ideas, and all that I have left now are notions. Somebody is
eating all my ideas right out of my head and leaving only the hulls of them.
Did you know that notions are only the shells or hulls of ideas after the meat
is eaten out of them?”
The bears were toothless, and they were playful. Sometimes they came
gliding in on the air, and they might be practically invisible when the light
was in their favor. They came gliding in or ambling in, and they tagged the
people gently as a breath. But whenever they touched the people, however
briefly or lightly, they left what seemed to be very small entering marks. And
they also left a redness, like the stings of nettles. One of the explorers (no
matter which one; they had begun to run together, even in their own regard)
said that the Thieving Bears were really a species of giant insects, insects
with strange appetites and always hungry.
*
Seven days and nights went by very rapidly. It was a giddy world in this
respect, fast-spinning: for seven days and nights on Thieving Bear Planet
were the equivalent of only about eighteen hours on Old Earth or sixteen
hours on Astrobe. And the fast-spin did make a difference on Thieving Bear.
It was because of the fast-spin that there were no large treelike plants, not
even any very large bushes. There were small bushes, and there was the non-
gramineous grass.
a
2.
People without an accompaniment of ghosts are a deprived
people. They will descend to almost any depth of "oriental”
cultishness or modish superstition or silliness or astrological
depravity to hide the fact that they have lost their ghosts.
Ghosts without an accompaniment or “neighborness” of
people are similarly deprived, and they will cast themselves into
the most bizarre roles or forms to try to create a company for
themselves.
Both of these conditions are unhealthy.
-Terrance Taibhse, Introduction to Ghost Stories of Sector 24
The storminess of Thieving Bear Planet wouldn't have permitted any
botanical constructs taller than small bushes. And the fast-spin of Thieving
Bear compelled certain surface conditions for that world. On most worlds, the
hills go up. On Thieving Bear Planet, the hills went down.
The upper levels of all the continents of Thieving Bear were flat and lush,
and sometimes they were swept by violent winds. And down from them, the
hills ran to the sheltered plains or meadows or circle-valleys (such as was the
Plain of the Old Spaceships), and on these lower levels the winds were less
violent.
Two of the seven short nights just past had been "electric nights," and the
ghosts walked on electric nights. The electric nights were highlighted
(literally) by massive thunderstorms and plasmal displays. (The odds are that
these storms are more violent than the storms where you come from.) The
lightning piled up on the high places, roaring like lazaruslions. Then it rolled
down the hills like waterfalls and formed hot and spitting pools on the lower
plains and meadows.
The ghosts were always there, but some of them were ordinarily like
empty balloons. On the electric nights, they filled up with lightning and
manifested themselves. But others of the ghosts were always low-key, living
out their endless nights and days till they would finally fade away after a long
era. One of the ghosts was that of John Chancel, one of the earlier visitors to
Thieving Bear Planet, usually called the “discoverer” of Thieving Bear, but
now he said that this wasn't true. During the second of the electric nights,
Chancel's ghost sat in the cockpit room of the ship with the explorers and
lovingly handled the eight hundred knobs, wheels, levers, push buttons,
keyboards, and voice boxes that commanded the ship. The ships hadn't been
so sophisticated in his day.
“I catch onto all the new and enjoyable advances in ship control quicker
than ‘he' would,” Chancel's ghost spoke softly. “Oh, he has the physical
brains with him, most of them; but I have the intuition. And he, we, were
never very good on brains anyhow. We had the mystique and the personality,
we had the intuition, we guessed a lot, and we faked a lot. But we were never
a well-linked personality."
“Just how does one become a ghost?” Gladys Marclair asked. “Besides
dying, I mean, is there any way to bring it about?”
"It happens, in many cases, long before death. I was his ghost here for
twenty years (Earth years) before Chancel died elsewhere. He left his (my)
>
a
ghost here on his second landing. He came back here for me several times
after that, but I wouldn't rejoin him or go away with him. He had become
quite cranky in his ways, and I in mine. There would have been everlasting
conflict if we had joined. But it was also psychic disaster (more for him than
for me) for us to be separated.
“It's not at all rare for a living person to be separated from his ghost. I see
that two of you six have become separated from your own ghosts, and none
of you can guess which two of you it is. On Thieving Bear, the conditions
seem to be favorable for these split-ups. It leaves a great hunger (yes, a
physical hunger) in the ghosts who are left behind. But each planet has its
own ghostliness that is different from that of other places. Even Old Earth has
remnants and tatters of ghostliness, and it isn't a hungry world. As a prophet
said, 'Happy the world that has iron meadows and rich essences on which the
spirits may feed, and then go to sleep.' But we spirits are most often sleepless
here."
"What happened to Dixie Late-Lark?” Gladys Marclair asked this pleasant
ghost.
“Oh, she's a ghost of a different sort. There never was any Dixie Late-
Lark as a person. There were only the six of you who arrived here. Dixie was
your esprit de group, your group effigy, and also a manifestation of your
'goofiness syndrome.' But we made her visible to you for the first time. And
you recognized her and accepted her in your unthinking way. This
‘unthinking way' has become part of the environment of Thieving Bear
Planet. She was the toothsome imaginative essence of all of you, the
capriciousness or coltishness of you, and that made her very appetizing. We
love essence. It's so concentrated.”
"Why did you make her visible?” Selma asked.
“Because we like to see what we're eating.”
"Who or what are the Thieving Bears?” Luke Fronsa asked Chancel's
ghost.
“Oh, they're a sort of tumbleweed, a sort of nettle. Ghosts use them to get
around in some of the time; so I myself am often a Thieving Bear. It is only
on the electric nights that we can inflate ourselves with enough plasm to look
like ourselves. We walk here a lot because we are always hungry and restless.
Ghosts in places that are richer in organics and metals and minerals stay well
fed by a sort of osmosis, so they walk and stir very little. They sleep their
"
decades and centuries away. Notice it sometimes that active ghosts are only
to be found in deprived regions. One of my counterparts has hardly stirred in
a hundred years. I can feel my counterparts, but there's not much of them to
feel.”
"Where do the little Thieving Bears come from?”
“From a very early landing, perhaps the earliest, for they were here when I
arrived. It was an ill-advised settlement expedition of men, women, and
children. Then all died of starvation, not knowing how to turn the lush grass
into food. They were the first of the hungry ghosts. It was their crying hunger
that has drawn all the ships to land in this one place. 'Come let us eat you' is
their cry, and it is still a most passionate cry.”
"You spoke of your counterparts' a moment ago," George Mahoon said.
“Did John Chancel generate more ghosts than one? Is he himself restless and
hungry?”
“Oh, I myself (the central John Chancel) have gone to my glory. But all of
us great ones leave multiple ghosts behind us. He (I) left at least two others
besides myself. We have a sort of awareness of each other, a loose feeling.
He had real greatness (unlikely as it seems), and I didn't. And yet this is the
paradox: he saw himself entirely from the outside, and he loved what he saw;
I saw us from the inside, and I wasn't impressed. And we were not the first
man on as many planets as is claimed for us. We were not the first man here.
There were already Thieving Bears here when we came, ghosts of earlier
explorers. But John Chancel had the greatness; and the earlier explorers had it
not. So Chancel was credited with many first landings.
“Good luck to you, ladies and gentlemen, when you lift off in your capsule
this electric morning. There are several entries that you must make in your
log immediately after lift-off, or you will forget them and never make them at
all. And you will have to make these entries in something other than ink.”
"Why should we lift off in our capsule?” Elton Fad asked. “We use the
capsule only when the ship is inoperative.”
"It's inoperative now and forever,” the ghost of John Chancel said. "Well,
it's a good ship and it eased the hunger of a lot of us. You'd better lift off in
a
the capsule as soon as possible now. We try to play fair, but we'll be feeding
on it very soon if it's still here.”
That John Chancel was a nice fellow, even in his fading ghost form.
>
* * *
But a much more violent ghost (right at that electric dawn after the second
electric night) was the ghost of Manbreaker Crag. After the second of the
electric nights had ended, Manbreaker decided to remain apparent out of
sheer stubbornness. They had all been feeling the powerful presence of this
Manbreaker Crag for some time.
"I'm the only one here of any moment or weight," Manbreaker's ghost
spoke in a rough sort of roar. “I'm not a person to crawl into pieces of nettle
or tumbleweed or any weeds except my own mortal weeds. I'm not one to
take on the form of a cutie giggling bear or other toy. I am not a ghost, nor
any part of a ghost story. Ghost stories are for children and cutie bears. I am a
simple dead man who is restless and hungry on this mineral-poor world. On
electric nights, I go get my own body where I keep it. I enter it and I inflate it
with the crackling lightning and the electricity that has gathered here. I'm a
hungry dead man with a dead man's temper. Don't mess with me!"
“Don't mess with us, fellow," George Mahoon spoke sharply. “Our ship
seems to be in a very weakened condition and we have to be getting out of
here quickly. Stay out of the way, grave-rot oaf, and be quiet. Elton, go
sharpen this, and then bring it back to me along with a heavy sledgehammer.
I think I know how to deal with hungry dead men.”
George Mahoon handed a thick and heavy hardwood dowel pin to Elton
Fad. It was about the length and heft of a baseball bat.
“The other ones, the real ghosts, which is to say the real unreal ones, have
their little self-saving fables that they recite when they feed on people and the
possessions of people," the hungry, long-dead man, Manbreaker Crag,
roared. The only speaking voice he possessed was this sort of dogged roar.
“They say, “We do not steal important things out of your minds. We steal
only funny-shaped, trifling things. Serious people like you are better off
without them. Our gain is your gain.' That is what they are telling you, but
they lie. What we eat out of your minds are the most serious things that your
minds are capable of holding. What we steal and eat out of your bodies are
the tastiest things in your bodies. We come to table on you, and we feast on
you. What we eat out of your ships and your stores are the most nourishing
and sophisticated things you have brought, wotto metal, data gelatin,
electronic reta, codified memories and processes. We eat these things because
we are hungry. And I eat them more ravenously than do any of the others. I
eat the essence of minds and leave gibbering idiocy in its place. I eat the
bodies of whole people where they stand.”
"Is everything possible transferred from the ship to the capsule?” big
George Mahoon asked his party.
"It is," several of them answered.
"I will eat the essence of your capsule-boat just as all of us on Thieving
Bear have eaten the essence of your ship,” dead Manbreaker Crag roared.
"Is it sharpened?” Mahoon asked as he took the thick hardwood dowel
from the returning Elton Fad.
“It is sharpened,” Elton said, “but something has gone wrong with it. It
loses weight as I stand here. They feed across short distances.”
"Scrawny ship captain, I think I'll eat you as you stand there," dead
Manbreaker roared at Captain Mahoon. “You'd make a big bite, but I'll eat
you."
Big George Mahoon felled bigger dead-man Manbreaker Crag with a
powerful blow to his dead face. Then he put the point of the sharpened dowel
pin (“Yes, Elton, I believe that he ate the heart out of it, but how could it have
been prevented?” Mahoon asked) to the region of the heart of Manbreaker
and struck the pin a heavy blow with the big sledgehammer. But the wooden
pin or stake came apart into weak splinters and pieces of worm-eaten (or
zombie-eaten) wood.
“Ah well, we'll have to leave him as he is,” Mahoon said. “I don't know
any other way to kill a man who's already dead.”
The six explorers got into the capsule-boat then and lifted off. They looked
down on the ship they had left behind them then, and it crumbled down and
became a part of its own outline and schematic. It became one more of the
token spaceships that formed that part-circle that gave the name Plain of the
Old Spaceships to that curious site. Those drawn outlines of the old
spaceships, they were the old spaceships. There must have been a lot of good
eating in each of them, though.
“To the log!” George Mahoon howled. “I feel it all slipping out of my
memory so fast! Each one of us take a long log page and write as rapidly as
a
possible. Get it down, before we lose it as earlier explorers lost it.”
“No use lamenting that there is no ‘ink’ in any stylus or pen or log pencil
laid out or still boxed,” Selma Last-Rose rattled. “No use lamenting that even
the electronic ink is eaten out of every recorder and that the remembering
jelly is eaten out of every memory pot. The hungers of the Thieving Bears are
unaccountable. All the earlier logs had a few words written in something
other than ink. If we all write as fast as we can, we may get more than a few
words down. We may even get the explanation down onto the log sheets
before it fades completely from our minds."
They all opened their veins and wrote on the long log sheets in their own
blood. It was sticky going. So many free-flowing things had been eaten out of
their blood that it was now viscous and thick. But they made it do. They got
the explanation all down, even though (when it was shown to them later) they
hardly remembered writing it.
A simple explanation had been needed for the conditions on Thieving Bear
Planet. It was needed because, as the great Reginald Hot had once phrased it,
“Anomalies are messy.”
And that simple explanation is herewith given, more or less as it was
written in thick blood in the log book.
Days of Grass, Days of
Straw
Introduction by Gary K. Wolfe
“Days of Grass, Days of Straw” first appeared in New Dimensions 3, the third
in a series of rather adventurous anthologies edited by Robert Silverberg
throughout the 1970s. Coming close on the heels of science fiction's
controversial New Wave, Silverberg's series was clearly out to recognize
new voices and new literary approaches to science fiction and fantasy, and
Lafferty had stories in each of the first four volumes. The volume with “Days
of Grass, Days of Straw" also included two stories which would become
widely reprinted, Hugo Award-winning classics, Ursula K. Le Guin's "The
Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas” and James Tiptree, Jr.'s “The Girl
Who Was Plugged In” (Tiptree was of course later revealed to be a
pseudonym of Alice Sheldon). Each of those would be reprinted dozens of
times in the coming decades, but Lafferty's story—despite now being
regarded as one of his best and most strikingly visionary by aficionados-
was reprinted only in a few of his own collections. It did, however, get
translated into Dutch and inspired the 2004 song Dagen van gras, dagen van
stro (a literal translation of the title) by the performer Spinvis (Erik de Jong).
Spinvis's lyrics have only an elliptical connection with Lafferty's story, but
the point is that Lafferty's best stories, even when not widely familiar,
manage to find their way into unexpected corners of the culture and leave
traces there.
The story itself is one that some readers find challenging—within the first
two lines, a city street morphs into a road, then a trail, then a mere path, and
"
our protagonist Christopher finds himself in a pre-urban, pre-industrial
landscape with features resembling Native American legends and Oklahoma
tall tales. Even his own name doesn't ring true, and half-recognized people
and places never quite coalesce into a more traditionally realized fantasy
landscape. Yet he feels revived and invigorated, as though the world had
been “pumped full of new juice.” “Things were mighty odd here,” he notices
in an observation that may well sound familiar to anyone reading a Lafferty
story for the first time. “There was just a little bit of something wrong about
things.”
We eventually learn that Christopher hasn't crossed into a fantasy world at
all, but rather to a different kind of time—a “day of grass," one of the
"overflowing and special days apart from the regular days,” which are called
days of straw. Although these special days are “Days out of Count” in terms
of history and the calendar, they are earned at great cost by prophets and
"prayer-men," who wrestle with God to gain them. Called by different names
in different cultures, these "rich days, full of joy and death, bubbling with
ecstasy and blood” may include entire seasons, and although “nobody has
direct memory of being in them or living in them,” we give them pallid
names like Indian Summer. Lafferty's stunning vision of a more vital and
perhaps more dangerous world just beyond the one we know, but somehow
folded into it, is one of his most haunting recurrent themes.
Days of Grass, Days of
Straw
1.
Fog in the corner and fog in his head:
Gray day broken and bleeding red.
-Henry Drumhead, Ballads
Christopher Foxx was walking down a city street. No, it was a city road. It
was really a city trail or path. He was walking in a fog, but the fog wasn't in
the air or the ambient: it was in his head. Things were mighty odd here. There
was just a little bit of something wrong about things.
Oceans of grass for one instance. Should a large and busy city (and this
was clearly that) have blue-green grass belly-high in its main street? Things
hardly remembered: echoes and shadows, or were they the strong sounds and
things themselves? Christopher felt as though his eyeballs had been cleaned
with a magic cleaner, as though he were blessed with new sensing in ears and
nose, as though he went with a restored body and was breathing a new sort of
air. It was very pleasant, but it was puzzling. How had the world been
pumped full of new juice?
Christopher couldn't recall what day it was; he certainly didn't know what
hour it was. It was a gray day, but there was no dullness in that gray. It was
shimmering pearl-gray, of a color bounced back by shimmering water and
shimmering air. It was a crimson-edged day, like a gray squirrel shot and
bleeding redly from the inside and around the edges. Yes, there was the
pleasant touch of death on things, gushing death and gushing life.
Christopher's own name didn't sound right to him. He didn't know what
town he was in. Indeed he'd never before seen a town with all the storefronts
flapping in the wind like that. Ah, they'd curl and bend, but they wouldn't
break. A town made of painted buckskin, and yet it was more real than towns
made of stone and concrete.
He saw persons he almost knew. He started to speak and only sputtered.
Well, he'd get a newspaper then; they sometimes gave information. He
reached in his pocket for a coin, and discovered that he didn't have regular
pockets. He found a little leather pouch stuck in his belt. What's this? What
else was stuck in his belt? It was a breechclout with the ends fore and aft
passing under his belt. Instead of pants he had a pair of leggings and a
breechclout, three-piece pants. Oh, oh, what else?
Oh, he wore a shirt that seemed to be leather of some sort. He wore soft
shoes that were softer than slippers. He was hatless, and his hair came
forward over his shoulders in two tight long braids. He had dressed casually
before, but he didn't remember ever dressing like this. How were the rest of
the people dressed? No two alike, really, no two alike.
But he did bring a coin out of that leather pouch that was stuck in his belt.
A strange coin. It wasn't metal: it was made of stone, and made roughly. On
the face of it was the head and forequarters of a buffalo. On the reverse side
was the rump of a buffalo. The words on the obverse of it read WORTH
ONE BUFFALO, and on the reverse they read MAYBE A LITTLE BIT
LESS.
“And where do I put a coin in this contraption?” Christopher asked
himself angrily and loudly. A hand extended itself, and Christopher put the
coin in the hand. The hand belonged to an old wrinkled brown man, swathed
in robes and folds of blackened leather, and sitting in the dust.
The old man gave Christopher a newspaper, or gave him something
anyhow. It was on leather that was almost board-stiff. It was illustrated, it
was printed in a variety of hands; and here and there it had a little hair
growing out of it as though its leather were imperfectly scraped.
“Wait, your change,” the old brown man said. He gave Christopher seven
small coins. These were neither metal nor stone: they were clay baked in the
sun. The obverse of each was the head and fore of a badger, puffed and
bristled and hissing in high defense. And the reverse was the reared rump of
the same badger in embattled clawed stance.
“Price go down a little but not a whole badger,” the old man said. “Take
three puffs. It's close as I can get to even change.” Wondering at himself,
Christopher took three strong rich smoky puffs from the old pipe of the old
man. He felt that he had received full value then. It was about all that he felt
satisfied with. But is it wrong to feel unsatisfied, which is unsated?
Christopher thought about it.
He went over and sat on a bale of rags outside the shop with the sign HOT
ROAST DOG FOR SALE OR GIVE. The bale of rags seemed somehow
lively; it was as if there was no division between the animate and the
inanimate this day. He tried to make something out of the strange newspaper
or the strange day, or the newly strange man who was apparently himself.
Oh, the newspaper was interesting. It could be read one way or another; by
picture, by stylized pictograph, by various writings and printings. Here were
anecdotes; wooly, horny, bottomlessly funny anecdotes: and they were about
people that Christopher knew, or almost knew. And all the people passing by
(Christopher realized it with a chuckling gasp) were also people that he knew
or almost knew. Well, what made them so different then? They looked like
familiar people, they smelled like familiar people (which the familiar people
erstwhile had not done), they had the familiar name that came almost to the
edge of the tongue.
“But what town is this? What day is this? What is the context?”
Christopher wailed out loud. “Why is everything so strange?”
"Kit-Fox, you call me?” Strange Buffalo boomed at him. Strange Buffalo
was a big and boisterous man and he had always been a good friend of
Christopher. He had? Then why did he look so different? And why was his
real name, or his other name, now unremembered?
“Will the buffalo go to war, do you think, Kit-Fox?" Strange Buffalo
asked him. “Do you believe that the two great herds of them will go to war?
They come near to each other now and they swear that neither will give
way.”
“No, there will be only the pushing and goring of a few thousand bulls, not
much else,” Christopher said. “The buffalo simply haven't the basis for a real
war." He was surprised at his own knowledge of the subject.
"But the buffalo have human advisers now,” Strange Buffalo said. “It
began with the betting, of course, but now we can see that there is real cause
a
>
a
of conflict on both sides. I dabble in this myself and have some good ideas.
We are tying spear-shafts to the horns of some of the big bulls and teaching
them to use them. And we're setting up big bows and teaching them to bend
them with their great strength, but they haven't any accuracy at all.”
“No, I don't believe they were meant to have a real war. It's a wonderful
dust they raise, though, when they all come together. It makes you glad to be
alive. And the thunder of their millions of hoofs!" (There was the distant
sound of morning thunder.) “Or is that a thundering in the mountains?" Kit-
Fox-ah, Christopher was asking.
"Well, there is quite a clatter in the mountains this morning, Kit,” Strange
Buffalo was saying in happy admiration. “The deep days, the grass days like
this one aren't come by easily. It's a wonder the mountains aren't knocked to
pieces when the big prophets pray so noisily and wrestle so strong. But, as
the good skin says, we must work out our salvation in fear and thundering."
"Is it not 'In fear and trembling'?" Christopher asked as he lounged on the
lively bale of rags.
“No, Kit-Fox, no!” Strange Buffalo pealed at him. “That's the kind of
thing they say during the straw days; not here, not now. In the Cahooche
shadow-writing it says ‘In fear and chuckling,' but the Cahooche words for
thunder and chuckling are almost the same. On some of the Kiowa antelope-
skin drawings, 'In scare-shaking and in laughter-shaking.' I like that. I wish I
could pray and wrestle as wooly and horny as the big ones do. Then I'd get to
be a prophet on the mountain also, and I'd bring in more days of grass. Yes,
and days of mesquite also."
“The mountain is a funny one this morning, Strange Buffalo. It doesn't
reach clear down to the ground," Christopher said. “There's a great space
between, and there are eagles flying underneath it.”
“Ah, it'll fall back after a while, Kit-Fox, when they have won or lost the
wrestling for the day; after they have generated sufficient juice for this day,
for I see that they have already won it and it will be a day of grass. Let's go
have a rack of roast dog and a gourd of choc beer,” Strange Buffalo
proposed.
“In a minute, Strange Buffalo. I am in the middle of a puzzle and I have
this fog in my head. What day is this?"
"It's one of the days of grass, Kit-Fox. I just told you that.”
“But which one, Strange Buffalo? And what, really, are ‘days of grass'?”
“I believe that it is the second Monday of Indian Summer, Kit-Fox,"
Strange Buffalo was saying as he gave the matter his thought and attention.
“Or it may be the first Monday of Blue-Goose Autumn. We're not sure,
though, that it is a Monday. It sounds and tastes more like a Thursday or an
aleikaday.”
“It sure does,” Christopher—ah, Kit-Fox agreed.
A laughing, dying man was carried past by four hale men. This fortunate one
had been smashed by bear or rolled on by horse or gored by buffalo, and the
big red blood in him was all running out. "It works,” the happy dying man
cried out. “It works. I got a little too close to him and he ripped me to pieces,
but it works. We are really teaching those big bulls to use the spears lashed to
their horns. Others will carry on the work and the fun. I bet that I've had it.”
“A little blood to bless me!" Strange Buffalo cried out, and the dying man
splashed him with the rich and rigorous blood.
"For me also," Kit-Fox begged, and the dying man smeared him with
blood on the brow and breast and shoulders and loins. Two other friends,
Conquering Sharp-Leaf and Adoration on the Mountain, came and were
blessed with the blood. Then the man died and was dead.
“There is nothing like the fine rich blood to make a grass day sing in your
head and in your body,” Strange Buffalo exulted. “On the straw days they try
to hide the blood or they bleed in a dark corner.”
(What was all this about the grass days and the straw days? There was
now a sordid dull-dream quality, a day-of-straw quality that kept trying to
push itself in. "For a little while,” it begged, "to reestablish rigor and rule and
reason for just a little while.” “Go away,” said the day-of-grass quality. “The
wrestle was won this morning, and this is a day out of the count.”)
Kit-Fox and Strange Buffalo went in, past the booths and work areas of
the coin-makers, past the stands of the eaglewing-bone-whistle makers, and
into the shop which had roast dog for sale or give. Strange Buffalo had a
shoulder of dog and Kit-Fox had a rack of ribs. There was fried bread also,
and hominy and pumpkin. There was choc beer dipped with gourd dippers
out of a huge crock. Thousands of people were there. It was crowded and it
was supposed to be. The man named Mountain twinkled in the air. Why had
a
"
a
they not noticed that about him before? Folks rolled up the walls and tied them. Now the strong smoke and savor could visit all the places, and the folks in every shop could see into every other shop. It was full morning and beginning to get warm. “But I still want to know the date,” Kit-Fox insisted, not quite converted to the day of grass, not quite clear of the head-fog that accompanies the sullen burning of the straw days. “What newspaper is this that doesn’t have a date? I want a date!” “Look at it. It tells,” said Strange Buffalo. “You want a date, honey?” the top of the newspaper writhed in sudden flickering of day-fire print. “Phone 582-8316 and I give you a real date.” Then the day-fire print was gone. “I hope I can remember that number,” Kit-Fox said anxiously. “Strange Buffalo, where is there a telephone exchange?” “They are the same and single and right outside past the booths,” Strange Buffalo said. “You were sitting upon it when I came upon you. And you, you old straw-head, you thought it was a bale of rags.” Kit-Fox went outside, past the booths of the stone-buffalocoin makers and the clay-badger-coin makers, past the tents of the porcupine-quill dealers, to what he had thought was a bale of rags, a lively bale of rags as he now remembered it. Well, it was an ample lady in her glad rags and she was the telephone exchange lying there in the grass. “I want to call number 582-8316,” Kit-Fox said uneasily. “Here are a handful of dice,” the glad-rags lady told him. “Arrange them here in the short grass and make any number you want.” “But proper dice have numbers only to six,” Kit-Fox protested, “and some of the numbers are higher.” “Those are improper dice, they are crooked dice,” the lady said. “They have numbers more than six and numbers less than one. Number out your telephone number in the short grass with them.” “Are you sure this is the way to dial a number?” Kit-Fox asked. “Sure I’m not sure,” the lady said. “If you know a better way, do it that way. Worth a try, kid, worth a try.” Kit-Fox numbered out his numbers in the short grass. “Now what do I do?” he asked. “Oh, talk into the telephone here.”
“That buckskin bag is a telephone?” “Try it, try it. Drop a badger coin in and try it.” Kit-Fox dropped the coin into the telephone. “Hello, hello,” he said. “Hello, hello,” the lady answered. “That’s my number you called. You want a date, I wait for you awhile. Believe me, I get pretty tired of waiting pretty soon.” “I don’t think this is a telephone exchange at all,” Kit-Fox grumbled. “How else I can get guys so easy to drop badger-coins in a buckskin bag,” the lady said. “Come along, lover man, we will have a grand time this day.” The lady was full-bodied and jolly. Kit-Fox remembered her from somewhere. “Who are you?” he asked her. “I’m your wife in the straw days,” she said, “but this is a grass day. They’re harder to find, but they’re more fun when you find one. They have something to do with grandfather’s brother and that wrestling of his.” “Days of grass, days of straw,” Kit-Fox said as he embraced the lady passionately. “How about a hay day?” “You mean a heyday? Those are special. We hope to make them more often, if only the wrestle is better. They’re fuller of juice than the grass days even. We try to make one now.” They made a heyday together (together with a whole nation of people); and it went on and on. Day-Torch (that was the lady in the glad rags, the lady who was Kit-Fox’s wife during the straw days) bought an eagle-wing-bone whistle from a dealer, and she whistled happy haunting tunes on it. The people followed Kit-Fox and Day-Torch out of town, out to the oceans of buffalo grass and blue-stem grass. They torched everything that was dry and set the blue-black smoke to rolling. But the fundamental earth was too green to burn. All mounted horses and took lances. They went out after buffalo. Word was brought to them that some of the newly armed buffalo bulls wanted to schedule battle with them. And the battle was a good one, with gushing blood and broken-open bodies, and many on each side were killed. Strange Buffalo was killed. That big boisterous man died with a happy whoop. “Strange Buffalo, indeed,” one of the buffalo bulls said. “He looks like a man to me.”
When the ground there had become too soggy and mired in blood, they adjourned the battle till the next day of grass, or the one after that. Bloody battles are fine, but who wants to spend a whole day on one? There are other things. Kit-Fox and Day-Torch and a number of other folks went to higher ground. There was a roaring river on the higher ground, the biggest river ever and the loudest. “Oh be quiet,” Day-Torch said. “You’ve got the tune wrong.” The great river ceased to roar. Day-Torch whistled the right tune on the eagle-wing- bone whistle. Then the river resumed its roaring, but in this right tune now. This mightiest of all rivers was named Cottonwood Creek. Henry Drumhead added his beat to the tune. Then the folks had a rain dance till the sharp rain came down and drenched them through. They had a sun dance then, till the sun dried up the mud and began to burn the hides of the people. They had a cloud dance then. They had an antelope dance till enough antelope came to provide a slaughter and a feast. They had a pit dance, a fire dance, a snake dance, and an ashes dance: the ashes from pecan wood and hickory wood are a better condiment than salt to go with roast antelope. They had a feast dance. Then (after a while) a shakedown dance. They had a thunder dance and a mountain dance. Say, it is spooky to come to the foot of the mountain itself and see the great gap between it and the ground! Rocks and boulders fell off of the bottom of the mountain and killed many of the people below. And, from the mountain itself, a broken, bloody, and headless torso fell down to the earth. Helen Hightower—ah, that is to say the glad-rag lady Day-Torch—set up a rakish screaming, “The head, the head, somebody forgot the head!” There was a thunderous grumbling, a mountain-shaking irritation, but the bloody head did come down and smash itself like a bursting pumpkin on the earth. “A lot of times they forget to throw the head down if you don’t remind them,” Day-Torch said. The meaning of the fallen torso and head was that there was now one less prophet or wrestler on the mountain; that there was now an opportunity for one more man to ascend to glory and death. Several of the men attempted it by various devices, by piling cairns of stones to climb upon, by leaping into the air to try to grab one of the dangling
roots of the mountain, by hurling lances with trailing lianas to fasten quivering in the bottom of the mountain. They played it out in the garish day there where all the colors were so bright that they ached. Many of the men fell to their deaths, but one ascended. There is always one who is able to ascend to the great wrestle when there is an empty place to receive him. And the one who ascended was—no, no, you’ll not have his name from us yet. Something was mighty odd here. There was just a little bit of something right about things. 2. Draftsman, draftsman, what do you draw? Dog days, draggy days, days of straw. —Ballads, Henry Drumhead 3. Indian Summer. A period of warm or mild weather late in autumn or in early winter. —Webster’s Collegiate
So Webster’s Collegiate defines it, but Webster’s hasn’t the humility ever to admit that it doesn’t know the meaning of a word or phrase. And it doesn’t know the meaning of this one. There are intervals, days, hours, minutes that are not remembered directly by anyone. They do not count in the totality of passing time. It is only by the most sophisticated methods that even the existence of these intervals may be shown. There are whole seasons, in addition to the four regular seasons that are supposed to constitute the year. Nobody knows where they fit in, there being no room for them anywhere in the year; nobody has direct memory of being in them or living in them. Yet, somehow, they have names that have escaped these obliterations. The name of one of the misfit seasons is Indian Summer. (“Why can’t the Indians have their summer in the summertime like the rest of us?” comes a high voice with a trace of annoyance. Not a high-pitched voice: a high voice.)
But all that is neither here nor there. It is yonder, and we will come to it.
Christopher Foxx was walking down a city street. Things were mighty even
here, mighty neat. There was just a little bit of something wrong about their
rightness.
The world was rubbed, scrubbed, and tubbed; it was shaved, paved, and
saved; it was neat, sweet, and effete. Ah, the latter was possibly what was
wrong with it, if anything could be wrong with perfection. The colors were
all flat (flat colors had been deemed best for nerves and such), and the sounds
were all muted. Christopher, for a moment, wished for a color that shrieked
and for a sound that blazed. He put the thought resolutely out of his head.
After all, he had for wife Helen Hightower, and he suffered much criticism
because of her gaudiness and exuberance.
Christopher took a paper from the slot on the corner, noted that it was a
day in May (he had a queer feeling that he had been uneasy about the date,
and yet all that registered with him was that it fell within a familiar month).
He entered the North Paragon Breakfast Club. It was there that the
Symposium would begin (it would last the whole day and into the night, and
be held at various sites) on the multiplex subject “Spatial and Temporal
Underlays to the Integrated World, with Insights as to Their Possible Reality
and Their Relationship to the World Unconscious and to the Therapeutic
Amnesia; with Consideration of the Necessity of Belief in Stratified Worlds,
and Explorations of the Orological Motif in Connection with the Apparent
Occurrence of Simultaneous Days.” It would have been an exciting subject if
Excitement had not become another of the muted things.
Buford Strange was already at the North Paragon, and with him were
Adrian Montaigne and Vincent Rue.
"I have already ordered for ourselves and for yourself, Christopher,"
Buford said. “It is sheldrake, and I hope that you like it. They will not prepare
it for fewer than four persons. 'We can't go around killing quarter ducks,
they say.”
“That is all right,” Christopher said meekly. He glanced at the other three
nervously. There was surely something familiar about them all.
Great blue mountain thunder! Why shouldn't there be! He had worked
>
with these men daily for several years. But, no, no, his edgy mind told him
that they were familiar in some other and more subtle way. He glanced at the
paper which he had taken from the corner slot outside. Something like quick
flame ran across the top of it and was gone too quickly to verify. But was it
possible that the flame had said “You want a date, honey? You phone” Of
course it was not possible. Clearly, at the top of the paper it was printed A
DAY IN MAY. Clearly? Was that clear enough for a date?
“What date is this?” Christopher asked the three of them.
"May the eighth, of course,” Adrian answered him. "You've got today's
Journal in your hand and still you ask?”
Well now it was printed clearly there, May 8, and there was no nonsense
about "a day in May"; still less was there anything like "You want a date,
honey?"
Some wild-looking children burst into the North Paragon Breakfast Club.
"Straw-Men! Straw-Men!” they cried at the four gentlemen there. "Straw-
Men! Straw-Men!” The children buffeted the four men a bit, did other
extravagant things that are since forgotten, and then they went out of the
Breakfast Club again: or at least they disappeared; they were no longer there.
"Why should they have done that?” Adrian asked, puzzled. “Why should
they have called us that, and done the other things?”
“Why should who have called us what?” Vincent asked, even more
puzzled.
“I don't know,” Adrian said dryly. “It seemed that someone was here and
said or did something."
"You're witless, Adrian," Vincent chided. "Nobody was here."
"Straw-Man,” Christopher Foxx said softly. “I remember the word now
and I couldn't remember it before. I woke up this morning trying to
remember it. It seemed to be the key to a dream that was slipping away in
spite of my trying to hang on to it. I have the key word now, but it fits
nothing. The dream is gone forever.”
"We will come back to this subject later in our discussions," Buford
Strange said. “I believe that your word ‘Straw-Man,’ Christopher, is a part of
the underlay, or perhaps of the overlay, that pertains to our world and our
study. There is a good chance that certain children, or perhaps dwarfs or
gnomes, entered here several moments ago. Did any of you notice them?”
"No," said Vincent Rue.
"No one entered," said Adrian Montaigne.
“No. I didn't see anyone,” said Christopher Foxx.
"Yet I believe that a group did come in,” Buford Strange continued
suavely. “It was a group unusual enough to be noticed. Then why didn't we
notice it? Or why did we forget, within a short moment, that we had seen it at
all? I believe it was because the group was in a different sort of day. I am
nearly sure that it is a group that lives in either St. Martin's Summer or in the
Kingfisher Days. Ah, here is the sheldrake ready with all the trimmings!
Drool and be happy. We shall never know such moment again."
It was a momentous fowl, no question of that. It was good, it was rich, it
was overflowing with juice. It was peer of the fowl that are found in the land
named St. Succulentus's Springtime. (What? What? There is a land named
that?)
The four noble men (they were ennobled by the circumstance) fell to
eating with what, in days of another sort, might almost be called gusto. It was
a royal bird and was basted with that concoction of burst fruits and crushed
nuts and peppers and ciders and holy oils and reindeer butter that is called-
(wait a bit)
“Do you know that the sheldrake is really a mysterious creature?” Buford
Strange asked as he ate noisily (nobody eats such royal fare in quiet). Buford
acted as if he knew a secret.
“It is not a mysterious creature at all,” Adrian countered (he knew it was,
though). “It is only the common European duck.”
"It is not only the common European duck," Buford said strongly. "In
other days it may be quite uncommon.”
"What are you saying, Buford?” Vincent Rue asked him. "In what other
days?"
"Oh, I believe, possibly, in what the Dutch call Kraanzomer, Crane-
Summer. Are we agreed that the other days, the days out of count, are topic
rather than temporal?”
"We are not even agreed that there are days out of count,” Christopher
objected.
“Drakes' teeth, by the way, while rare, are not unknown,” Adrian
Montaigne popped the statement out of his mouth as if in someone else's
voice. He seemed startled at his own words.
“Drake is really the same word as Drakos, a dragon,” Christopher Foxx
"
mumbled. “Ah, I was going to say something else but it is gone now.”
“Waiter, what is the name of the excellent stuff with which the drake is
basted and to which it is wedded?” Vincent Rue asked in happy wonder.
"Dragons' sauce," said the waiter.
"Well, just what is the mystery, the uncommonness of the sheldrake,
Buford?” Christopher asked him.
“I don't seem to remember," that man said. “Ah, let us start our discussion
with my, our, failure to remember such things. Vincent, did you not have a
short paper prepared on 'Amnesia, the Holes in the Pockets of the Seamless
Garment’?”
“I forget. Did I have such a paper prepared? I will look in my own
pockets.”
Meanwhile, back on the mountain, back on the thundering mountain there
were certain daring and comic persons rushing in and out and counting coup
on the Wrath of God. It is a dangerous game. These were the big prophets
who prayed so violently and sweated so bloodily and wrestled so strongly. It
was they who fought for the salving or the salvation of the days, in fear and
in chuckling, in scare-shaking and in laughter-shaking. The thundering
mountain was a funny one this morning. It didn't reach clear to the ground.
There was a great space between, and there were eagles flying under it. And
the day, the day, was it really the first Monday of Blue-Goose Autumn? Was
it really a Monday at all? Or was it a Thursday or an aleikaday?
It was like another morning of not long before. The eagles remember it;
the clouds remember it; the mountain wrestlers remember it dimly, though
some of the memory has been taken away from them.
Remember how it is written on the holy skins: “If you have faith you shall
say to the mountain 'Remove from here and cast thyself into the sea' and it
will do it.” Well, on that morning they had tried it. Several of the big
prophets and wrestlers tried it, for they did have faith. They groaned with
travail and joy, they strove mightily, and they did move the mountain and
make it cast itself into the sea.
But the thunders made the waters back off. The waters refused to accept or
to submerge the mountain. The prayer-men and wrestlers had sufficient faith,
but the ocean did not. Whoever had the last laugh on that holy morning?
The strivers were timeless, of the prime age, but they were often called the
“grandfathers” brothers' by the people. They were up there now, the great
prophets and prayer-men and wrestlers. One of these intrepid men was an
Indian and he was attempting to put the Indian Sign on God himself. God,
however, was like a mist and would not be signed.
“We will wrestle,” the Indian said to God in the mist, "we will wrestle to
see which of us shall be Lord for this day. I tell you it is not thick enough if
only the regular days flow. I hesitate to instruct you in your own business,
and yet someone must instruct you. There must be overflowing and special
days apart from the regular days. You have such days, I am sure of that, but
you keep them prisoned in a bag. It is necessary now that I wrest one of them
from you.”
They wrestled, inasmuch as a man slick with his own sweat and blood
may wrestle with a mist: and it seemed that the Indian won the lordship of a
day from God. “It will be a day of grass,” the Indian said. “It will be none of
your dry and juiceless days.” The Indian lay exhausted with his fingers
entwined in the won day: and the strength came back to him. “You make a
great thing about marking every sparrow's fall,” the Indian said then. “See
that you forget not to mark this day."
The thing that happened then was this: God marked the day for which they
had wrestled, but he marked it on a different holy skin in a different place,
not on the regular skin that lists the regular days. This act caused the wrested
day to be one of the Days out of Count.
Prophets, wrestlers, praying-men of other sorts were on the mountain also.
There were black men who sometimes strove for kaffir-corn days or ivory-
tree days. There were brown island men who wrestled for sailfish days or
wild-pig days. There were pinkish north-wood men who walked on pine
needles and balsam; there were gnarled men out of the swampy lands; there
were town men from the great towns. All of these strove with the Lord in fear
and in chuckling.
Some of these were beheaded and quartered, and the pieces of them were
flung down violently to earth: it is believed that there were certain qualities
lacking in these, or that their strength had finally come to an end. But the
others, the most of them, won great days from the Lord, Heydays, Halcyon or
Kingfisher Days, Maedchensommer Days, St. Garvais Days, Indian Summer
Days. These were all rich days, full of joy and death, bubbling with ecstasy
and blood. And yet all were marked on different of the holy skins and so they
became the Days out of Count.
*
ور
“Days out of the Count,” Buford Strange was saying, “It's an entrancing idea,
and we have almost proved it. Seasons out of the count! It's striking that the
word for putting a condiment on should be the same word as a division of the
year. Well, the seasons out of the count are all well seasoned and spiced.
There are whole multiplex layered eras out of the count. The ice ages are
such. I do not say 'were suchʼ; I say “are such.”
"But the ice ages are real, real, real,” Helen Hightower insisted. (Quite a
few long hours had passed in the discussions, and now Helen Hightower, the
wife of Christopher Foxx, was off her work at the telephone exchange and
had put on her glad rags and joined the scholars.)
“Certainly they are real, Helen,” Buford Strange said. “If only I were so
real! I believe that you remember them, or know them, more than most of us
do. You have a dangerously incomplete amnesia on so many things that I
wonder the thunder doesn't come and take you. But in the days and years and
centuries and eras of the straight count there are no ice ages.”
"Well then, how, for instance, would local dwellers account for terminal
moraines and glacial till generally?” asked Conquering Sharp-Leaf—ah,
Vincent Rue.
(They were at the University, in that cozy room in the psychology
department where Buford Strange usually held forth, the room that was just
below the special effects room of Professor Timacheff.)
“How did they account for such before the time of modern geology?”
Buford asked. “They didn't. There would be a new boulder one morning that
had not been there the day before. The sheep-herder of the place would say
that the moon had drawn it out of the ground, or that it had fallen from the
sky.”
"You're crazy, Buford,” Adrian Montaigne said with a certain affection.
"
“Why the ice ages then? Why should they have happened, even in times out of count? Why should they have left their footprints in the times within the count?” Adrian had very huge and powerful hands. Why had they not noticed this before? “I believe there was a dynasty of great and muscular prophets and ghost- wrestlers who wanted to call out the terrible days of Fimbul Winter,” Buford said in a hushed voice. “I don’t know why they wanted such things, or why they sweated blood and wrestled prodigies to obtain them. They were men, but they are remembered as the frost giants.” “Oh my grand, grand uncles!” Day-Torch—Helen Hightower, rather, cried out. “Days of snow! Days of ice! Millions of them!” “You are saying that certain archetypes—” Kit-Fox began. “Shook the pillars of Heaven till the snow and ice fell down for a million days, for a million days out of the count,” Buford Strange finished. “Strange Buffalo, ah, Buford, you are crazy,” Christopher Foxx chided much as Adrian had. Christopher was talking, but the queerly smiling Adrian had now become the presence in the room. Adrian had the curious under- rutile of the skin of one who has sweated blood in prayer and buffoonery and passion. Why had they not noticed that of him before? “I could almost believe that you were one of the great challengers yourself, Strange,” Christopher said to Buford, but he was looking at Adrian. “You strike me as with a lance, Kit,” Buford said sadly. “You uncover my mortification. For I failed. I don’t know when it was. It was on a day out of the count. I failed a year ago or ten thousand years ago. I could not make it among the great ones. I was not cast out to my death: I was never in. There was room for me, and an opportunity for the ascent, but I failed in nerve. And one who has aspired to be a champion or prophet cannot fall back to be an ordinary man. So I am less than that: I am short of manhood. But, sadly, I do remember and live in other sorts of days.” “I believe that the aberrant days are simultaneous with the prosaic days,” Adrian Montaigne mused. Adrian was quite a large man. Why had they not noticed that before? “No, no, they are not simultaneous,” Buford was correcting him. “There are the days out of the count and there are the days in the count. Those out of count are outside of time so they cannot be simultaneous with anything. You have to see it that way.”
“You see it your way and I’ll see it mine.” Adrian was stubborn. “Consider some of the aberrant times or countries: St. Garvais’ Springtime, St. Martin’s Summer (the saints in these names were mountain prophets and wrestlers, but some of them were not at all saintly in their violence), Midas March (the very rich need their special season also: it is said that, in their special month, they are superiorly endowed in all ways), Dog Days, Halcyon Days, Dragon Days, Harvest May (what in the world is harvested in May?), All-Hallow Summer, Days of Ivory, Days of Horn, Indian Summer, Wicklow Week, Apricot Autumn, Goose Summer, Giant-Stone Days, Day of the Crooked Mile, the season called Alcedonia by the Latins. I tell you that all these days are happening at the same time!” This man named Adoration on the Mountain, or rather Adrian Montaigne, had a reckless sort of transcendence about him now. “No, they do not all happen at the same time,” Strange Buffalo was saying, “for the aberrant days of them are not in time. They are places and not times.” “Are there no nighttime hours in the times out of time?” Vincent Rue asked. “No. Not in the same sense. They are in another province entirely,” Buford said. There was thunder in the special effects room of Professor Timacheff on the floor just above them, cheerful, almost vulgar thunder. Timacheff taught some sensational (sense response and also melodramatic) courses up there. But how did he get such special effects anyhow? “They do happen at the same time,” Adrian Mountain insisted, and he was laughing like boulders coming together. Quite a few things seemed to be happening to Adrian all at the same time. “They are all happening right now. I am sitting with you here this minute, but I am also on the mountain this minute. The thunder in the room above, it is real thunder, you know. And there is a deeper, more distant, more raffish thunder behind it which primitives call God’s-Laughter Thunder.” “This gets out of hand now,” Vincent Rue protested. “It is supposed to be a serious symposium on spatial and temporal underlays. Several of you have turned it into a silly place and a silly time. You are taking too anthropomorphic a view of all these things, including God. One does not really wrestle with God in a bush or a mist, or ride in wildly on a pony and
count coup on God. Even as an atheist I find these ideas distasteful.” “But we are anthropoi, men,” Adrian proclaimed. “What other view than an anthropomorphic view could we take? That we should play the God-game, that we should wrestle with a God-form and try to wrest lordship of days from him, that we should essay to count coup on God, I as a theist do not find at all distasteful. “Why! One of them is failing now! It happens so seldom. I wonder if I have a chance.” “Adrian, what are you talking about?” Vincent demanded. “How could you do it, Adrian, when I could not?” Buford Strange asked. “Remember me when you come to your place, Adrian,” Day-Torch cried. “Send me a day. Oh, send me a day-fire day.” “And me also, Adrian,” Kit-Fox begged. “I would love to do it myself, but it isn’t given to everyone.” There was a strong shouting in the room above. There was the concussion of bodies, and the roaring of mountain winds. “What in all the crooked days is Professor Timacheff doing up there this evening?” Vincent Sharp-Leaf asked angrily. “And what things are you doing here, Adrian? You look like a man set afire.” “Make room for me! Oh, make room for me!” Adrian of the Mountain cried out in a voice that had its own crackling thunder. He was in the very transport of passion and he glistened red with his own bloody sweat. “One is failing, one is falling, why doesn’t he fall then?” “Help with it, Kit-Fox! And I help also,” Day-Torch yowled. “I help!” Kit-Fox yelped. The room shuddered, the building shuddered, the whole afternoon shuddered. There was a rending of boulders, either on the prophet’s mountain or in the special effects room of Professor Timacheff above them. There was a great breaking and entering, a place turning into a time. There came a roaring like horses in the sky. Then was the multiplex crash (God save his soul, his body is done for) of bloody torso and severed limbs falling into the room from a great height, splintering the table at which the five of them sat, breaking the room, splattering them all with blood. But the ceiling above was unbreached and unharmed and there was no point of entry. “I am not man enough even to watch it,” Buford Strange gurgled, and he slumped sideways unconscious.
“Timacheff, you fool!” Vincent Rue bawled to the space above them. “Watch your damned special effects! You’re wrecking the place!” Unquestionably, that Timacheff was good. He used his special effects in classes on phenomenology that he taught up there. “The head, the head! Don’t let them forget the head!” Day-Torch cried in a flaming voice. “I just remembered that Timacheff is out of town and is holding no classes today,” Kit-Fox muttered in vulpine wonder. “Make room for me! Oh, make room for me!” Adrian Mountain boomed. Then he was gone from the midst of them. He would be a factor, though, “in days to come.” “The head, the head!” Day-Torch flamed and scorched. Christopher and Vincent tried to straighten up the unconscious Buford Strange. They shook him, but he came apart and one arm came off him. He was revealed as a straw-man filled with bloody straw, and no more. “Why, he’s naught but a poorly made scarecrow,” Christopher Foxx said in wonder. “He was right that one who falls back from it cannot become an ordinary man again. He will be less than man.” “That’s funny. He always looked like a man to me,” Vincent Rue said. “The head, the head! You forget the head. Let the head fall down!” Day- Torch cried. And the head fell down. It smashed itself like a bursting pumpkin on the broken floor. 4. Under the town is a woolier town, And the blood splashed up and the head fell down. —Ballads, Henry Drumhead
R. A. Lafferty began selling fiction regularly in the early 1960s and went full-time as a writer in 1971. His novels include Past Master (1968), Fourth Mansions (1969), and the Native American historical Okla Hannali (1972). You can sign up for email updates here.
About the Author
Thank you for buying this
Tom Doherty Associates ebook.
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
Sign Up
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.
TOR.COM
Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe.
And related subjects.
*
More than just a publisher's website, Tor.com
is a venue for original fiction, comics, and
discussion of the entire field of SF and fantasy,
in all media and from all sources. Visit our site
today- and join the conversation yourself.
Contents
Title Page
Copyright Notice
Not to Mention R. A. Lafferty: A Personal Introduction
Neil Gaiman
Slow Tuesday Night
(Introduction by Michael Dirda)
Narrow Valley
(Introduction by Michael Swanwick)
Nor Limestone Islands
(Introduction by Michael Bishop)
Interurban Queen
(Introduction by Terry Bisson)
Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne
(Introduction by Jack Dann)
In Our Block
(Introduction by Neil Gaiman)
Ride a Tin Can
(Introduction by Neil Gaiman)
Nine Hundred Grandmothers
(Introduction by Patton Oswalt / Afterword by Andy Duncan)
Land of the Great Horses
(Introduction by Harlan Ellison / Afterword by Gregory Frost)
Eurema's Dam
(Introduction by Robert Silverberg)
Selenium Ghosts of the Eighteen Seventies
(Introduction by Kelly Robson)
The Primary Education of the Camiroi
(Introduction by Samuel R. Delany)
Continued on Next Rock
(Introduction by Nancy Kress / Afterword by R. A. Lafferty)
Sky
(Introduction by Gwenda Bond)
Cliffs That Laughed
(Introduction by Gregory Feeley)
Seven-Day Terror
(Introduction by Connie Willis)
Boomer Flats
(Introduction by Cat Rambo)
Old Foot Forgot
(Introduction by John Scalzi)
The World as Will and Wallpaper
(Introduction by Samuel R. Delany)
Funnyfingers
(Introduction by Andrew Ferguson)
Thieving Bear Planet
(Introduction by Jeff VanderMeer)
Days of Grass, Days of Straw
(Introduction by Gary K. Wolfe)
About the Author
Copyright Acknowledgments
Copyright
Copyright Acknowledgments
“Seven-Day Terror” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, March 1962. “Slow Tuesday Night” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, April 1965. “In Our Block” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, July 1965. “Nine Hundred Grandmothers” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, February 1966. “Narrow Valley” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, September 1966. “The Primary Education of the Camiroi” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, December 1966. “Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, February 1967. “Land of the Great Horses” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Dangerous Visions, Harlan Ellison ed. “Cliffs That Laughed” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in The Magazine of Horror, March 1969. “Ride a Tin Can” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, April 1970. “Continued on Next Rock” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 7, Damon Knight ed. “Old Foot Forgot” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 7, Damon Knight ed. “Interurban Queen” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 8, Damon Knight ed. “Nor Limestone Islands” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 1, Terry Carr ed. “Sky” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions I, Robert Silverberg ed. “Boomer Flats” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, July-August 1971. “Eurema’s Dam” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions II, Robert Silverberg ed. “The World as Will and Wallpaper” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Future City, Roger Elwood ed.
“Days of Grass, Days of Straw” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions 3, Robert Silverberg ed. “Funnyfingers” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Funnyfingers & Cabrito. “Selenium Ghosts of the Eighteen Seventies” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 8, Terry Carr ed. “Thieving Bear Planet” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 12, Terry Carr ed.
This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in these stories are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
THE BEST OF R. A. LAFFERTY
Copyright © 2019 by The Locus Science Fiction Foundation
All introductions and afterwords are copyright © 2018 by their respective authors and are used with permission.
All rights reserved.
Cover photograph by Danny Xu / Shutterstock.com Cover design by Jamie Stafford-Hill
A Tor Essentials Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates 120 Broadway New York, NY 10271
www.tor-forge.com
® Tor is a registered trademark of Macmillan Publishing Group, LLC.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lafferty, R. A., author. The best of R. A. Lafferty / edited by Jonathan Strahan.—First edition. p. cm. “A Tom Doherty Associates book.” ISBN 978-1-250-79481-9 (hardcover) ISBN 978-1-250-77853-6 (trade paperback) ISBN 978-1-250-77868-0 (ebook) 1. Science fiction, American—Fiction. I. Title. PS3562.A28 813'.54—dc23 2020044266
ISBN 978-1-250-77853-6 (trade paperback) ISBN 978-1-250-79481-9 (paper over board) ISBN 978-1-250-77868-0 (ebook)
eISBN 9781250778680
Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
First published in Great Britain in 2019 by Gollancz, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group Ltd
First U.S. Edition: February 2021
1. I recommend Paul Kincaid’s excellent article in Through the Dark Labyrinth, https://www.google.com.au/amp/s/ttdlabyrinth.wordpress.com/2014/08/01/reprint-thus-we-frustrate- charlemagne/amp/
