H-54/60€
AN ACE SCIENCE FICTION SPECIAL
R.A. LAFFERTY
PAST MASTER
*A first-rank speculative work."
JUDITH MERRIL
WD
Astrobe, the Golden Planet, was perfect. It was
Utopia. Perfect comfort, entertainment, wealth,
were free to the citizens of Astrobe. Yet growing
numbers chose to abandon this life of luxury to
dwell in squalor and disease, to starve and die in
the miserable slum of Cathead.
Why?
Not one person in the whole universe could
answer this question, or provide a solution to the
crisis of rejection. And so, in desperation, the
rulers of Astrobe reached into the past, and drew
to them the one man who could aid them, the Mas-
ter who knew Utopia from the inside out...
a
“As with everything the man writes, the wind
of imagination blows strongly, with the happy
difference that in a novel he can reach f Il gale-
force .... This is a great galloping madman of a
novel, drenched in sound and color."
-HARLAN ELLISON
ISBN 0-441-65303-0
65303
0
Printed in USA
72 742100 250
R.A. Lafferty is one of the most original writers in
science fiction. He bends or breaks normal story
restrictions apparently at will, pokes fun at serious
matters and breaks into a kind of folk-lyricism
over grotesqueries. All this, plus the most unfet-
tered imagination we've enjoyed in years.
—Terry Carr
99
“The Lafferty madness ... is peppered with night-
mare: witches, lazarus-lions, hydras, porsche's-
panthers, programmed killers that never fail, and a
burlesqued black mass. One hears of black com-
edy? There are places in PAST MASTER where
humor goes positively ultraviolet."
-Samuel R. Delany
"... wild, subtle, demonic, angelic, hilarious, trag-
ic, poetic, a thundering melodrama and a quest
into the depths of the human spirit . .. R.A. Laf-
ferty has always been uniquely his own man.
-Poul Anderson
“I read it in one sitting; I couldn't put it down.
Lafferty has the power which sets fires behind your
eyeballs. There is warmth, illumination, and a cer-
tain joy attendant upon the experience. He's
good.”
-Roger Zelazny
a
“It is a minor miracle that a serious philosophical
and speculative work should be written so colorful-
ly and so lyrically. There is, happily, no way to
categorize the book: it has elements of science fic-
tion, of pure fantasy, of poetry, of historical fic-
tion; it is sharply critical and marvelously gentle;
very serious and irrepressibly funny; profoundly
symbolic and gutsy-realistic by (unexpected) turns.
A first rate speculative work."
—Judith Merril
“R.A. Lafferty is possessed—a madman, a wild
talent ... Lafferty's world is not always com-
fortable, since he takes particular delight in subtly
twisting the meanings of words. His world is usual-
ly delightfully absurdist, and often bristling with
pins to prick the soap-bubbles of whatever you
hold sacred. Lafferty is fun, sophisticated, and ut-
terly insane."
-A Reader's Guide to SF
PAST
MASTER
R.A. LAFFERTY
A
SF
acebooks
Division of Charter Communications Inc.
A GROSSET & DUNLAP COMPANY
51 Madison Avenue
New York, New York 10010
PAST MASTER
Copyright © 1968 by R.A. Lafferty
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any form or by any means, except for the inclusion of brief
quotations in a review, without permission in writing from the
publisher.
a
All characters in this book are fictitious. Any resemblance
to actual persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental.
An ACE Book
This Ace printing: July 1982
Published Simultaneously in Canada
2 4 6 8 0 9 7 5 3 1
Manufactured in the United States of America
CONTENTS
Chapter
Page
1. At the Twenty-Fifth Hour
1
2. My Grove, and I in It
13
3. At the Naked Sailor
40
4. On Happy Astrobe
55
5. The Shape of Things to Come
78
6. Sting in the Tail
100
7. On Thunder Mountain
132
8. Black Cathead
154
9. King-Maker
165
10. The Deformity of Things to Come
179
11. Nine Day King
199
12. The Ultimate People
215
13. Apocephalon
228
1. AT THE TWENTY-FIFTH HOUR
The three big men were met together in a private build-
ing of one of them. There was a clattering thunder in the
street outside, but the sun was shining. It was the
clashing thunder of the mechanical killers, ravening
and raging. They shook the building and were on the
verge of pulling it down. They required the life and the
blood of one of the three men and they required it
immediately, now, within the hour, within the minute.
The three men gathered in the building were large
physically, they were important and powerful, they
were intelligent and interesting. There was a peculiar
linkage between them: each believed that he controlled
the other two, that he was the puppeteer and they were
the puppets. And each was partly right in this belief. It
made them an interlocking nexus, taut and resilient, the
most intricate on Astrobe.
Cosmos Kingmaker, who was too rich. The Heraldic
Lion.
Peter Proctor, who was too lucky. The Sleek Fox.
Fabian Foreman, who was too smart. The Worried
Hawk.
“This is Mankind's third chance," said Kingmaker.
“Ah, they're breaking the doors down again. How can
we talk with it all going on?”
He took the speaking tube. “Colonel," he called
out. “You have sufficient human guards. It is impera-
tive that you disperse the riot. It is absolutely forbidden
1
PAST MASTER
99
that they murder this man at this time and place. He is
with us and is one of us as he has always been.
“The colonel is dead," a voice came back. “I am
Captain John Chezem the Third, next in command.”
“You be Colonel Chezem now," Kingmaker said.
“Call out what reinforcements you need and prevent
this thing.'
“Foreman," said Peter Proctor softly within the
room. “Whatever you are thinking this day, do not
think it so strongly. I've never seen the things so avid
for your life.” '
)
"It is Mankind's third chance we have been throw-
ing away here,” Kingmaker intoned to the other two in
the room, speaking with great serenity considering the
siege they were under. Even when he spoke quietly,
Kingmaker was imposing. He had the head that should
be on gold coins or on Great Seals. They called him the
lion, but there were no lions on Astrobe except as
statuary. He was a carven lion, cut out of the Golden
Travertine, the fine yellow marble of Astrobe. He had a
voice of such depth that it set up echoes even when he
whispered. It was part of the aura of power that he set
up about himself.
"Mankind's first chance was the Old World of Old
Earth,” Kingmaker said. “What went wrong there,
what continues to go wrong there, has been imperfectly
analyzed. Earth is still a vital thing, and yet we must
speak of it and think of it as something in the past. It
didn't make it before in that Old World, and it isn't
going to make it now. It has shriveled.'
Thunder and bedevilment! They were howling and
2
quaking worse than ever. They'd take the building apart stone by stone to get their prey, and they wouldn't be long about it. The mechanical killers were relentless when they came near their kill, and Fabian Foreman was their intended kill. �'Mankind's second chance was America, the New World of Old Earth, " Kingmaker continued. "In one sense it was the First New World, a sort of childhood of ourselves. And Mankind experienced its second failure there. That was really the end of Old Earth. She lives in our shadow now, has done so since we were big enough to cast a shadow.' ' Thunder, thumping thunder outside! The screaming of maniac machines! "Astrobe is Mankind's third chance, " continued the regal Kingmaker. ''If we fail here we may not be given another opportunity. There is something of number and balance that tells us we cannot survive another loss. If we fail here we fail forever. And we are failing . Our luck has run out." Howling, undermining, and a section of one of the outside walls beginning to slide! "Our luck will never run out," Proctor stated. "We've oceans of luck still untapped. We are doing quite well." ' 'Those cases on Old Earth did not end in total failure," Foreman stated in a somewhat shaky voice, ' 'though they did end in total death . And it is not a one, two, three thing . It is cyclic and it has happened many times." It was veritable explosions outside when Foreman spoke. It was his life that the mechanical killers de-
PAST MASTER
3
PAST MASTER
а
manded right now. Hereafter all the conversation was
a little difficult, almost submerged in the ocean of noise
and violence.
"Oh my bleeding ears! They were black enough
failures,” Kingmaker cut back in, but that blackness
was shot full of lightning. True, there were many fail-
ures, Fabian, but I make three the magic number. The
clock stood at the twenty-fifth hour so often that the
very survival of man through it all appears a miracle.”
“'Let's drag it back to daylight,” Proctor growled
softly above the noise that indicated that the killers had
already broken into some of the upper rooms of the
building. “Only ourselves are here and we are not
impressed by each others' eloquence. We are here to
select a candidate. We are not here to stay the crack of
doom."
“Wrong, Proctor," Kingmaker rumbled like buried
thunder, and Kingmaker was always impressed by his.
own eloquence. “We are here to stay the crack of
doom. It has fallen to us three, the inner circle of the
Masters, to do exactly that thing.”
“'Doom's been cracking for a long time, Cosmos,"
Proctor jibed. He was a sleek and pleasant man even
when he took exception. His voice was a sort of
mechanical purr, or was that of a fox that has been
eating honey.
“Aye, how it cracks!" said Kingmaker. “If you
have an ear for history, Peter, you will notice that it
cracks louder every time. In many ways we are a
meaner people this time around. Would we three be at
the top of the heap in any of the earlier orders?”'
" "I repeat that the earlier testings of man were not
total failures," Foreman said, “and perhaps they were
PAST MASTER
6
a
not failures at all. They were deaths. It is not the same
thing."
The floors were being undermined. You could hear
the hate-roaring of the things underfoot now.
“There has always been a web of desperate and quite
incredible triumph," Foreman continued. “The in-
domitableness of man has so far been the most amazing
thing about him. I hate to see it going out of us.”
Foreman's voice did have a little of the hawk's cry in it,
but also a jingle of old laughter. He was tall and graying
and lined. He seemed older than the other two, and he
wasn't. “We've lost so much! Every time we die we
lose something. So much could have been done, so
much became livid with, rottenness, that we belittle
what was done. So for one not quite total failure in the
Old World of Old Earth we were given another life
something over one thousand years ago. We were given
the American thing."
“And failed even worse," Proctor purred with a sort
of cheerful bitterness.
“No, we did not," Kingmaker protested. We
failed even better. It's an ascending spiral—till it
breaks."
“That's true,"' Foreman said. “Our American fail-
ure was less nearly total. With a New World to work in,
and with unlimited prospects, we limited them shame-
fully. There was no error of the Old World that we did
not commit again in the New World on a vaster plane.
But there was another side to it. There were times when
we almost balanced the loaded scales, when we reani-
mated both the Old and New Worlds. There were times
when we won hands down when we didn't have a
chance. We enlarged ourselves, the two hemispheres of
1)
5
PAST MASTER
)
1
6
us, and we set to tasks that before could not have been
conceived.
“Oh, our failures were abysmal enough to sicken a
scavenger, but we did come near to appreciating just
how high the challenge is. That world died, though
history does not record the event. So for that death,
which was not quite a total failure, we were given yet
another life."
“On Astrobe!" said Proctor with smiling contempt.
“Yes, here on Golden Astrobe," said Kingmaker
with affection. “Foreman says the other worlds all
died, and in a sense he is right. This is the world that
must not die. We are—and I do mean to be flowery
-the third and possibly last chance of mankind.
Foreman uses another count than mine and I am never
sure that we mean the same thing, but I know what I
mean. Another failure will finish us. If we die here, that
is the end of everything. Our contrivances the
machines, which say that they will succeed us, can save
,
neither themselves nor us. We have walked the fine line
too long and it almost disappears.
“How have we failed? For five hundred years every-
thing went right. We had success safe in our two
hands."
“And dropped it,” said Foreman. “In twenty years
everything has come apart.”
They were all cool, considering the howling menace
outside, and now perhaps within. But they had to pause
for a moment when the noise completely overwhelmed
them with its waves.
“I'm puzzled,” Kingmaker said when it was possi-
ble to be heard again. "For days at a time the killers
don't bother about you Foreman. And then they go wild
6
PAST MASTER
1
1
>
to get at you, as now. I believe they'll have your life this
time.”
“For days at a time I am not clear in my own
thinking,” Foreman stated. “Today I am, and they
sense what it is. But they're mistaken in my motives.
Nobody has the welfare of Astrobe so much at heart as
myself.”
“We've had the sensor machines run a few logs on
you, Foreman," Kingmaker said heavily. “It's certain
,
that you'll be murdered. Today, I believe. Your logs
say
within the next several months at the most. You will
be literally torn to pieces, Foreman, your body dis-
membered. What fury but that of the mechanical killers
could tear you apart as your logs indicate?”'
“I suspect another such fury building up, King-
maker. It will upset all my personal plans severely if
I'm murdered today. I'll need the several months that
my logs give me as possible.”
“Why did you have us meet you here, Fabian?''
Proctor asked. “There are many stronger places where
you could be better protected.'
"This building has some curiosities of design that I
had put in twenty years ago. It's my own building, and I
know a way out."
“You belong to the Circle ofthe Masters the same as
Kingmaker and I do,” Proctor said. “You have as
much to do with the programming as does anyone, and
you understand it better than either of us. If something
is wrong with the programming of the mechanical kil-
lers, then fix it. Certainly they should not attempt to kill
you. They're programmed only to kill those who would
interfere with the Astrobe dream."
"And by definition all members of the Circle of
7
PAST MASTER
Masters are utterly devoted to the Astrobean dream,
and are all of one mind. But even we three aren'tof one
mind. Kingmaker wants to continue the living death of
Astrobe at all cost. You, Proctor, do not believe that
there is anything very wrong with Astrobe; but I believe
there is something very wrong with you. You are both
attached in your own way to the present sickness. I
want a death and resurrection of the thing, and the
mechanical killers do not understand this.
Rending and screaming of metal! A crash deep be-
neath them that echoed through the floor.
“The building is going down,” Kingmaker said.
“We have only minutes. We must agree on our candi-
date for World President."
“We don't necessarily want a great man or even a
good man,” Proctor said. “We want a man who can
"
serve as a catchy symbol, a man who can be manipu-
lated by us.'
“I want a good man," Kingmaker insisted.
“I want a great man," Foreman cried, “and we've
come to believe that great men are nothing but myths.
Let's get one anyhow! A myth-man will satisfy Proc-
tor, and it will do no harm if he's a good man also.”
“Here is my list of possibilities,” Kingmaker said,
'
and began to read, “Wendt? Esposito? Chu? Foxx?
Doane?'' He paused and looked at the other two after
each name, and they avoided his eyes. “Chezem?
Byerly? Treva? Pottscamp?''
“We're not sure that Pottscamp belongs to the
Center Party," Foreman objected. “We're not even
sure that he's a man. With most of them you can tell,
but he's like quicksilver."
“Emmanuel? Garby? Haddad? Dobowski? Lee?''
1)
I
8
PAST MASTER
Kingmaker continued. “Do you not think that one of
them by some possibility—? No, I see that you don't.
Are these really the best men in the party? The best men
on Astrobe?"
“I'm afraid they are, Cosmos," Foreman said.
“We're stuck fast.
There was a rending crash rising above the ocean of
noise, and one of the mechanical killers splintered the
upper part of an interior door to the room and came
through it, head and thorax. It contorted its ogre face
and gathered to heave itself through. Then came some-
thing almost too swift to follow.
With a blindingly swift flick of a hand knife Proctor
struck the killer where the thorar emerges from the
lorica. He killed it or demobilized it.
Proctor often showed this incredible speed of motion
which seemed beyond the human. The mechanical kil-
ler dangled there, the upper part of him through the
broken door. The thing had a purplish nightmarish
ogre appearance designed to affright.
Kingmaker and Foreman were both shaking, but
Proctor remained cool.
“He was alone,” Proctor said.
ne," Proctor said. “They go in patrols
of nine, and the other eight of his group are still howling
in the hallway above. I can keep track of the things.
Two other patrols have now entered the building, but
they blunder around. All deliberate speed now! We
can't have more than two minutes left with all possible
luck. Back to our business!
“We know the next step. By recent decree all Earth
Citizens are also Citizens of Astrobe. That doesn't
necessarily make them better, but there's a psychologi-
cal advantage in reaching out for a man. It's true that
1
)
9
PAST MASTER
)
.
9
Earth has shrunken in importance—but shrinking pro-
duces an unevenness; it thrusts up mountains the while
it creates low places. There are new outstanding men on
Earth even though the level has fallen dismally. How
about Hunaker? Rain? Oberg? Yes, I know they sound
almost as dismal as do the leaders of Astrobe. Quillian?
Paris? Fine?''
“We're in a blind maze of midget men,” Kingmaker
“
said. “There are no real leaders. It's become all au-
tomatic. Let's go the whole way, then. The Pro-
grammed Persons propose once more that they man-
ufacture the perfect candidate and that all parties en-
dorse him. I'm tempted to go with them. .
“We've been there before,”' Foreman protested. “'It
didn't work then, and it won't work now. The old-
recension humans simply aren't ready to accept a
mechanical man as world president. Remember, that's
how Northprophet had his being. They fabricated him,
some years ago, to be the perfect leader. And so he
would have been—from their viewpoint. And, accord-
ing to rumor, that is the origin of Pottscamp also. No,
it's a human leader that we need. We must keep the
balance of a human for president and a mechanical for
surrogate president. A mechanical man can't stop the
doom clock from striking on us. He's part of the
clock.'
“There's one other field of search,” Kingmaker
came in as if on cue. If he hadn't, Foreman would have
had to suggest it himself and that would have taken the
edge off it. “We need not limit ourselves to men now
living. Chronometanastatis has been a working thing
for a dozen years. Find a dead man who once led well.
Let him lead again. It will catch the fancy of the people,
a
1)
10
PAST MASTER
a
especially if they guess it themselves and are not told it
outright. There's a bit of mystery attached to a man who
has been dead.
“But the dead of Astrobe will not do. A man doesn't
get hoary enough in five hundred years. Let's go back
.
to Earth for a really big man, or one who can be
presented as really big. How about Plato?''
“Too cold, too placid,” said Foreman. “He was the
first and greatest of them, but actually he was a pro-
grammed person himself—no matter that he designed
the program. He wrote once that a just man can never be
unhappy. I want a man who can be unhappy over an
unjust situation! Have you suggestions for dead
Earth-men, Proctor?”'
“For the sake of formality, yes. King Yu. Mung
K'o. Chandragupta. Stilicho. Charles the Great.
Cosimo I. Macchiavelli. Edward Coke. Gustavas
Vasa. Lincoln. Inigo Jones. They'd make an interest-
ing bunch and I'd like to meet every one of them. And
yet, for our purpose, there is a little something lacking
in each."
“They are men who are almost good enough,” said
Kingmaker. “We already have plenty of men who are
almost good enough. Have you a list, Foreman?''
“Yes.” Foreman took a folded paper from his poc-
ket. He made a great show of unfolding it and smooth-
ing it out; he cleared his throat.
"Thomas More," he read.
He folded the paper again and put it back in his
pocket.
“That's right,” he said. “Only one name on my list.
He had one completely honest moment right at the end.
I can't think of anyone else who ever had one."
a
11
PAST MASTER
“He did lose his head once in a time of crisis,"
Proctor jibed.
“I believe he can handle it,” Foreman said. “All
that's required is a mustard seed.”
“Lay off it, you damned riddle maker,” Kingmaker
'
growled sharply. “We have to hurry. It's your life they
are after this day, Fabian. Yes, he'll make a nice
novelty, and he'll be presentable. I could say a dozen
things against his selection. I could say twice as many
against any other candidate we might propose. Shall
we?''
They all nodded together.
"Send for him!” Kingmaker smote his chair with
finality. “Will you handle it, Foreman?”'
“
,
"If I live through the next five minutes I will handle
it. If not, then one of you do it. Out now, you two! The
killers will not touch you at all! And if I slip them this
day they may not bother me again for a week. The
violence of their reaction to me comes and goes. Out
with you! How handy! The wall opens to give you
way!”
The shattered wall did open. Kingmaker and Proctor
were out, and the mechanical killers were in with a
surge. Foreman stood and trembled as the walls stag-
gered and the whole undermined building collapsed.
Then it was so murky that neither eyes nor sensors
could make it out. The second and third stories came
down on the first, the debris exploded inward, the
killers, ten patrols of them, went through its stones and
beams gnashing for flesh, and they covered the place
completely.
It was his own building, Foreman had said, and he
knew a way out.
12
2. MY GRAVE, AND I IN IT
a
The pilot chosen by Fabian Foreman to bring Thomas
More from Earth to Astrobe was named Paul. Paul was
two meters of walking irony, a long, strong, swift man,
and short of speech. His voice was much softer than
would be expected from his appearance, and had only a
slight rough edge to it. What seemed to be a perpetual
crooked grin was partly the scar of an old fight. He was
a compassionate man with a cruel and crooked face.
From his height, his rough red hair and ruddy face, and
his glittering eyes he was sometimes called The
Beacon.
For a record of inegular doings, classified as crimi-
nal, Paul had had his surname and his citizenship taken
away from him. Such a person loses all protection and
sanction. He is at the mercy of the Programmed Persons
and their Killers, and mercy was never programmed
into them.
The Programmed Killers are inhibited from killing a
human citizen of Astrobe, though often they do so by
contrived accident. But an offender who has had his
citizenship withdrawn is prey to them. He has to be
very smart to survive, and Paul had survived for a year.
For that long he had evaded the remorseless stiff-gaited
Killers who follow their game relentlessly with their
peculiar stride. Paul had lived as a poor man in the
Barrio, and in the ten thousand kilometers of alleys in
Cathead. He had been running and hiding for a year,
13
PAST MASTER
and quite a bit of money had been bet on him. There is
always interest in seeing how long these condemned
can find a way to live under their peculiar sentence, and
Paul had lived with it longer than any of them could
remember. And he was ahead of those stiff killers. He
had killed a dozen of them in their brushes, and not one
of them had ever killed him.
An ansel named Rimrock, an acquaintance of both of
them, had got in touch with Paul for Fabian Foreman.
And Paul arrived now, remarkably uncowed by his
term as fugitive. He arrived quite early in the moming,
and he already had an idea from the ansel of what the
mission was.
“You sent for me, Hawk-Face?'' he asked Foreman.
“I'm an irregular man. Why should you send me on a
mission? Send a qualified citizen pilot, and keep your-
self clean."
“We want a man capable of irregular doings, Paul,'
Foreman said. “You've been hunted, and you've be-
come smart. There will be danger. There shouldn't be,
since this was decided on by the Inner Circle of the
Masters, but there will be."
"What's in it for me?''
“Nothing. Nothing at all. You've been living in the
meanest circumstances on the planet. You are intelli-
gent. You must have seen what is wrong with As-
trobe.”
“No, I don't know what is wrong with our world,
Inner Circle Foreman, nor how to set it right. I know
that things are very wrong; and that those who use
words to mean their opposites are delighted about the
whole thing. You yourself are a great deal in the com-
pany of the subverters. I don't trust you a lot. But you
14
PAST MASTER
are hunted by the killers. You slipped them yesterday
by a fox trick that nobody understands, so you enter the
legendary of the high hunted. There must be something
right about a man they hate so much.
“We are trying to find a new sort of leader who can
slow, even reverse, the break-up, Paul. We've selected
a man from the Earth Past, Thomas More. We will
present him to the people only as the Thomas, or
perhaps, to be more fanciful, as the Past Master. You
know of him?''
“Yes, I know him as to time and place and reputa-
tion."
“Will you go and get him?"
*All right. I'll be back with him in two months,”
Paul said. And he started to leave the room.
“Wait, you red-headed fool!” Foreman ordered
sharply. “You are a man of intelligence? What sort of
oaf have I settled onto here? I haven't briefed you, I
haven't given you any details at all yet. How will
)
6
you—?”
1)
“Don't give it a thought, grand Foreman,” Paul
said. He had a crooked mean grin on his face. How was
Foreman to know that the grin was the scar of an old
fight and that Paul's expression could never change
much? “I said I'd do it, Foreman. I'll do it."
“But what will you go in? How?"
"I'll steal your own craft, of course. I nearly stole it
once before. I'd rather have it than Kingmaker's flying
palace. There isn't a finer small craft to be had, and
there isn't a man I'd rather steal from than you. And I
have to leave in such sudden fashion if I'm to leave
alive.'
“But I will have to set up contacts for you.”
1)
1)
15
PAST MASTER
3
“I know your Earth contacts, and I know those of
Cosmos Kingmaker. In fact, I have conned several of
them in the past in my record of irregular doings. I'm a
competent pilot in both mediums, time and space. I
I
must leave at once or there will be some leak to it. I'm
no good to either of us dead."
“But I will have to get you off Astrobe alive. You're
still a marked prey for the Programmed Killers.”
“I'd die of your kindness, Foreman. I'll get off alive
in my own way.”
“But you must have some questions!"
“None. I can find London on Old Earth. I can find A
Thousand Years Ago. I can locate a well-known man
there. I can bring him back if he wants to come. And I
can make him want to come.”
>
Paul strolled out, leaped into Foreman's grasshopper
which stood in the open entry hall, and jammed the
identification counterpart on it. Then he took flight.
The grasshopper, of course, emitted the Stolen signal as
it flew, and all Foreman's keying of permission could
not override that signal.
“Why did I ever listen to an ansel and select a wild
man like that?” Foreman moaned to himself. “Ten
seconds on the mission, and he's done everything
wrong. He'll have every guard at spaceport on him, and
they'll kill him before I can explain. Why did the ruddy
fool jam the counterpart?''
Within seconds Paul came to spaceport in the grass-
hopper; and in the same short seconds, three groups
had gathered to deal with him variously. One group, ,
however, had known of Paul's sudden impulsive action
some hours before.
16
PAST MASTER
S
Paul was thinking rapidly in this, but he also had a
friend who was feeding things into his mind. Paul knew
that it is sometimes better to have two groups than one
in pursuit of you. If you can get the bears and the
hounds to close in on you from opposite directions at
the same time, somebody is likely to get mauled. Luck
holding, it may be the bears and the hounds.
Having a few bear-baiters and hound-baiters in am-
bush ready to take a hand may also help.
The bears were the spaceport guards, huge and lum-
bering, reacting to the Stolen signal of the grasshopper.
And the bears got there first, too fast, or the hounds
were too slow. They dragged Paul out of the grasshop-
per with their grapples, and he knew that they were
about the business of killing him. One of them shagged
him a bloody swipe that took skin and deep flesh off
arm, shoulder, and left ribs. And one, but only one,
clasped him to crush him to death. But the primary aim
of these bears, these mechanical guards, was to secure
the stolen vehicle and clear the status of it. Killing Paul
was only a secondary aim.
“Timing not right," rattled through Paul's head in
what seemed his last moment. “Other killers too late.
Never was anything late about them before." He was
crushed too tight to talk, almost too tight to think. With
the grip that the thing had on him, he would never
breathe in another breath. But he fought mightily with
the iron bear, unwilling to give death an unearned
advantage.
The hounds were the Programmed Killers, the same
who had been haunting Paul for a year. Stiff and bristl-
ing, they now reacted to a frantic signal in their own
sensing devices, the Escape signal sent out by Paul's
17
PAST MASTER
>
>
actions. Their programming told them that their prey,
the Paul Person, was attempting an off-world escape
from them, and that it was urgent. They closed in on
Paul for the kill, blind to everything else; and the
spaceport guards as blindly reacted to this sudden intru-
sion into their own area of investigation.
The tangle, when it came, was of blinding speed and
deafening fury. Here were two different groups of
mechanical killers: one programmed for patrol, defense
and counterattack, the Bears; the other programmed for
stalking and direct assault, the Hounds or Hound-Cats.
But a bear was crushing Paul to death, however much
the strong and slippery man struggled against it.
And yet the crusher was diverted in the chuming
confusion. Twice it had to stop to smash gnashing
metal hounds into mechanical death and disarray.
Every device there had one or more alarms or sirens or
hooters going off inside him, and the signals did not
make for clarity.
Then was the maddening clash and jangle as the third
force entered. Paul felt it in his brain, and both sorts of
mechanicals felt it in their gell-cells. And there was a
direct command in Paul's brain: “Breathe dammit!”
So he took one more great breath, having been loosened
for the veriest instant. He was too far gone to have
known to breathe without being told.
But this third assault was a human one, more or less.
The voice in Paul's brain was that of Rimrock the ansel.
Whether Rimrock could be called human or not, he was
associated with humans. Now Paul also heard the voice
of Walter Copperhead, the necromancer who could
spook the matrix out of the mechanicals and confuse
>
18
PAST MASTER
>
their programming completely. Paul heard other
voices, and he was able to get another breath.
Paul was not dead. He refused to die. His crushing
iron bear had had to loose him completely to smash
down three of the mechanical hound-cats at once. And
the sudden men were in it now. Battersea was as tall a
man as Paul and twice as thick. He swung a battleaxe
that weighed as much as an ordinary man, and he knew
where were located the nexus and centers of every sort
of mechanical. He'd battered them to death before.
Shanty was near as huge a man as Battersea, and was
faster. Copperhead's powers included the power to
disable and kill, and Rimrock the ansel, of that most
gentle species, had nevertheless slicers three feet long.
Others were there. There was Slider, but Slider had
never been sure which side he was on. And Paul him-
self was into the battle now. He had a long stabber up
from a sheath at his loins; and Paul also knew a little bit
about how these contrivances were put together. On
many of them, an upthrust below the base of the third
center plate will sever communications in the mechani-
cal and leave it helpless; and it was there that Paul
thrust. He got it; his thrust severed communications and
life; it was a man and not a mechanical that he battled
that time, and Paul killed him. A man masquerading as
a Programmed Killer! So there were, the more to con-
fuse the event, human men on both sides.
"The time is now!” the voice of Rimrock the ansel
shrilled in Paul's brains, and yet the silent Rimrock was
battling one of the iron bears and seemed not even
aware of Paul's location. But Rimrock was a devious
fellow.
>
19
PAST MASTER
Paul, free again for a moment, bounded like a
-springbuck and was into Foreman's spacecraft. Fore-
man had keyed permission, and the identification coun-
terpart had not been jammed on this. Paul was in
sudden flight.
Well, it had been a curious and bitter battle, quite
brief and quite deadly. At least two humans had been
killed, and half a dozen mechanicals. And the battle
will have to explain itself as it goes along, for it is not
over. It is to be fought again and again in its variations.
But Paul was free and in flight-painfully swiped
and giddy from loss of blood, but in flight beyond
pursuit. The Programmed Killers had Paul on their
death list as an enemy of the Astrobe Ideal; and yet he
was now on mission for the three big men, the Inner
Circle of the Masters, who were supposed to be the
mainstays of that ideal.
Paul had been whistling happily, whenever he had
the breath for it, during the whole confused battle in
which he had killed a man and demolished a Program-
med Person. He was still whistling happily when he
was in flight in Foreman's spacecraft; and none of those
in the melee (except the ansel) had any idea what he was
about. And he still whistled when he was in Hopp-
Equation Space.
It breaks here. It isn't like other space. And persons
and things in it aren't the same persons and things they
were before,
Astrobe is about a parsec -and a half from Earth.
Going at light speed it would take more than five years
to make the trip. But by Hopp-Equation Travel, it could
be made in one Astrobe month, a little less than one
Earth month, about seven hundred standard hours.
20
PAST MASTER
Paul's craft would disappear as it traversed the par-
sec and a half to Earth. But, to the pilot who made the
run, it was the rest of the universe that disappeared. To
him there was no motion, no worlds or stars—really no
sense of duration, or of time in passage.
Odd things happened to pilots and passengers during
Hopp-Equation travel. During the period of cosmic
disappearances, Paul always became left-handed. In
addition, there was always an absolutely fundamental
reversal in him. He knew from the private jokes of other
pilots that this total reversal happened to them also.
There was more sniggering about this than about any-
thing else in space lore, for Hopp-Equation travel was
very new. But it happened, it happened every time: the
total reversal of polarity in a person. Man, what a
reversal in polarity!
“Oh well, it's the only way I could ever sing sop-
rano,”Paul would say; and he often did so when in this
state.
Paul would cat-nap on the trip, but his state of sleep
would register on the craft's instrumentation, and he
was not permitted to sleep beyond ninety seconds at one
time. He became adept at this, however. Very intricate
dreams can be experienced in ninety seconds.
Paul calculated that he had at least twenty thousand
of these memorable dreams during the passage. Each
was gemlike, self-contained, perfectly timed, widely
different from any other. Each was a short life of its
own, many of them with large sets of characters and
multitudinous happenings, some completely gentle,
some nostalgic for things never known before but
clearly remembered, some sheer horror beyond the ride
of any nightmare. The Law of Conservation of Psychic
21
PAST MASTER
Totality will not be abridged. There were four and a
half years of psychic awareness to be compressed into
one month, and it forced its compression into these
intense and rapid dreams.
There is a great lot of psychic space debris, and when
one enters its area on Hopp-Equation flight one experi-
ences it. Every poignant thing that ever happened,
every comic or horrifying or exalting episode that ever
took place, is still drifting somewhere in space. One
runs into fragments (and concentrations) of billions of
minds there; it is never lost, it is only spread out thin.
The ansel was in many of the dreams. These crea-
tures are psychically remarkable; they were in the
human unconscious before they were found on As-
trobe.
There were flashes, in and around Paul's dreams, of
his year of escapes, and of the most recent escape at
spaceport. Paul was never terrified in moments of
danger. His terror came later, in dream form, and a lot
of it communicated itself on this passage. The several
persons and mechanisms who had died in that last
episode were in several of the dreams; persons who
have just died are also psychically remarkable.
Paul had many dreams of a boy named Adam who
died cavalierly in battle again and again, and so avoided
the misfortune of 'really growing up. Dying was the
only thing he was really good at. And he dreamed of
Adam's sister, a child-witch who decided to go to Hell
before she died. But Paul was not sure whether he had
known these two, and others previously; whether he
knew them only in these dreams; or whether he was to
know them in the future. And how was it that Adam
died so many times? How did he come to life so many
22
PAST MASTER
times? “No, no," Adam explained. “It is death, it is
death. I am not born again. I do not live again. It is
always another of the same name." Paul dreamed of
the monster Ouden; and of his own death, when it
should come, knowing that he was actually viewing it.
But it wasn't all heavy vital stuff encountered in the
Passage Dreams. Some of it was light and vital stuff.
Also still drifting in deep space is every tall tale ever
told.
Hey, here's one. It was of an Earthman of a few
hundred years before Paul's time, John Sourwine, or
Sour John. But now Paul became Sour John and he told
and lived at the same time the outré tale.
Owing to the diet he had followed from his youth
-alcohol, wormwood, green snails—one of Sour
—
John's kidneys had become vitrified, and in a peculiar
manner. Not only had it turned into glass, but it had
turned into glass of a fine jewel-like green. This he had
seen himself on the fluoroscope.
It happened that he and some friends were at
Ghazikhan in what was then India of Old Earth, and
they looked at the great idol there. They were told that
the center eye of the idol, an emerald nearly a foot in
,
diameter, was worth eleven million dollars. Sour John
went back to his ship and thought about it.
“Ghazikhan is not a sea-port,” Paul interrupted his
dream, for he had acquired Old Earth information by
psych-teacher machine long ago. “Either get on or get
off,” said Sour John, Paul's other self for the moment.
“I say it is a sea-port." Paul (Sour John) went back to
his ship and thought about it. He had always meant to
acquire expensive habits, and he could use eleven mil-
lion dollars. He sharpened up an old harpoon, called the
23
PAST MASTER
>
ship's boy to help him, and in no time at all they had
that kidney out. They trimmed it down a little, put it to a
lathe and then a buffer and one thing and another, and
soon they had it shined up to perfection. It was the most
beautiful kidney in the world.
Then Paul went back to the town, climbed up the idol
at midnight (it was five hundred feet high and sheer and
slick as ice); he pried out the emerald eye and substi-
tuted the green kidney. It fit perfectly. “I knew it
would,” said Paul. Then he climbed down, a descent
that not another man in the world would dare to make,
and went back to his ship with the emerald. He sold it in
Karachi for eleven million dollars, and he lived high for
a while. But owing to his only having one kidney, Paul
was now unable to drink water at all.
Three years later Paul (Sour John) was back in
Ghazikhan. He was told that the center eye of the idol
had been reappraised. By a miracle it had changed, the
people said. It had become richer in color, finer in
texture, of a deeper brilliance; and a grand new aroma
came from it. And now it was worth thirteen million
dollars. “I figure I lost two million dollars on the
deal,” Paul said as he woke up.
Ninety seconds; how could that be? The climb up the
idol had taken two hours at least. Somebody asks what
sort of man was this Paul with the permanent crooked
grin? He was the sort of man who was visited by a
passage dream of a virtrified kidney.
Twenty thousand of such little dreams! Hey, here's
another one!
Paul was coursing at fantastic speed towards the area
where the little twin stars Rhium and Antirhium re-
volved around each other. “Hurry," were his instruc-
tions; “they seem of no consequence, but they are the
24
PAST MASTER
9
governor of the universe. Somebody is tampering with
them.” Paul. continued at his impossible speed and
arrived at the area. He saw something that nobody had
ever seen before, for nobody had ever been so close to
them. The two small stars that revolved around each
other were joined together by a long steel chain. It was
that which held them in their tight rapid orbits; it was
that which made them the governor of the universe.
Paul quickly located the trouble. There was a small
green creature, with the body of a monkey and the head
of a gargoyle, cutting the chain with a hack-saw, and he
had it near cut in two. “Pray that I be not too late!” Paul
prayed, and he believed he had made it when the
sawyer broke a blade. But he quickly replaced it with
another, stuck his green tongue out at Paul, took three
more strokes with the hack-saw, and the chain broke.
Then Rhium and Antirhium swung out of their tight
orbits, and the whole universe was out of control with
its govemor broken. Fifty-billion billion stars went
nova, and then blacked out to nothing. The universe
had eaten itself and was gone forever. “I told you to
hurry!” the space captain told Paul furiously as he
came barreling up. Then the space captain's face
melted like wax and he was gone. “I did hurry,” Paul
said. Then his own face melted like wax and he was
a
>
gone also.
“Is it quite finished?”' came the voice of old hawk-
face Fabian Foreman. “If it is quite finished, then
perhaps we can begin to construct a new universe. It's
all right. It worked out well. I meant you to be too
late.'
Ninety seconds long. Twenty thousand of them,
each one so different.
Oddly, it is only the maladjusted who are able to
25
PAST MASTER
stand the passages. The well-adjusted pilot cracks up
on such a solo trip. That is why all Hopp-Equation
pilots are of a peculiar breed.
Paul knew that some of the monsters he encountered
in the passage dreams were real. They were the weird
creatures who live in Hopp-Equation space. Some of
them were encountered by Paul only; but others were
experienced by pilot after pilot in the same episode in
the same part of space. It was delinum. Nearly five
years of psychic experience must be crowded into one
month. The psychic mass of experience is not fore-
shortened.
.
a
From Golden Astrobe to Blue Earth. Earth is always
bluish to one coming from Astrobe. Astrobe always
seems gold to one coming from Earth. It is that the
whites of their two suns are not the same white. White
is not an absolute. It is the composite of the colors
where you live.
Paul made Earth-fall, taking it from the moming
side, a beautiful experience that never gets old.
He came down in London and stabled his craft. He
took with him a small but weighty instrument, and went
to the London office of Cosmos Kingmaker. That rich-
est man on Astrobe had vast interests on Earth also; and
Paul knew his way around on both worlds.
Brooks was in charge of Kingmaker's London of-
fice, and Brooks was immediately flustered by a visit
from a man of Astrobe. Most Earthmen are flustered
and inferior towards men of Astrobe, feeling them-
selves left behind and of less consequence. When most
of the small but vital elite had gone from Earth to
Astrobe four or five hundred years before, it had made a
26
PAST MASTER
1)
3
difference that was never erased. Earth really was in-
ferior and of less consequence now.
Paul presented Brooks with credentials and direc-
tives from Kingmaker, and Brooks accepted them. Paul
had forged them during the passage, though he could
have gotten real ones from Kingmaker himself or
through Foreman. Paul liked to do things on his own.
“You do not give me much information, and I do not
ask much,” Brooks said. “I have heard of you
vaguely. I know that you have been in trouble on both
worlds. Well, I respect the buccaneer in a man; it has
almost gone out of us. My master Kingmaker has
employed such men before, and it is not for me to
question it. Here is the basic machine. I could calibrate
an attachment for any period you wish, but you seem to
have brought your own attachment."
"Oh, there's no great secrecy, Brooks. I'vecome for
a man, and I'll probably leave with him again tomor-
row. It isn't necessary that you know the exact calibra-
tion, though it would be no great harm if you guessed
it.”
“Here's coin of the period as my brief here requires
me to supply to you. I wish you hadn't requisitioned so
much of it. It will strap me. It goes much further than
you would imagine. The multiplier is something like
fifty to one."
And Paul was fingering the old gold coins around on
a little table there.
“Here, I can use less than one in four of these," he
said. “I give the rest of them back to you, Brooks; they
are minted a very few years too late for my purpose;
they might embarrass me. The men where I am going
would be suspicious of Tomorrow Coins. I know the
6
)
27
PAST MASTER
1)
0
multiplier, and the former and present value. The re-
maining sum will be about right."
“Will you come out in Chelsea, messenger Paul?”'
“In Chelsea you ask? You guess shrewdly, for an
Earthman. No, I will go in here and come out here."
"Chelsea at that time was not a part of London. It
was some miles in the country.”
“The distance was the same then as now. I may find
my man in London on business or I may find him at his
home in Chelsea."
Paul stepped through the tuned antenna-like loop,
and to Brooks it was as though the man had disappeared
into the crackling air. To Paul it was going through an
unholy gray confusion that is deeper than darkness.
And he was sick, as are all who follow the time ravel.
Paul came out ankle-deep in mud. He was on the
edge of a big sprawling wooden town. He went into a
ramshackle public house, ordered and ate wood-cock,
some very high beef, barley bread, and an onion the
size of a child's head; and he talked to the proprietor.
"Could you tell me whether Thomas More is in the
city, or home in Chelsea?'' he asked the man, being
careful to give the old pronunciation of words as well as
he could.
“'Likely at home,” the man said. "He's out of favor
with the King now, you know. You are a solicitor?”'
“Yes, I solicit,” Paul said.
“You've an odd sound to your talk," the man told
him. “You are from the North?''
"No, from the South," Paul told him. That was true.
Astrobe, from Earth viewpoint, was in the Southern
Celestial Hemisphere.
“It's dangerous to talk to strangers these days,” the
a
9
9
.
1)
28
PAST MASTER
man said, “but I was never one to be intimidated. The
old things are passing away, and I hate to see them go. I
don't like the new things that are brewing. But I do like
Thomas More, though doubting that he'll be long in the
land of the living. Mother of Christ, I hope someone
can persuade him to leave the country before it's too
late! I believe that you are one of them from across the
channel."
“Yes, I'm from across the channel,” Paul said,
“and I'll take him out of the country if he'll go with me.
Do not mention our conversation, and I will not.'
“The King's men are everywhere, friend. Walk in
Christ."
Paul went out again. It was a cold day. He knew the
way, and he followed the road to Chelsea in Middlesex.
He was pleased to discover that the English had not yet
become that most unhandsome of people.”
There wasn't much trouble with the language back in
this period—a few little tricks to remember, no more.
,
An hour or two of crisp walking on the road, and Paul
was to Chelsea. He asked but once, and then he spotted
his man, walking in his frozen garden and wrapped up
like a sheep.
How did Paul know him for sure? Well, he looked a
little like the Thomas More of Holbein's portrait which
Paul had studied, but only a little. All portraits by
Holbein look more like Holbein than like their subjects.
But Thomas More was a man who would always be
recognized.
“I am Paul,” said Paul as he walked up to him, “and
after that I hardly know what to say."
“Your name-saint also traveled far, Paul,” Thomas
More said with easy friendliness. “Not so far as you
9,
29
PAST MASTER
9
6
9
9
have, of course, but perhaps to higher purposes. But I
salute you, as a man coming through both mediums,
which I do nowt understand."
Paul had gone back a thousand years, and he and
Thomas could understand each other. But Thomas
couldn't have understood his own great-grandfather. It
goes by jumps, and it had changed much more in the
hundred years just past than in the thousand years to
follow. It is true that Thomas said nowt for not; that he
pronounced of as though it were spelled of and not uv;
that he sounded the plural s as though it were ans and
not a z.
“I don't understand it either,” Paul said. “But how
could you know that I have come through both
mediums?”
“You've the aspect of one of them,” Thomas said.
“I've been visited through time before. I'm not a great
man, but I'm one who has aroused curiosity in History.
Where are you from, Paul?” '
“From Astrobe, of which you have never heard.”
“Lay no bets on that, Paul. I've a number of past and
future things in my head. Once I believed that travel
through time was unnatural. But we all travel through
time every moment of our lives. It is only that you have
traveled at a different rate and in a different direction.
Are all on your world as tall as you?''
Thomas had a touch of the things that would later be
called the Irish brogue and the Scotch bur, but they
were in the English of this time.
“No. The average is about a half a foot shorter than
myself—about a half a foot taller than yourself,” Paul
said. “To us you are a short and chunky man, and you
have allowed yourself to appear old: I assume it is your
6
)
a
30
PAST MASTER
natural appearance unmodified. But I'm more and
more puzzled that you should guess me so accurately."
“I didn't get the name of being the best lawyer in
Europe without being able to appraise a man,"Thomas
said. “And you are not unique. I told you that I had
been visited through time before. By a curiosity of
History I am to have a certain fame. The circumstances
of it bewilder me as they have been explained to me by
another traveler. I do nowt at all understand what is to
happen to me within the next year. Other men have
been visited from the future, I'm sure; but they're no
more likely to publish the fact than I am. Incredulity is a
fang that bites deep. I understand that I am to make, and
only a few weeks from now, a decision so foolhardy on
the surface of it as hardly to be believed. Visitors have
come and asked me why I did it, and I can't tell them at
all. You see, I haven't done it yet. The point for which I
am to lose my head seems to me to be a trivial one, not
worth the loss of a head, certainly not worth the loss of
mine. Why have you visited me from Asterick,
Paul?''
“From Astrobe. We are in trouble on Astrobe. They
are looking for a candidate to lead them out of a hope-
less tangle there. They have tried almost every other
sort of man; now they want to try an honest man. They
considered the Name Men, living and dead, of the two
worlds. You were the only completely honest man they
could discover or the only man with one completely
honest moment.'
“Oh, it was—will be quite a showy act of honesty
for which I will lose my head, Paul. But I can't con-
ceive of myself doing it. I haven't been particularly
honest up to this point of my life. Opportune rather. But
a
a
31
PAST MASTER
9
a
if I were honest, or if I am to be so in the climax moment
of my life, how will that help you on Astrobe in the
future?''
“I've come to take you back to Astrobe with me."
“You want to take me forward in time with you,
Paul? That's impossible, of course. We must live out
our lives in our own times and places according to the
fate laid out for us. We cannot tamper with the course of
History."
“A little of the shine flaked off you then, Thomas.
It's only a plating, is it, and not the deep thing?
Thomas, that was a silly string of commonplace for an
uncommon man to utter. And, as a Christian man, you
can hardly accept fate.
“You would make a fine lawyer yourself, Paul. No,
I never paid obeisance to Fate. And I have just enough
natural truculence in me to do it. But I hate to leave my
family."
“Thomas, Thomas, are you lacking in curiosity? In
imagination? In daring? They have called you a
forerunner, a man open to new ideas. And possibly you
will not be leaving your family. History records that
you died on a certain date, in an extreme manner, and in
this realm.”
“Will there be two of me, then, Paul? But of course
there are two of me, and more. Every man is a mul-
titude; but I play with words. Why do you really need
me?'
“I have told it. It is because our world is sick."
" “And you are looking for a gaudy cure? You are
looking for a Doctor snatched from the Past? I have
failed to cure a sick world here, Paul, and I have
)
32
PAST MASTER
watched its sickness growing all my life. It was not
even a successful doctor in his own time that you are
come for. I was the High Chancellor Doctor; and the
patient has thrown me out of the house."
“Those who decide such things have decided that
you are the man we need."
“It isn't that I haven't studied the subject, Paul. I
once wrote an account of as sick a world as I could
imagine. You see, my second claim to fame is that I
coined the word and the idea Utopia. I wrote in bitter
and laughing irony of that sickest of all possible worlds,
that into which my own world seems to be tuming.
“But here is an odd thing, Paul. I am told by time
travelers that my angry humor piece has always been
misunderstood. It came to be believed that I wrote of an
ideal world. It even came to be believed that I wrote
with a straight face. My mind boggles at the very idea,
but I'm told that it is so. Paul, there is something very
slack about a future that will take a biting satire for a
vapid dream.
“Will you come back with me?''
“Not to any Astrobe, no, Paul. I can't help you or
yours, you red-headed ogre. I like you, man. There's
something pleasant about a really ugly man, and we
both qualify. But I can't go with you. I will try to
explain.
“I have asked questions of the Time Men who came
to question me, so I know a little of several futures. You
live about a thousand years from now, at my guess, at
the time of the First Astrobian Time of Troubles; and
Astrobe in your time is in wobbly shape. But a thousand
years after you are dead, Astrobe will still be in wobbly
,,
>
33
PAST MASTER
9
99
shape. It will have a different wobble then, however.
Astrobe will have long since survived the crisis that
worries you now.”
“A crisis is survived only by the doings of one
critical man.
“I know it.
“Thomas, you are that man.
“No. I am not. It is another. I begin to recall it now. I
hadn't paid too much attention to the accounts of the
Other World when I was told of such; it all seemed
pretty fanciful. His name, his name, I wish I could
remember his name.
“So dol, Thomas. You would surely recognize your
own, if you were presented under it.
“The man who brought Astrobe out of its first time
of troubles, and in so left-handed a manner, his name, it
will come to me, Paul, that man was quite in the heroic
mold, and I am not. That man, after he had been
shamefully put to de— Jerusalem irredentada! It can-
not be! The name of that man, Paul—miserere mihi
Domine!—his name isn't known. Always he is iden-
tified only as the Past Master. It's a startling thought.
You believe him to be me?"
“Yes. I'm sure now, Thomas. You've told me some-
thing that isn't known to them there yet. They're still
searching for a name to present you under. 'Past Mas-
ter' is one of those they are considering, but they won't
decide till they see you. 'Past Master' it will be, then.
The Master out of the past is yourself, Thomas.”
“Paul, you also have been pursued for your life, as I
have been lately. I know the look of a hunted man, even
a defiant one. Surely there are not King's Men on
Astrobe who hunt down and kill."
9
34
PAST MASTER
"No, they are different, Thomas. They are Pro-
grammed Mechanical Killers.”
“No, they are the same, Paul. King's Men every-
,
where are programmed mechanical killers. But I see
that I will have to discover for myself the name of the
realking of Astrobe. Yes, I'll go. Stay the night. I'll go
with you in the morning."
“Thomas, what happened, what is happening to
your own world?'' Paul asked as they talked together
that night. “You built it according to an ideal of high
perfection, but it started to come apart a hundred years
before this time. Your world is at an end, and another
one, in some ways much worse, is beginning. What
goes wrong with your world, Thomas?”
“We built it too small, Paul, we built it too small.
And what is really wrong with Astrobe? Can you not
give me the name of it? It helps to know the name of
your opponent.”
“It's name is the monster Ouden, the open mouth of
Ouden, of whom you have not heard.'
“I'm an educated man, Paul, in my own opinion at
least. I'm one of the handful of men who brought Greek
back to Western Europe. History should remember that
much of me. And Ouden means nothingness."
“That's the name of him, Thomas, and he has his
growing legions.
They burned oak and pitch-pine and yew in the open
fire, and drank a little of the native. In that century
England still had a wine of its own.
99
They were up early in the morning. Thomas More,
about to start on a strange journey, went to be shriven.
35
PAST MASTER
9
“I believe only in spurts now, Paul,” he said. “My
faith is weak. Is it not ironic that I will die for it in the
near future? And that those of strong faith will hide and
be silent?"
Paul went with Thomas and did likewise, perhaps the
first man to be absolved of sins a thousand years before
he committed them.
They went to London afterwards. They went through
the tunnel loop and came out in Kingmaker's London
office, where Brooks was sleeping on a sofa. He
wakened and recognized Thomas at once.
"I'd guessed it was he you came to take, Paul,” he
said. “I'd rather you took the crown jewels or the Seal
or the Charter. If his bones are no longer with us, then
we are not the same man.
“Let's go see, Paul," Thomas said. “A man owes
himself that much curiosity.”
They went to the old church of St. Peter in Chains.
“You are buried here," Paul said. “The church is a
reconstruction, but the graves underneath are still
there."
An old priest came to them there.
“Do the bones of Thomas More for certain lie
below?'' Thomas asked the old priest.
“They do. This very year we opened several of the
graves. The bones of Thomas More are there, and on
one finger bone is the famous signet ring of which you
wear a replica on your own finger. You are an anti-
quarian.
“No, I'm an antiquary,” Thomas said. “I have a
special interest in this man. What other man, Paul,
looks down on his own grave and he in it? All except
my head. I'm told that it's buried at Canterbury. Par-
36
PAST MASTER
9
boiled it, did they not? I'd like to see it, but I suspect
that it's too long a joumey."
They were going on a joumey of a parsec and a half,
but seventy miles was too long a joumey.
As they strolled about London, Paul realized that this
man Thomas would never be an anachronism, either on
Earth or on Astrobe. Thomas was already onto the new
pronunciation of the language—to the point of burles-
quing it. He was at home, too much at home, in this
latter world. He did everything directly, and as his
right. He got into a fist fight with a bulky young man in
a drinking place.
Thomas won the fight, too, but Paul saw fit to chide
him about it.
“Remember, Thomas, you were sainted after you
were dead," Paul told him. “Saints do not indulge in
bar-room brawls."
"Some do, Paul, some don't,” Thomas maintained,
wiping blood off his peculiar nose. Whatever hap-
pened to that nose wouldn't matter much; it wasn't a
pretty one, but it had a lot of character. “Several
men of my acquaintance were later sainted, so I've
been told. One of them was a withdrawn man who
didn't brawl. One of them was too puny for it. But the
third of them did indulge in just such brawls. I've seen
him."
And this reminded Thomas of something else. “One
thing I forgot to ask, Paul. How is the fishing on
Astrobe? You are silent,Paul. I can still withdraw from
this adventure, you know. Answer me, man."
“I am trying to contain myself, Thomas. You will
not believe it until you see it. It is one of the great things
that have remained great.
.
9
37
PAST MASTER
9
“You mean it, Paul? You can go out any afternoon
and take a string of them?”
"A string of them? Thomas, you talk like a boy.
How can you string fish that are as long as a man? On
Astrobe, if you go out in a boat for any purpose other
than angling, the fish will rise to the surface about you
and howl for the hook.'
“I am glad, Paul, that the new-day fishermen have
not suffered any shortening of the tongue. That is what
really worried me."
They went to Sky-Port and entered their craft for
Astrobe, Thomas with an armful of mystery novels,
revels, bonanzas, and science fiction books, all new
things to him. Thomas had also discovered tobacco and
he swore that the stogie was the most wonderful thing in
the world since the Evangels. He announced that he
would smoke and read for the whole trip to Astrobe. So
they enskied.
And so it went well till their first period of cosmic
disappearance.
He was trying to bellow, the man Thomas, no, the
creature Thomas, and his voice was no longer one to
bellow with. The fundamental reversal had taken place
in him as they made the Hopp-Equation trip, and
Thomas seethed with a fury that he could not express.
“Does it happen to all wavelers, Paul?” the Thomas
finally asked in frustration.
“To all who travel by Hopp-Equation journey. The
regular trip takes five years.
"What's time to a revenant? I've been dead a
thousand years, that I should live to such shame," he,
she, it said.
38
PAST MASTER
a
The Passage dreams again, to Paul, and now to the
Thomas also. Thousands of them, no more than a
minute and a half each, incomparably vivid. In passage
dream Thomas met an oceanic man named Rimrock
and did not find it odd. He encountered a female crea-
ture who was at the same time Succubus, Eve, Lilith,
Judith, Mary, and Valkyrie. He dreamed three quick
vivid dreams of three men he had never met. One man
for his moment was a spider with a lion's head. One
man was a most peculiar fox. And one man was a hawk
who sat and shuffled shells at a table, and one shell was
different.
These dreams sank down into the cellar of the
Thomas mind, but they would come up to him again
when he met those persons.
39
3.
AT THE NAKED SAILOR
9
“Why, this is beyond wonder, Paul,” Thomas said
when they had toppled into normal space and began to
orbit in to Astrobe. "It's a golden world. When I was a
boy I was told that the streets of Paris were gold; or,
I
if
not they, then those of Rome, or Constantinople, or
Cordova. I visited them all, and they weren't. The
Spanish ambassador told me that it was so in Mexico
City. I didn't get to go there, but I had long since come
to my doubting years. But the whole world here is
gold.”
“It is the color of our grian-sun,” Paul said. “It is
our white, and so it will seem to you."
They came onto firm Astrobe, dismounted, and gave
the craft to the keepers. They started towards the easy
>
rooms.
1,
>
.
"Not that way, Red, it's a trap, it's a trap!” an ansel
voice erupted in Paul's head. “To your left! To your
left quickly and find friends by the edging trees.”
“Not that way, Thomas,” said Paul, and they veered
off their course. “We walk in this direction. Careful
now. It was the voice of Rimrock the ansel in my head
waming us. You wouldn't know about ansels.
“Why, certainly I know, Paul. He spoke in my own
head several times during the late hours of the passage.
I look forward to meeting him. But I heard no warning.
Are you sure of this?''
“No. But we'll not go to the easy rooms till we are
40
PAST MASTER
sure. We'll find what's going on over by the edging
trees. Come, quickly, but carefully."
“Paul, I don't like it,” Thomas said, hanging back a
little. “Don't hand me around like a boy. I know more
of snares and traps than you do. The King's Men do
sometimes employ the left-handed trap, and I smell the
iron of it now."
Too late.
“Paul! Thomas! Away fast!" came the oceanic
voice of Rimrock in their heads. “It was not myself
who spoke to you. It was another. Away!"
Too late.
Paul and Thomas were chopped down like weeds.
It was agonizingly painful darkness, blind nauseat-
ing confusion, a devouring death that encompassed
Paul in mind and body. It stank, it roared, it blasted, it
disgusted and affrighted. A growing rumor was rising
in the near distance, but too far, too late surely to save
them.
Paul remarked, with his riven mind and suddenly
shattered and darkened vision, and with dirt in his
mouth, on how beautiful was the afterglow of the day,
especially when one has just died. The double vision of
the reeling, the syndrome of the split head lends itself to
detachment.
Paul heard, with ears that seemed to belong to some-
one else, a new booming roar very near. He was
amused that Thomas More, dead a thousand years, was
so angrily refusing to die. There was another fellow, a
long crooked sorrel-top who was making a great fuss
about it also. Paul pulled the two halves of his mind
back together and realized that the other fellow was
.
41
PAST MASTER
himself, and that refreshing and kindling anger had
flowed back into him. It had been a new blow, one that
should have crushed his skull, that rather torched off
the reaction in him, canny coolness linked with white-
hot anger.
“If that didn't get me, I'll be a devilish hard man to
kill,” he spat through the dirt in his mouth, and had
already fought his way to his feet. He had hope now. He
recognized the growing rumor in the ever nearer dis-
tance as the shouting of the poor lungers from Cathead,
and he knew that those miserables were on his side. The
lungers hated everybody', but they hated the stilted-
gaited assassins most of all.
And Thomas had not stayed down when struck
down. He had been up again and giving battle. There
had been words in his booming roar, but they came to
Paul's understanding only now:
"Front them! Front them!” Thomas shouted.
“They're King's Men. They kill from behind. They go
for the dorsalis, the spinal, the brain base. One who
flees them is already dead. Front them! Front them!''
It was not now the original assassins only. It was a
chumning mob, and men and things were killing and
being killed. Paul was struck another blow that drove
bone splinters into his brain, but oblivion never quite
closed down on him. Oblivion was like a mirage that
receded so that he could not come up to it; and the
confusion had multiplied mightily. Distant sounds had
a mocking quality that set the conflict off as a sort of
dream world. The hoot of distant slag boats calling had
a terrible profundity coming over the pungent water.
.
One of the assassins was broken and useless. A giant
lunger was killed. And a boy named Adam was killed.
42
PAST MASTER
But hadn't the boy Adam been killed before? No,
Adam hadn't necessarily been killed that other time.
Not this time either. The boy had been killed in one of
those dreams of passage, and those dreams (being out
of time) could be of either past or future things.
When it came to Paul that he was being saved, it
came to him with a childish delight as though it was his
right. He heard Thomas and Rimrock the ansel talking,
but not in words. "It were better to hide in a den like a
wounded bear and study the events and their founda-
tions,” the ansel told Thomas; and the ansel was a
native of Astrobe and had never seen a bear. “It were
best to get to any low hidden place with remarkable
suddenness and wait for the worse day that is sure to
come,” Thomas told the creature, and Thomas had a
broken jaw and wouldn't be able to speak till it was
wired up.
“We are only poor miserable lungers from
Cathead!” cried the powerful breaking voice of Bat-
tersea to what sounded like a crowd gathering. “It is
only a little scuffle among ourselves, and we carry
away our own dead. Decent people need not be con-
cemed with it. We go quickly, and regret having
intruded onto an open area."
Paul was being carried somewhere. It was easier that
way. Oblivion flickered around the edges of Paul, and
then closed in completely on him.
A few hours for the beginning of recovery, and Paul
awoke to a great odor, a writhing of many strong odors
of men and seas and things.
“It smells like the Barrio," Paul told himself, and
43
PAST MASTER
smelling seemed to be the only one of his senses that
was functioning well. “Worse, it smells like Cathead.
Still worse, it smells like the strip where they merge. It
smells like one of the ten thousand low bordello inns in
the teeming region. It smells like the worst of them all,
the Naked Sailor."
Paul found that he could see, though crookedly out of
an unmended head. He had been lying on hay, and he
had the impression that goats had been kept in in that
room. He found that he could walk, though not straight
as a rational man would. He staggered out of the door-
less room. He walked in an angular and indirect manner
through the viscera of a rambling and noisome build-
ing, past a kitchen where a mad-eyed girl gave him a
length of strong fish twined in kelp, and he continued
on his way eating it. He lurched along till he found a
common room, and then another on a lower level. He
heard the voice of Thomas More. He saw that it was
coming through wired jaws.
“It's a bleak back-byre we have here,” Thomas
said. “We'll clean it up, or we'll pull it down and burn
it. What we need is a tub in the middle of the room, and
dip the whole clutch of you."
Thomas was holding a sort of court there. He was a
lively little runt with a clear voice and a pleasant un-
handsome face. He was attended by a dozen weary
ragged men who sat about on the floor and regarded
him with red-rimmed eyes.
“Where in hell are we, Thomas?”' Paul asked in a
voice that hurt him to use. He had floating bones in his
head somewhere.
“Fourth of the seven sections, Paul," Thomas said
cheerfully, “According to the Moslems, the fourth
44
PAST MASTER
9,
section of Hell is for Christians. Be appeased; there are
three worse Hells than this. It's named the Naked
Sailor."
“The Naked Sailor! Thomas, there aren't three
worse Hells than this,” Paul stated.
“Aye, man, there are,” said one of the men with
red-rimmed eyes.
“It's a compendium, Paul,” said Thomas as if he
were lecturing a congregation of barons. “It gives me a
vantage point to study what is wrong with your As-
trobe, before I make my appearance from beyond the
grave. The Naked Sailor is itself a grave. I have ven-
tured out three times this day, and have had three men
killed defending you."
“You venture out again, man, and we kill you our-
selves to save us the trouble," said another of the
shot-eyed men sitting on the floor. “Ourselves, we
have only a life each. You're not worth another one, old
potato-face.”
“There's something deformed about this whole bus-
iness," Thomas said. “These giant settlements here
are pieces right out of Hell. Do you know, Paul, that
there are unburied dead lying in some of the alleys?
This must be the underside of this world, this world's
sick delirium. Well, I'm finding what is wrong. I'll see
the top soon enough and find how right everything is
there.'
“Be on your guard when you do, man," said another
of the weary-eyed fellows. “It is in these places here
that the savor of the only things that are still right on
Astrobe clings.
The Killers were milling around outside, and the air
was full of sullen electricity. There was fear and anger
)
19
45
PAST MASTER
1)
>
1)
like soot in the air. Bot-flies were spluttering and roar-
ing about the slippery blood in the roadway outside and
in the common room itself. There had been carnage,
and the atmosphere spoke of more to come.
“Just what is my status?” Thomas asked. “Why
should they try so persistently to kill you and me, Paul?
What are these curious killers?”
“They're the guardians of the Astrobe Dream,”
Paul said with sad irony.
“They believe you'll see our side of the thing,” one
of the ragged men said. “We're not so sure that you
will."
“Are these killers human beings?”' Thomas asked.
“They are not,” said the weariest of the men sitting
there. “They are devils dressed in tin cans.
“Was the ansel who talked to you without words a
human being, Thomas?” Paul asked. “Would you call
Rimrock a human?—But you haven't seen him yet.”
“I don't need to see him, Paul. He is composed of
body and spirit. He has intellect. That makes him
human.'
“But the killers look much more human than he
does. They have a calculated shrewdness that passes for
intellect, and they have a human form.'
There was a clatter, a crash, a moan that was only
half human, and a bleating scream that was dying
animal. A poor man scampered in with three goats, a
crazy man with unfocused eyes. He sat down on the
floor sobbing and coughing together, and his goats
gathered around him.
"Is he human, Thomas?” Paul asked.
“Certainly, though he's demented. He is a judgment
46
PAST MASTER
upon everyone on this planet. Aren't there mad-houses
for such as he?''
“'In civilized Astrobe they say that all Cathead and
the Barrio is a mad-house. There are two million men as
mad as he, one in twelve. He isn't bad. He slavers, and
he cannot speak coherently, but he gets about. He has
even avoided the killers till now. But I doubt that he'll
be able to avoid them much longer, the way they are
ravening about today. We may none of us avoid them.
You don't like what you've seen of Cathead, what you
now see and hear and smell?'' Paul asked.
"No. I had no idea that such ancient vestiges of
poverty and misery could still survive on the advanced
world of Astrobe. Why weren't such things swept away
long ago?''
The mad goat-man was crooning a little song. The
killers were thronging and gnashing in the roads like the
iron dogs they were.
“'It isn't an ancient vestige,” Paul said. “This is all
new. Twenty years ago Astrobe was completely beauti-
ful and civilized. Then these places appeared, like a
blight, as the great ones say. I do not call them that.”
**Paul, I walked for many squares through these
neighborhoods in my three sorties out. There are blind
children with their eye-sockets matted with insects.
There are people starving to death, falling and being
unable to arise. There are men driving themselves at
labor in small fetid shops. There was never whip-
slavery so harsh. There are men and women working in
atmospheres so foul that they tum them purple in a few
moments, and they come out spouting blood—and go
back in to the labor before they have rested. There are
a
47
PAST MASTER
9
human people eating the filth in the gutters, and drink-
ing the gutter runs. They are like this in their millions. I
saw a large building fall down. There are women offer-
ing children for sale. There are old-clothes men who
strip the corpses and leave them naked in the streets. Is
there no compassion in the civilized sections of As-
trobe? Can they do nothing to alleviate the misery
here?”
“But, Thomas, everybody in Cathead and the Barrio
is here by choice. They left civilized Astrobe of their
free will to set up these giant shambles. They can retum
to civilized Astrobe today, within the hour, and be
cared for and endowed with property, and settled in
ease. And they would be free of the mechanical mur-
derers also.”
“God over my head! Why don't they do it, then?"
“Somebody go with him!” Paul shouted, for the
demented goat-man had started out into the roadway
once more just when a din of killers had risen. Several
of the weary men had risen to it, and then fallen back.
Too late.
He had gone out in his distraction, and his small
goats had followed him out. Perhaps he was more
addled than usual. Perhaps he was not used to such
concentrations of killers as were smelling around the
presence of Thomas. The whipped crazy man knew
how to dodge through one or two killers, scooting like a
low whippet. There were too many to dodge.
The striding killers struck him down dead just out-
side the door. Passersby withdrew to their own safety,
and the little goats bleated in lonesomeness. Then, as
the killers clashed along looking for new entrance,
quick hungry people caught the little animals, fought
48
PAST MASTER
а
O
)
over them, tore them apart, and began to eat hunks of
them raw and hleeding.
“Enough,” Thomas, moaned. “I was never an ad-
vocate of wealth and fineness. I believe fully in holy
poverty. But I say that poverty is like drink: a little of it
is stimulating and creative; too much of it is depraved
and horrifying. I must be about my work on this world,
and I must get to the center of things before I can solve
the mystery of degradation here. How can I get in touch
with the men who sent for me? I have seen enough of
the underside of this world for this day.”
A communication center is approaching, on two
feet or on four,” Paul said. “He can put anybody into
contact with anybody.”
“Aye, I feel him. He's talked to me, and I had but a
short glimpse of him at our ambushing. It is Rimrock,
the oceanic man! He at least will talk sense.
And Rimrock, the oceanic man, came in, on no legs
at all, then on four legs, then on two. And he shook
hands with Thomas with great friendship.
An ansel is in appearance a little like a seal of old
earth. It can slither with great speed along the land, just
as though it were swimming in water. It can walk
passably, as a man or as an animal. And it has curious
mental powers.
“My friend from the green ocean,' Thomas
boomed. “You of the rubbery black hide and the tufted
ears! You bound or you walk, and you talk inside men's
minds and make appearances. Read me the meaning of
this damnable world, Rimrock."
“They sent for you and you come. I and others
thought you should see a little of the sanity of Cathead
and the Barrio before you are plunged into the madness
49
PAST MASTER
of civilized Astrobe. But the great men are waiting for
you impatiently, a day and a night and half a day now.
They are frenzied that someone has stolen their prize
and may somehow turn it against them. And I had to
settle with another—a false ansel who spoke in the
Paul's mind and tried to lure you to your death. It's
fresh blood on me. I hope you don't mind."
Rimrock the ansel was much larger than any earth
seal, and the slicing mouth on him was a meter long.
"It comes down on this place!” all the weary men
with the red-rimmed eyes shouted, and they stormed up
from their sitting on the floor. “We go! We go.” They
all rushed off, some to the interior rooms of the build-
ing, some as a battling wedge with flailing staves and
pokers through the killers in the roadway.
“What ails the fellows?'' Thomas demanded.
What comes down on this place?''
“The bleak blackness," Rimrock said. “We have a
.
visitation. He is curious about your being here. I know
you have met him before in bits and snatches on your
own world. I am sure that you encountered fragments
of him in the passage here. Now it is himself.”
The girl-woman Evita came in. She was like a
wraith, of a sudden beauty and mystery, and a depth of
depravity that took the breath away. The short glimpse
of her set Thomas to shaking. She was something not
completely of nature.
“I wanted to see him and talk to him," the Evita
said. “But the old monster comes instead. I will talk to
the Thomas in another place and hour."
She vanished out again. Paul and Thomas and Rim-
rock the ansel were left alone. Then the monster Ouden
came and satin the middle of them and encircled them.
50
PAST MASTER
The short account that follows is necessarily mystic.
We cannot be sure that Paul and Thomas held the same
congress with Ouden. We cannot hear at all the ex-
change between Ouden and Rimrock, but we can sense
it. We cannot be sure whether it was Paul or Thomas
forming the words in the man-Ouden conversation. It
was a confrontation and a presence.
But the Paul-Thomas host knew who Ouden was.
They shriveled together in his presence, and their bones
grew hollow.
“You are like ghosts," said the Paul-Thomas. “Are
you here only because we see you here? Which was
first, you, or the belief in you?''
“I was always, and the belief in me comes and
goes,” Ouden said. “Ask the ansel: was I not of the
Ocean from the beginning?''
“What have you done to Rimrock?”' the Paul-
Thomas asked. “He diminishes."
“Yes, he turns back into an animal in my presence,”
said Ouden. “So will you, and all your kind. You will
turn further back, and further. I will annihilate you."
“I deny you completely,” said the Paul-Thomas.
“You are nothing at all."
“Yes, I am that. But all who encounter me make the
mistake of misunderstanding my nothingness. It is a
vortex. There is no quiet or static aspect to it. Consider
me topologically. Do I not envelop all the universes?
Consider them as turned inside out. Now everything is
on the inside of my nothingness. Many consider the
Nothing a mere negative, and they consider it so to their
death and obliteration.'
“We laugh you off the scene,” said Paul-Thomas.
“You lose.
)
”
2
51
PAST MASTER
>
a
9
“No. I am winning easily on Astrobe,"Ouden said.
“I have my own creatures going for me. Your own
mind and its imagery weakens; it is myself putting out
the flame. Every dull thing you do, every cliché you
utter, you come closer to me. Every lie you tell, I win.
But it is in the tired lies you tell that I win most
toweringly.”
“Old nothingness who sucks out the flames, I have
known flames to be lighted again,” said the Paul-
Thomas.
“It will not kindle," said the Ouden. 'I eat you up. I
devour your substance. There was only one kindling. I
was overwhelmed only once. But I gain on it. I have put
it out almost everywhere. It will be put out forever
here."
“I piloted once to a world of deformed little animals
of a certain stench,” said the Paul-Thomas. “They ran
in and out of old buildings that had been built by a
cogent race. The experts to whom I brought some of the
deformed little animals said that they were the fallen
remnant of that cogent race. They were abdominable
little creatures whose only interest was to defile, and
the experts said that they had fallen from something
very like man.”
“I know the folk you mean," said theOuden. “They
are a particular triumph of mine."
"Leave me now!” the Paul-Thomas ordered
sharply. “You are a nothingness, a ghost. One may
order a ghost to leave."
“Never will I leave. Not ever in your life will you sit
down that I do not sit down with you. And finally it will
happen that only one of us is left to get up, and that will
be myself. I suck you dry."
,
>
52
PAST MASTER
“I have one juice left that you do not know," said the
Paul-Thomas.
“You have it less than you believe.”
.
The Ouden monster had disappeared from them.
Paul and Thomas More and Rimrock the ansel dozed. It
had been a mere passage dream, one that was somehow
left over.
9
“'Look at them sleep!” giant Battersea cried in deri-
sion. “On your feet, the three of you. We mount battle
array to convoy you back, and Rimrock must gather his
wits to set up the communication.”
“Whether your work on Astrobe be good or bad, you
have to get on with it,” said Shanty. “One doesn't save
a world by napping away the noontime. Come, we'll
take you through the killers, and to the Important Men
who wait for you. Then let you shrivel! Let you turn
!
înto things like them!”
It was really a battle array that Battersea and Shanty
and Copperhead and others led. There was weaponry
and vehicles, and the killers backed away from them
frustrated. Paul and Thomas and the ansel rode out of
vile Cathead and the Barrio, away from the Naked
Sailor and ten thousand places like it, skirted giant Wu
Town, and came into colossal Cosmopolis the Capital
of Astrobe.
Misery forgot, here was opulence and ease, beauty
and dignity of building and persons, the real golden
world, the ideal achievement. It was the most beautiful
and most highly civilized world ever built, the most
53
PAST MASTER
peaceful, the most free from any sort of want. It daz-
zled.
And in the heart of Cosmopolis the three big men,
along with the fourth member of the big three, all now
in communication with the ansel and knowing of their
coming, awaited their prize from the past that had
escaped them for the two days since the landing.
-
54
4.
ON HAPPY ASTROBE
a
The riches of civilized Astrobe were almost beyond
comprehending. Thomas had a quick eye and a rapid
mind, but he was dazzled by the wonders he rode
through. Here were the homes and buildings of many
millions of people, grand city after grand city, all in
luxury and beauty and ease. Nor was it only the build-
ings and the perfected land and parks. It was the people.
They were elegant and large and incredibly urbane, full
of tolerant amusement for the rolling spectacle, of a
superior mien, of a shattering superiority. They were
the true Kings of Astrobe. Every man was a king, every
woman was at least queenly.
“It is Rome arisen again a hundred times over,
Thomas said. “It is the power and the majesty. For
good or bad, this is what all folks have wanted from the
beginning. Here are all dreams come true; here is the
treasure at the end of Iris, the Pearl of Great Price, here
is the fat land and the mighty City; it's the Land beyond
the Hills of the Irish pipers, the Great Brasil, the Hes-
perides.”
“Easy, good Thomas. It is a whited sepulcher. But
do they not keep it neat and shined?'' Evita mocked.
Who was the Evita, and what did she here? Thomas
asked as much.
“A blinking brat with a charisma on you!" Thomas
exclaimed. “Who are you, girl, and what are you doing
55
PAST MASTER
I,
а
in my party? How are you a known person to all on this
world, and you only a grubby child?”
· But Evita did not answer. Thomas would never know
for sure who she was, nor would others.
“Where do we go?'' Thomas asked. “This is my
dance and I should be calling the tunes. I will not be led
by the hand like a boy. I will make my own ar-
rangements.”
“You have been doing so," said Walter Copperhead
the necromancer. “We do but proclaim it for you. We
carry out every detail that you have ordered."
“But I have ordered nothing," Thomas said. “It
runs too fast for me."
“In your own mind you order it,” said Rimrock the
'
ansel. “You vision it in a Roman or English context,
and we transfer it to an Astrobian. It is a Triumph you
require for yourself; not for pride or vanity, but for the
solid establishment of a burgeoning regime. I have
been transmitting your orders to the Anxious Powers,
to the Great Men of Astrobe, and the Copperhead has
been transmitting also. We call them and they are
amazed. We order them to assemble. They will not,
they say, and they do. They are startled, they are full of
wonder even before they see you."
“Rimrock, Rimrock, you'd grow rich as a fawney
man at a county fair in old England. No Gypsy ever set
a spell so fine. But where do we go?”'
“To the Convocation Hall, as you yourself have
decided, good Thomas; to take it all swiftly while the
tide is running for us. You will be the Sudden Appari-
tion. You will accept the accolade and the mystic sta-
tion of Past Master.'
56
PAST MASTER
a
"I'm not even knowing what the Convocation Hall
is,” said Thomas as they rolled through the magnifi-
cient city of Cosmopolis in Battersea's armored wagon.
“Who will be assembled there?”
“Those you have ordered to assemble will have
assembled,” said the oceanic Rimrock. "And the de-
tails work themselves out as we roll on, and always to
our advantage. There's a small bloody battle going on
now over the Exultation Trumpets, actually twelve
small battles in the twelve steep towers around the Hall.
The Trumpets haven't blown for twenty years, but you
have decided wisely that they will blow for you. Hap-
pily your men win those small bloody battles now."
“I didn't know that I had any men," said Thomas.
The party rolled to the head of the Concourse. They
stopped and dismounted. They walked the long Con-
course between the rows of heavenly aspens. Then the
whole sky broke open! The Exultation Trumpets
blasted a deafening golden blare like twelve Gabriels
announcing the second coming. The electrum doors of
the Convocation Hall swung open to the soaring sound.
This was a striking effect that had been devised two
hundred years befor
years before. This was their moment, and the
shabby incandescent party entered.
All the great ones of Astrobe sat in the high circle.
They sat there in amazement, some willingly, some
not. Many of them had been drawn there protesting that
they would not go. The compulsion puzzled them, and
they knew much about the management of minds.
And the Thomas More party stood in the Arena
below them, but it was not at all as if the great ones were
looking down on the party below.
57
PAST MASTER
a
Then all the great ones stood. And they hadn't in-
tended to. The great ones of Astrobe stand only in the
presence of a Superior. All were assembled, and all
were on their feet now: Kingmaker, Proctor, Foreman,
Pottscamp, Northprophet, Dobowski, Quickcrafter,
Haddad, Chezem, Treva, Goldgopher, Chu, Sykes,
Fabelo, Dulldoggle, Potter, Landmaster, Salver,
Stoimenof, all the high dukes of Astrobe, half a dozen
former world presidents, the tall scientists and the
mind-men, the world designers.
In the arena was Thomas More, dirty and in disarray,
with a shattered jaw wired up by a Cathead knacker, a
long-nosed, almost comical middle-aged man of short
stature; the Paul Person who had lost his surname and
his citizenship for inegular doings, and who now had
bone splinters in his brain that affected his vision and
his wits; Rimrock the oceanic man who communicated
by means unknown and who was in appearance a
grotesque rubber-nosed animal; Evita the legend girl-
whose existence doubted by all
rationalists; Walter Copperhead the necromancer who
was no better than an astrologer: all of them with the
smell and trappings of black Cathead still on them.
The vast sound of the Exultation Trumpets broke. It
died down in echoing fragments and left a vibrating
silence.
And a Person had declared himself!
This was the Past Master, dead a thousand years, a
dumpy little almost-old man, a pinkish little elf on a
world of golden-bronzed giants. But on him in that
moment was the magikos, the charismatic grace, the
transcendent magnetism, the presence, the messiah-
woman
was
58
PAST MASTER
ship, the draiocht. He had erupted in the middle of them
with the dirt of the grave still on him, so it seemed. It
was sheer ghostliness, the seeming of one who comes
through closed doors and sealed tombs, one who is the
master of time. It was transcendence touching them all.
Then came the Ovation like a pouring ocean. It broke
in heavy crested waves, each one higher than the
former. It lasted a great while. It lifted them up, all the
,
golden cynics who had forgotten what it was to be
exalted. Some of them would speak of it later as their
fools' camival, yet it would always remain a stunning
thing in their lives.
Thomas had them hooked without speaking a word.
A presence had been created for him, and it had won.
How that presence had been managed and by whom,
Thomas would try to sortout in his mind later. Had it all
been done by a quack man and a quack animal, and a
brat child? Who makes magic here? Clearly, several
powers of a near-alien sort had been working for him
there.
And that presence made itself known immediately,
through all the Cities and through all that world, from
one end to the other.
“It is the Past Master," the people everywhere said.
He had them, he had them. Then he spoke, loudly
and clearly.
“I accept the great burden that has been given me to
bear,” Thomas announced in a silver voice that had a
bit of the old grave-duct in its burt. “Now we will set
about the governing and righting of this world."
9
,
“He hasn't been offered the burden yet,” Peter
59
PAST MASTER
Proctor throat-growled to himself. But Peter was grin-
ning a weird fox-like grin. Nobody appreciated a suc-
cessful master-stroke so well as did Proctor.
And after minutes, or perhaps hours, the Convoca-
tion broke, and moved away in glittering fragments.
The implementation of it would be done in smaller
gatherings, in tight groups and committees. The par-
ticular details would evolve themselves out of shrewd
staff work.
But nobody really doubted that they had their man.
“It was Rimrock, the rubber-nosed ocean-man
thing," said Thomas when he had withdrawn with his
party and was mingling with other functionaries. “It
was the Copperhead with his occult stuff. It was Paul
with his broken crown, and the child-witch with the two
opposite auras about her. They took all the grand ones
like country ganglers with the magic show they did for
me.
"Aye, and with trumpets!"
“I thought I was a master of contrived effects,"
Cosmos Kingmaker told Thomas, “but I never put
together a show like yours. I have a personal difficulty.
My wife has been regarded as the most beautiful
woman on Astrobe, and she so regards herself. It is,
indeed, a requisite of my position that I have the most
beautiful woman on Astrobe. But the legend-girl who is
in your entourage has her startled, and the popular
reports have torn her up. So long as the Evita was
believed a legend it could be lived with. Now she has
60
PAST MASTER
a
a
made another public appearance and everybody on the
planet knows who she is."
“I have not seen the one, nor greatly noticed the
other, except for certain queer qualities that cling to
her, and they are not altogether of beauty. I have no
idea at all how she happens to be in my entourage.
She's a puzzler."
“So, you've been wandering like a loon these days
and nights,” Kingmaker accused, “and no telling into
what hands you've fallen. It isn't a very responsible
beginning. What hills and dales of Astrobe you've been
wandering over I don't know."
“Through what swamps, rather. On Earth, at least,
the loon is a bird of the swamps and meres. I've been in
some brackish swamps.
“It's a bird, is it?'' Kingmaker asked. “'I thought it
was only an expression. Well, whatever swamps you
have been wading in, do not go to them again till you
have been instructed. You will not know with what
eyes to look at these things until we tell you."
“I had intended to use my own eyes.”
“No, no, that won't do at all. We won't have you
interfering with the things we have set up for you to do,
,
or offering untutored programs on your own.”
“You are saying that you won't have me interfering
with the image that you intend to present me under?''
“That's it exactly, Thomas. The image has already
gotten a little beyond what we intended. We were
worried whether we could make it strong enough. Now
we are worried that perhaps it is a little too strong. I had
expected you to be more amazed at the wonders of
Astrobe, however."
1)
61
PAST MASTER
“Kingmaker, man, I stand and stare boggle-eyed at
I
them like a calf at the new bam door. Of course I'm
impressed by the thousand years of technological ad-
vance since my time, half of it made since the first
landing on Astrobe, much of it quite new to me. And in
my day I had the name of being a forerunner in these
things. I didn't know what questions to ask about the
future when—well, when I talked to certain traveling
men on this subject a long time ago, or at least a long
time from here. I asked them questions of philosophy
and theology and the political formation of common-
wealths, and of the arts and tongues and of the mind
understanding itself. It never struck me that the changes
would be in material things. We had already made great
advances in these, far beyond the Greeks and Romans,
and I thought the cycle would swing back and the
thousand years after myself would be devoted to ad-
vances in the intangibles. Aye, I'm impressed; the
more I hear, the more I see, I'm impressed.
,
“The fact that there are no sick of body among you
(except in the Bario and Cathead) amazes me. The fact
that there are no sick of mind among you would entice
me also, had I not discovered for myself that so many of
you are dead of mind. All your mechanical and mental
things are new coinage to me. Your mind-probes and
mind-crawls fascinate me, even when they are turned
on myself. You have loosed them on me within the last
several moments, have you not, Kingmaker? I can feel
them crawling like moles through the tunnels of my
head. Hah! I've got them calked now, though. I've but
to think in Latin and they can't come into me. I always
believed that it would be a mental image thing, not a
verbal thing, when it came.'
.
62
PAST MASTER
“We have both sorts, Thomas. The verbal is the
simpler."
“'So simple that you can hide it in the palm of your
hand, Kingmaker, and you do."
“It's neater than eavesdropping," Kingmaker said,
"and it does pick up the sub-vocals. You yourself use
an ansel, but they haven't proved satisfactory. The
ansel tends to forget that he is only a communication
device. Sometimes he becomes the master. Most men
think in words in their unguarded moments, and par-
ticularly when they are voicing other words at the same
time. Of course my own device here can be fitted with a
Latin or any other attachment; it is just that I had
forgotten that Latin was still used in your day by the
international scholar crowd. So I have missed a sequ-
ence out of your private thought, and just when it was
getting pretty good. Would you repeat it for me?''
“No I won't, Kingmaker. It would burn the ears off
you. But of all the things I have seen on Astrobe to this
minute, it is your Programmed Persons who most en-
chant me: not the Programmed Killers who have given
me some trouble, but the others. What a boys' dream
come true! The old-time Greeks dreamed of this, you
know, and the latter-time Jews. The mechanical man
who works! What clockmaker's apprentice would not
give half his soul for the secret? That we can make
machines in our own image, and that they can outthink
and outperform us! It's a marvel, Kingmaker. It hasn't
grown to be a stale marvel with you, has it? And not
only have men made them to perform better than men;
but now, so I'm told, the things make themselves better
than men can make them.'
“No, this marvel hasn't become stale to me,
>
63
PAST MASTER
.
Thomas. I wasn't sure how you would take it, particu-
larly since you yourself have been attacked by the
Programmed. The Killers themselves are a specialized
minority, built to guard against any threat to the As-
trobe Dream. But sometimes, it seems, they make
mistakes. The Programmed themselves are the main
thing, the men of the future, the successors to our-
selves."
While Kingmaker talked, Thomas entertained in the
cellar of his mind one of those passage dreams such as
both he and Paul had experienced on the transit between
Earth and Astrobe. Cosmos Kingmaker was a great
golden spider, for all that he wore the head of a lion in
the dream. Out of her webs she spun (for sex is often
confused in these passage dreams) the whole great
civilized world of Astrobe. The great buildings, the
great societies, all were the fruit of these webs. The
whole world of Astrobe was entirely of gossamer. But
the rampant spider would defend her work in every
flossy pinnacle of it. There would be no compromise
here. The silky façade must be preserved. What matter
that it had no substance?
Then a black wind arose, blowing out of Cathead. It
began to rend the webs. “Here, here!” great King-
makershouted in the superb spidery voice. “It is a false
thing that blows. I am the true thing. I am the true
cat-head, and not this other. I say to the winds "Be
quiet! Do not rumble my webs, Oh do not rumble my
webs!”
“I will return to these wonders again and again,
Kingmaker,” Thomas said, talking on an entirely dif-
ferent level than that of his passage dream. “And the
a
64
PAST MASTER
1
)
9
most wonderful of all is your travel today. On my trip to
Astrobe I traveled a hundred times farther in every
second than I had gone in all my life before; and I am a
I
traveled man, familiar in all the capitals of Christen-
dom. Speed has become infinite."
“No, Thomas. Hopp-Equation travel is only the
squre of eight, or sixty-four times light speed. With that
we can never hope to reach more than a narrow comer
of the universe. Other number-base travel has been
tried—the square of thirty-seven, for instance, or
Horwitz-Equation travel. But no pilot has ever retumed
from that, or from any of the others. They may retum a a
billion
years
in the future or in the past, or they may be
lost. We aren't the lords of speed yet."
“Even so, you must have billions of worlds to col-
onize."
“No, not yet, not for many centuries. We have only
six Proven Reserve Worlds after Astrobe. And the
colonies on them are still sickly things. The elites do
not go out to them as they went out from Earth to
Astrobe. At the moment we are going nowhere except
backwards."
“With every man-jack of you a thumping genius you
should be going forward with a surge. Kingmaker, you
figure to use me as a front; you have admitted as much.
But a little study of recent Astrobe politics is not reas-
suring. I find that you have had for recent short-term
world presidents a Mr. X, the Masked Marvel, the
Asteroid Midas, and the Hawk-Man from Helios. The
latter must have looked rather like Foreman. They
sound like the names of ancient Rome gladiators or, as
one has suggested to me, of medieval American wres-
tlers. Now you take me for another costumed actor, a
,
a
65
PAST MASTER
9
contrived front-symbol for you to manipulate. You will
bill me as the Past Master."
“Probably, since the name has taken the popular
fancy. We haven't yet decided."
''
“Cosmos, I will be manipulated by no one! If elected
president, I will preside!"
“That is what we both hope and fear, Thomas. No,
your case is not like the others. We have run out of
tricks, but the people haven't run out of expecting
tricks. To be elected you must be presented as a con-
trived front-symbol. But to rescue Astrobe from its
mortal difficulties you must supply us with a new
element."
“I believe you're afraid of a new element, King-
maker.'
“Of course I am. But I will not have the fabric of our
world rended.
“Do not rumble my webs, Oh do not rumble my
webs!''
“What, Thomas?”
“A fragment of a dream up from the cellar of my
mind, no more. You will try anything, be it deepest
change, to.preserve the changelessness."
“I don't know what the necessary element will be,
Thomas. Foreman believes that he knows. Thomas,
you don't seem too curious about your own attempted
assassinations."
“Oh, I've set up my own apparatus to go into that,
Kingmaker. It reaches higher than the simple Pro-
grammed; it reaches to the complex Programmed and to
the high-ranking human. There's a pretty strong party
that wants me dead before I am ever, as it were, bom on
Astrobe.'
9
66
PAST MASTER
“There's another thing we're afraid of, Thomas.
.
We're afraid to show you, and afraid to hide you, and
it's too late to make another choice. You have an
impressive name to the initiates, you received a start-
ling ovation which we do not understand-neither the
thing itself nor our own part in it—and you have an
impressive contuming for the people. But you're not an
impressive personality.”
“You hear me now, Kingmaker! I do not strut sitting
down, if that is what you mean. I do not play the great
man privately. But I can be an excellent man when
there is time for it, and you will not find a better. I was
counted a master in my own time, and I be a master
here. On the scena I can play the noblest rhetor of them
all! There'll be nowt awkward or awry about my per-
formance, Kingmaker. At this one thing for which
Astrobe has a hunger now, high oratory, we were the
professionals and you are the amateurs. I know that you
have analyzed the thing and broken the personal aura
down into its elements. It is like chopping up a bird, but
can you make a bird? Perhaps you can, since you made
the Programmed Persons, but we recognize them as
artificial. I know that you have built intricate eloquence
machines, man, but they ring false. The laughter of the
people at them like autumn leaves blowing is evidence
of this. I've heard the eloquence machines, and I've
heard the peoples' response. I've heard human and
programmed orators who have studied under the eloqu-
ence machines; I've heard a lot of things in one week on
Astrobe. People are hungry for the real thing, and I can
give it to them. You try to analyze my ovation at my
coming to Convocation Hall, and you fail. Part of it was
the connivance of my friends and associates, and part of
67
PAST MASTER
9 9
1
it was a congruity of circumstances. But the most of it,
Kingmaker, was myself.
“We'll have to let you try it, Thomas. But don't ever
try to set policy. Politics on Astrobe has become an
intricate science."
“Politics was intricate in my day," Thomas main-
tained.
But Kingmaker began to laugh at that. Thomas was
not sure whether or not he had reason.
1
0
,,
“We are lucky to be alive, Thomas," said Peter
Proctor the lucky fox, “and I do not mean it in any
negative way, as though there were something threaten-
ing us. I mean that developments themselves are lucky,
and on Astrobe today things are the luckiest ever.
“Then why do so many choose to leave this life,
Proctor?" Thomas asked.
“Leave it? You mean to join the Cathead thing? Or
do you mean what was once vulgarly called the suicide
rate? The first depresses me, the second delights me. Is
it not lucky to be able to leave a life that cloys? Is it not
lucky that there are such neat facilities for it? Should a
man sit at table after he is sated? Why then should he
live a moment longer than is required? Golden Astrobe
is no prison; we do not build walls around it to keep men
in. Life is not for everybody, and long life should be for
none. A man may dispose of himself in a booth on any
street comer. All apprehension and uneasiness has been
removed. A man can leave with a clear conscience.”
“Aye, do the dirty thing with a clear conscience.
And you make it work.'
"We livein a lucky world, Thomas. Now we rub our
hands, and we will bring still more luck to it.”
а
68
PAST MASTER
)
“I am the good-luck piece now, am I?”' Thomas
asked. “And what thing are you, Peter? I have won-
dered. And so, I am told, have others."
“Me, Thomas? I'm the luckiest man in the world,
any world. No need to look more deeply into me. I'm
the second richest man on Astrobe, after Kingmaker.
And all envy attaches to him, not to me. I am fortunate
in wife, in offspring, in attainments, in residence—"
“I have heard the scree,” Thomas said.
“And I am universally liked,”' Proctor finished with
a look that was more than commonly fox-like.
.
It was another of those passage dreams up from the
cellar of Thomas' mind. Peter Proctor was a fox in-
deed, and he ran nimbly over a thin volcanic crust that
had a very great depth below it. Thomas was in sudden
terror of that emptiness below the crust, and the flicker-
ing flames that were only an aspect of that emptiness.
Just how deep was the great space below that thin crust?
Thomas peered down. The space was forever. There
was no bottom. Stars could be seen below, under their
feet, but there was something the matter with these
stars. They were crooked things, stars of the crooked
light. But Peter the fox was in no way terrified with that
great depth, not even when great clumps of the volcanic
crust broke away before his feet and fell forever. “It is
my home there," said the fox. “Let the crust sink down
in it; let it fragment and break, and pitch all its fauna
into the flames in the void. I welcome it, the fundamen-
tal void. I was bom for it, and I will take all to it
quickly, if only the meddlers who would prop up the
crust will desist. The flames in the void are my home.
.
Nothing can harm a fox with an asbestos tail." And
0
69
PAST MASTER
then Thomas noticed that Peter the fox did indeed have
an asbestos tail.
6
>
>
“But you were one of the three men who sent to
bring me out of the past," Thomas said. “Why should
you, if everything goes so well here?”'
"Oh, I believed that you might do less harm than
another, little Thomas. You will be the newest novelty.
We need such for the people in this temporality, this
passing phase. The people must dine on novelties after
they are cloyed of food."
“The constant search for novelty which is a form of
despair."
“Who said that, little Thomas?"
“A Frenchman of some centuries after my time. I
came on the phrase lately by accident.'
“No, I believe that novelty is an aspect of ever-
leafing hope in the great resolving, Thomas. Hope is a
station that we pass on our way there. Hope is wonder-
ful.”
“Aye, Proctor. And luck is lucky. You don't seem
quite real to me. I wonder if you cast a shadow.”
“Not a black one, I hope, Thomas. You still wonder
why I was a party to sending for you since things are
going so well? I consider you an innocuous man, an
old-fashioned toy. Let the people have their toys.”
“What will you do if I prove to be more than a toy?”
“It is lucky that I have so many sides to me. It is
lucky that I can be very cruel without qualms. I can be
very unpleasant when the situation calls for it. Thomas,
I will not allow you to become more than a toy. One
wrong move, and you are a broken toy. Politics has
become a science, and I am its only consummate scien-
9
а
.
70
PAST MASTER
tist. Believe me, I am the only one who knows what is
going on. I make it go. When Kingmaker washes his
hands and absolves himself, I take over. If you prove to
be more than a toy, I will take over.”
"It is always darkest just before false dawn,” said
Fabian Foreman. “The foolish rooster has crowed
(they had them yet in your day, did they not, Thomas,
,
or have I my eras mixed?) and it is still night. Astrobe
has been a false dawn, and now we believe that the
dawn will never end."
“It seems rather bright to me here," said Thomas.
“'If this be night, what is the daylight like?''
“But we are wrong in believing that the darkness
will continue forever," Foreman continued. “The true
dawn must come, and quite soon, or else nothing will
come. The night will end, whether in daylight or in
nothingness. But I regret that the next grian-sun will
come up behind a particularly dirty cloud. I simply do
not see any other way to arrange it.”
“Is it you personally who makes the sun to rise,
Foreman?”
“Quite right, Thomas. It is I personally who will
make this particular sun come up. Had you some idea
that the sun came up by itself? Or that another than
myself was calling the tune on it?''
"Proctor believes that he makes things go on As-
trobe.”
“But I make Proctor go, Thomas.” '
"He says that when Kingmaker absolves himself and
washes his hands, he Proctor takes over.”
“Of course he does. Kingmaker is the action. Proc-
tor is the reaction or the nullification. How grandly
71
PAST MASTER
Kingmaker acts! Oh how beautifully and automatically
Proctor will react! Oh how cleverly I will abet them
both in it! And I be the only one who understands the
results."
1)
Out of the mind's cellar again a broached cobweb-
covered bottle of the sparkly stuff! Ninety seconds of
poignant drama that goes on while the rest of the world
goes on, and exposes the roots of that world.
Foreman, his hawk-face set in a gash of torture, sat at
a rougher table than one should find on Astrobe. He had
thirty cockle shells on the table before him and he
shuffled and counted them. He wept, but as a hawk
would, awkwardly and in ungainly fashion, with a
hideous cawing and coughing. “It has to be," he
cawed. “There is no other way to bring it about.'
But one of the cockle shells was actually a cockerel
shell, and the Foreman-hawk noticed it with a start.
Then a thunder came and sat down at the table with
him. “It is Mother Carey's own chicken you destroy
there,” the thunder said. “There is not woe in all the
worlds like your woe.
)
G
9)
6
1)
“I know how a cat watches a bird,” the Thomas said
to Foreman (and the passage bird had flown), “and I
know how well the bird can serve the cat in his busi-
ness. You'll nowt take me in one mouthful, though.
I'm a boney bird, I assure you. And now I see that you
are hawk and no cat, but still you pounce on me.'
“What do you mean, little Thomas?”
“Proctor called me that too, and he also purred when
he said it. I get you animals mixed; you are not the same
types as on Earth. Foreman, I have the feeling that
)
72
you'll push me into a corner that I'm too stubborn to come out of." "I must push everyone into corners that they're unable to come out of. I feel lonesome in that I am the only one who sees things so clearly and· so far in advance. The first time it happened, did somebody push you into a corner that you were too stubborn to come out of? Do you know who did it to you, Thomas? Do you want me to tell you?" "I don't want to know, because I suspect what man of good name it was who forced me to my murdering . But the first time hasn't happened to me yet. I was grabbed off by yoi.Ir pilot a few months before my Earth death that thousand years ago. I don't understand at all what happened that first time, since it hasn't yet." "But I know, Thomas. Yes, a man did push you into such a corner before, and I will push you into such a corner this time. You couldn't expect a different end­ ing, could you? It worked to a limited effect the first time. It half-saved a hopeless situation . It will work to a greater effect this time. I won't absolve myself or wash my hands, but I'll miss you." ' 'Foreman, in the whole Astrobe situation everyone is hiding something from me. Everything is wonderful on Astrobe, they tell me, and so it does appear to me, except for a comparatively slight area of blight which has appeared and will soon disappear. But it grows larger. ''The sickness of Astrobe can't be merely that a group has reverted, uneconomically ' to a backward form of economy, to an obsolete form of life. It is not that they have returned to the hard life of poverty, by free choice, and with no apparent compensation . There
PAST MASTER
73
PAST MASTER
)
have been such cults before. If the sickness had been no
more than this, you wouldn't have called me up to
doctor it, or to serve as a front for those doctoring it.
Well, something is very sick here; there's a beautiful
golden fever that kills. I don't understand even the
symptoms. And a hard man in Cathead told me that I
would mistake the sickness for the cure.”
“The hard man was half right, Thomas. The Cathead
thing is madness to most, a turning to poverty and
abject misery from free choice, and that choice made by
millions of people, more than a tenth of those on As-
trobe so far. You say you have seen the misery there.
You could not have, not in two days and a night. It is the
years and years of that bone-rotting misery that sickens
the imagination. But the Cathead partisans say that
their experiment is a Returning to Life. This I cannot
explain to you, no more can they; you have to live your
way into it and your own time is too short for that.
Perhaps you'll see it in your last moment.
"Perhaps I'd see it now if somebody would talk
sense.
“Oh, the two things are eating each other up, and
who is to say which of them is the rightful body and
which is the cancer? The Cathead affair is neither the
sickness nor the cure. It is a symptomatic irruption, a
surface effect of the sickness. We are sicker than
Cathead. We are sicker than the Barrio. Oh, we'll die
for it!
“I myself have made some plans for a resurrection or
a rebirth; or for the coming of another thing that may
have resemblance to present substance, but resemb-
lance only. Now we prepare in small things, while the
world ends. We'll make you serve the preparation, as
74
PAST MASTER
)
.
we've made worse men serve lesser things. And you'll
serve better after you're dead.”
“Damn it, I am dead, from your viewpoint.”
“Yes, that's the way I regard you. But your death
here and now on Astrobe is what's required. The shape
of things to come is very intricate, but it may work out
for the best after we are past this tricky situation.'
“For whose best, Foreman? I've the feeling that I'm
being measured and dealt for."
“You are. Take the cheerful view, Thomas. You've
been dead a thousand years. How will it matter what
happens to you here?”
"'Foreman, I'm quite interested in what happens to
me after I'm really dead. I'm not dead now, whatever
the seeming. They keep a different sort of time on the
other side. I don't understand you, Foreman. Are you
for me or against me?”
“I'm for you, Thomas, absolutely. I'm working for
the very highest goal by the lowest of means. So I'm for
you all the way, to the death and beyond-yours, not
mine. And with those cheerful words you leave me.”
6
0
“If these three are the inner group of the Circle of
Masters, it is no wonder that Astrobe is sick," Thomas
said to himself.
Thomas talked to Pottscamp, who has been called
the fourth member of the big three. Thomas enjoyed
talking to Pottscamp, one of the most interesting indi-
viduals he had ever met. Never was there a more
pleasant or surprising person; and Pottscamp had a
mind that was like quicksilver. Sometimes Thomas was
sure that there was nothing in that mind; and again there
75
PAST MASTER
)
was very much in it. It was as though Pottscamp went to
a source and dipped deep whenever he had the need to
replenish himself.
Pottscamp had large innocent blue eyes and the look
of perpetual youth. And yet he had been active in
Astrobe affairs for very many years and was certainly
older than Thomas' normal age. But he was a boy, a
precocious boy, a startling boy who might torture cats
or commit abominations, but who would always do so
with an air of total innocence.
“So that you will know who really runs things on
Astrobe, Thomas-"
“I know, Pottscamp, I know.”
Another capsule dream like a passage dream. There
was a boy who built a toy. It was a clever boy, and a
clever toy that he built. Which one was Pottscamp,
Thomas could not say, for they both looked like him.
“Go steal apples,” the boy told the toy, and the toy did
so. He brought back an armload in no time at all. “Go
out to my best friend in the road there and knock him
down," the boy-child said, and the toy did so. He
knocked down the best friend, and in retum he got
himself bloodied up and battered. The child was de-
lighted with what had happened to his best friend and to
his toy. “Work out my language assignments for to-
morrow," the child said, and the toy worked out all
the constructions and translations of the Camiroi and
Puca and Neo-Spanish assignments. “Drink,” the
child said, and the toy went and drank from the brook
that ran beside the home-house. “Eat," the child said,
and the toy ate the child up, every limb and light and
bone and morsel of him. Was that Pottscamp? Was he a
toy who would eat you up, or was he the guileless one
who would be devoured?
76
PAST MASTER
a
"I know, Pottscamp, I know who runs things on
Astrobe," Thomas said. “Kingmaker runs everything
by himself. So does Proctor. So does Foreman; he even
makes the sun to rise. And so do you run it all, you will
say."
But Pottscamp shook his head. “Our talk will be at
another time, Thomas. Our small conversation today
was but to proclaim myself to you. You are a person; I
am a person; the others are not, not really. If you were
not of a certain consequence, or likely to become of
consequence, I would not trouble to inform you and
deal with you.
“A little later, Thomas, and in another place, we will
talk at our leisure. And with me there will be eight other
entities that you will find very interesting. What you
will meet on that evening in the near future is the real
Circle of Masters, though several of us belong to both
circles.
“We will instruct you on what is indeed taking
place. We will show you the back of the tapestry. What
you see now is not the true face of Astrobe, not all of it.
The other side of the tapestry is shaggier, but it is a real
picture also, and a much more meaingful one than the
world you look at now. Take out your eyeballs and
polish them up, Thomas. Sweep out your ears and
garnish them with acanthia. You will need all your
sensing organs at their clearest to comprehend what we
will reveal to you. Have you never had the feeling,
Thomas, that you were looking at everything from the
wrong side? You have been.”
a
T7
5.
THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME
a
Thomas was playing a precis machine which he had set
to give him all general information about Astrobe. It
was a good machine that would answer questions, and
depart from its formulae to give personal opinions
when asked to do so.
“Golden Astrobe is an urban world, a world of
cities,” the precis machine played. “If a man is impor-
tant, then a city is more important, and a very large city
is still more important. When we have all become one
perfect city in our totality, then our evolving will be
completed. The individual must pass and be absorbed.
The city is all that matters. A city is more than the
totality of the people in it, just as a living body is more
than the heaped-up quantity of the total cells in it. When
the cells consider themselves as individuals, that is
cancer in the body. When men look upon themselves as
individuals, that is cancer in the body politic.
"The great cities of Astrobe, in our present evolving
phase towards the One Great City, are Cosmopolis the
capital, Potter, Ruckle, Ciudad Fabela, Sykestown,
Chezem City, Wendopolis, Metropol, Fittstown, Dog-
gle, Culpepper, Big Gobey, Griggs, and Wu Town. Of
these, Cosmopolis the capital is the most perfected, and
Wu Town is the least. Yet there is hope even for Wu
Town. All things achieve salvation in the great synthe-
sis.
78
PAST MASTER
“All these cities are quite large, it having been found
several centuries ago that a city of less than twenty-five
million persons is not economical. But beyond these
there is no point in multiplying cities or people. The
small annual increase that is allowed for Astrobe is
balanced by emigration to colony worlds. We do not
believe in heaping up people.'
“What about Cathead?” Thomas asked the precis
machine.
“Cathead is the cancer that is being excised from this
world. It is the cancer because the inhabitants of
Cathead regard themselves as individuals and believe
in the importance of themselves. Yes, Cathead is quite
large, the largest of the cities, larger even than Cos-
mopolis the capital. We will leave Cathead out of
account here since it is not typical of Astrobe.
“There is no poverty on Astrobe since all persons
have access to all things. There is no superstition, nor
belief in anything beyond, since there can be nothing
beyond. Any beyond will ultimately be evolved from
the here. While Astrobe is the highest thing there can be
nothing higher. This is the essence of the Astrobe
dream. There is no sickness on Astrobe, either bodily
or mental. There is no nervousness, apprehension, or
fear. All arts and all sciences are open to every person.
Travel about the world is by instantaneous conveyance.
The weather and the oceans have been controlled.
There is no feeling of guilt, since freedom from every
repression has been achieved. There is no cruelty or
hate. There is no possibility of sin, since there is no-
thing to sin against. There is every luxury and every
interest available to everyone. There is almost perfect
justice. The few remaining courts are to provide redress
79
PAST MASTER
9)
>
to inequities brought about by misunderstandings; and
these become fewer and fewer.'
“It has its points, it has its points,” said Thomas,
and rubbed his hands. “And yet it seems as though
someone has recounted all this long ago.”
“New dimensions of pleasure are achieved daily and
almost hourly," the precis machine played. “All live
in constant ecstasy. We are all one, all one being, the
whole world of us, and we reach the heights of intense
intercommunion. We come to have a single mind and a
single spirit. We are everything. We are the living
cosmos. The people of Astrobe do not dream at night,
for a dream is a maladjustment. We do not have an
unconscious, as the ancient people had, for an uncon-
scious is the dark side, and we are all light. For us there
is no future. The future is now. There is no Heaven as
the ancients believed; for many years we have been in
the only after-life there is. Death is unimportant. By it
we simply become more closely integrated into the
City. We leave off being individual. In us there is
neither human nor programmed, but we are all one. We
verge to our apex which is the total realization of the
world-folk. We become a single organism, ever more
intense and more intricate, the City.itself.”
“I remember now who it was who limned this all out
before,” said Thomas. “It was myself. What other
man makes a joke about a tree, and the tree bears fruit?
But I like it more now than when first I mocked it. It
sounds better when it comes tumbling from another
mouth, even a tin mouth. What, shall I be enchanted by
my own spell?”
“We all say the same things, we all think the same
thoughts, we all have the same feelings and pleasures,”
2)
1)
9
80
PAST MASTER
9
the precis machine played. “Both love and hate disap-
pear, for they were two aspects of the same thing-a
,
mantle that was wom by our species in its childhood.
We stand unencumbered before the grian-sun. We are
the sun. We are everything. We merge. We loose both
being and non-being, for both are particulars. We be-
come the extensible and many-dimensioned sphere that
has neither beginning nor end, nor being. We enter the
calm intensity where peace and strife cancel each other
out, where consciousness follows unconsciousness into
oblivion. We are devoured by Holy Nothingness, the
Big O, the Ultimate Point for all us ultimates."
“Shove it, my little mechanical mentor, shove it,”
Thomas More said. “I made it up, I invented it. It was a
joke, I tell you, a bitter joke. It was how not to build a
world.”
“But I am not finished,” the precis machine played.
“The vision still ascends. Well, no, it doesn't exactly
ascend beyond a certain point, since it has reached a
sphere where there is neither up nor down. But it
becomes intensity still more intense, and—”
“Shove it, little tin hom, shove it," Thomas
laughed.
“You are not impressed by the golden Astrobe
Dream that is becoming reality?” the precis machine
asked with apprehension, or with what would have
been apprehension if that still obtained on Astrobe.
“Not very much," Thomas said. “I invented it all
for a sour joke. I mustn't let the sour joke be on me.”
And yet Thomas was impressed by the Astrobe
achievement, if not by the Astrobe dream. There was a
terrible clarity running through everything, a simplicity
containing all the complexity. In matter and mind As-
6
1,
81
PAST MASTER
trobe was neat, and the rains fell always at their
scheduled hour. That was something: there was order.
Astrobe was an urban world. All its great cities were
really one, in a single close cluster. The countryside
was little used. There were the automated production
strips, and there were the feral or wild strips to keep the
balance. Few people lived in either. It was the cities
that were the heart of Astrobe, and the people of the
cities were bom knowing everything.
There were no individuals with sharp edges, there
were no dissenting or pemicious elements, there was
the high flat plane of excellence in all things. What can
you say against a world that has gained every goal ever
set? And there was pleasant termination available as
soon as a touch of weariness set in.
“It sets in with me already," Thomas said. “I have
to hold onto myself with both hands every time I pass a
termination booth."
But one thing seemed to be lacking onAstrobe, andit
puzzled Thomas.
“Where do the people attend mass?'' he asked as he
stood in the middle of golden Cosmopolis.
“They don't, Thomas; they haven't for centuries,”
Paul told him. “Oh, there are a very few who do
sometimes. I do myself on occasion, but I am a freak
and usually classed as a criminal. And in Cathead there
has been a new appearance of the thing, along with
other oddities. But not one person in ten thousand on
Astrobe has ever attended.
“Are there no churches at all, then?''
"In Cathead and the Barrio and the feral strips there
are a very few that might still be called by the name.
19
82
PAST MASTER
»,
.
)
Such buildings as remain in Cosmopolis and the other
Cities are under the department of antiquities. Some of
them have period statuary that is of interest to the
specialist. While mass itself cannot be found in any of
them here, the replica can be played on demand.”
“Let us go to one of them.
After groping about in some rather obscure streets
that Paul knew imperfectly, they found one. It was
quite small and tucked away in a corner. They entered.
There was the sense of total emptiness. There was no
Presence.
"I wonder what time is the next mass." Thomas
“
said. Or the mass that is not quite a mass. I'm not sure
that I understand you on it.
“Oh, putin a stoimenof d'or in the slot, and push the
button. Then the mass will begin.”
Thomas did. And it did.
The priest came up out of the floor. He was not
human, unless he was zombie human. He was probably
not even a programmed person. He may have been a
a
mechanical device. He wore a pearl-gray derby hat,
swish-boy sidebums, and common green shorts or
breechcloth. His depilated torso was hermaphroditic.
He or it smoked a long weedjy-weed cigarette in a
period holder. He began to jerk and to intone with
dreadful dissonance.
Then a number of other contrivances arrived from
somewhere, intoning in mock chorus to the priest, and
twanging instruments.
“For the love of Saint Jack, what are those, Paul?”'
Thomas asked in bewilderment. “Are those not the
instruments described by Dante as played in lowest
Hell? Why the whole thing has tumed into a dirty
0
83
PAST MASTER
)
burlesque, Paul, played out with unclean puppets.
Why, Paul why?"
“Oh, it had really turned into such a thing before it
died, Thomas. This is what the Church and the Mass
had become when it was taken over by the government
as a curiosity and an antique."
Well, the replica mass ran its short course to the
jerking and bawling of the ancient ritual guitar. At
sermon time was given a straight news-broadcast, so
that one should not be out of contact with the world for
the entire fifteen minutes.
At the Consecration, a sign lit up:
"Brought to you Courtesy of Grailo Grape-Ape, the
Finest of the Bogus Wines."
The bread was ancient-style-hot-dog rolls. The pup-
pets or mechanisms danced up orgasmically and used
the old vein-needle before taking the rolls.
“How do you stop the dirty little thing?” Thomas
asked.
“Push the Stop button,” Paul said, “Here, I'll do
it.” And he stopped it.
“Why, I wonder how it all came about,” Thomas
said. “That snake on a stick, is it meant to be the
Christ? Is that leering whore holding the deformed
monkey meant to be the Virgin? A dirty little burles-
que, a dreary bit of devil worship. But even dirty
burlesques are not made out of nothing. Had the mass
really fallen so low?"
“So I have read, Thomas. It fell to just this low estate
before it became ritually frozen."
“Then the Church was only a thing like other things,
Paul? And it died as other things do?''
“So most say. The Metropolitan of Astrobe still
6
84
PAST MASTER
lives, but he is a very old man; and the office will
probably not be continued beyond his lifetime. There is
a slight revival of the Church in Cathead, as I men-
tioned.”
"Acceptance in Cathead is enough to damn a thing in
any clean region. Cathead, that cancer growing on the
fair planet!”
“And in the feral strips there are small groups who
keep a rite that is not a burlesque."
“Well, I never had too much faith, Paul. I believe for
a while in the mornings if I wake feeling well. But my
belief is almost always gone by noon. Somehow I
thought that the Church would continue, but I don't
know why I thought so. It would, after all, be an
anomaly on rational Astrobe. Aye, I'm glad to see the
old thing gone.
"I'm not,” Paul said bitterly. "I came to it when it
was a black remnant in my darkest days in Cathead, but
it's more than all the other things. Yes, I'm crazy,
Thomas; I have bone splinters in my brain. But it's
curious that you are a saint in the Church in which you
don't believe, which you are glad to see gone.
Thomas laughed loudly and clearly, a really cheerful
thing, high and fluted. He and Paul went out into the
sudden golden daylight.
“Aye, they were right to push the old fraud into a
corner and turn her into a dirty burlesque,” Thomas
said. "If the tree does not bear fruit, cut it down."
2)
9
>)
1)
Thomas spent entire days marveling at the wonderful
ways of Astrobe. He had been something of a skeptic at
first. Now he had swallowed bait, hook, line, rod, and
fisherman's arm. He had become a sudden strong ad-
85
PAST MASTER
)
)
vocate of the Astrobe dream. And yet he wanted to look
more deeply into the workings of the thing, to examine
its more distant roots and sources.
"It is hardly to be believed," he said one day when
'
he had his retinue with him. “Come, people, we will
see more of this. We travel again.”
Against the advice of his mentors, Thomas had de-
cided to take some time to examine Astrobe.
“There is no point in travel, Thomas,” Kingmaker
had told him. “It is all the same everywhere. That is the
beauty of Astrobe: it is the same everywhere."
“Go where you will and see what you see,” Proctor
told him, “but do not believe everything that you think
you have seen. When you get back, I will tell you what
you
have seen. There have been sad cases of men who
say things falsely, and I had to take a hand. I do not
want to do that. Luck be on thy head, good Thomas."
“You will not know how to see, Thomas, you will
not know how at all,”Fabian Foreman told him. “You
haven't the eyes for it. You will see it all from the
wrong side. You are an awkward man, Thomas."
“In that hour it will be given you what you will see,”
Pottscamp told him. “And a little later, in a secret place
and out of context, you will sit down with nine entities
(one of them myself) and you will be told what these
things have been. You see now toy things with toy
eyes, but in that time you will be given seeing."
a
,'
Thomas had a loose retinue. He had chosen some of
the members. And some of them had chosen him. It
wasn't the group that the big men would have picked
for him, though there was one spy for the big men in the
group.
86
PAST MASTER
There was his old Earth-to-Astrobe pilot Paul; there
was Scrivener and Slider; there was Maxwell and Wal-
ter Copperhead; there was Evita the girl-woman from
the Barrio who was sister to the boy Adam; there was
Rimrock the ansel whom Thomas called the Oceanic
Man.
But first, just what is an ansel anyhow? And what
was Rimrock, who was a most exceptional ansel? An-
sels weren't understood at all on Astrobe, and that was
their only home.
“Would you tell me of your origin, Rimrock?”
?
Thomas asked him, “of yourself personally, and of
your species?”
“I would, but I'm not sure I can,” Rimrock said.
“What little we know of ourselves we have learned
from regular people, or have guessed. When we passed
through the strangeness and changed our cast, this
entailed forgetting much of our beginnings. It is a
childhood now shut offfrom us. You see, there were no
ansels to be found on Astrobe when Earthmen first
came here.
“It wasn't until the second generation of men on
Astrobe that any of us were discovered, and we were
quite backward: We do not generate rapidly; but none
of us die in our present memory, so we do increase in
numbers. We have developed from contact with regular
people, and we ourselves have more influence on peo-
ple than they suspect. People children are forbidden to
associate with us, but they dream about us, as do the
adults. It is nonsense that the happy people of Astrobe
do not have night dreams. I have walked through many
thousands of those dreams myself. I cannot see that we
have any limit, Thomas, though I am not clear as to
87
PAST MASTER
what our symbiotic relation with regular people should
be."
“But you must know where you came from, Rim-
rock!”
"Well, we do know it, but we have garbled it in
legend. Our legend is that we are the people who
climbed all the way to the sky, 'broke holes in it, and
climbed out into a strange world that is above the sky.
This world that you know, the noon-day world of
Astrobe, is the world that is above the sky. You do not
feel it, but we do.
“We were deep ocean creatures, Thomas. I re-
member, like a thing before birth, the world of the
depths; but we didn't consider it as the depths. We
loved to climb, to fly; our epics were all stories of such
daring. We loved the pinnacled mountains. Our heroes
were those who climbed them the highest. We flew up
and ever up, establishing settlements on higher and still
higher mountain ledges. We came to the beginning of
light, and then to the beginnings of vision. This was the
first of the strange zone that we had to cross. When we
came out of it on the higher side we would be different
creatures with minds formed again.
“For there had come the exciting rumor that some of
the great mountain spires might actually pierce the sky
itself. We had, of course, long talked to fish creatures
who claimed that they had been all the way to the sky;
that they had, indeed, leapt through holes in the sky,
and then fallen back. But who believes fish?''
“You did really talk with fish, Rimrock?''
“Why not, Thomas? We now talk with men, who are
much more intricate creatures. But this fish story was
88
PAST MASTER
true. I remember it all, as of something from another
life, the epic thing we did. I was a member of the first
party. We flew and climbed higher and higher to truly
dizzy heights. We went up the sheer cliffs of the edge-
of-the-world mountain; all the strong stories were that
this was the one that surely pierced the sky. We as-
cended more than ten kilometers, fearful always that
we would not be able to live at that height.
“The sky, we had believed ever since we had re-
ceived wisdom, was at an infinite distance from us and
would always appear at the same distance no matter
how high we climbed. We now discovered that this was
not so. We came closer to the sky and we were almost
hysterical in our excitement. We came all the way up to
it and touched it with our members. We did not die, as
we had feared. An epic hero had done this aeons before,
but he had died from it. So it was no ordinary thing that
we did.”
Rimrock had at first been talking with free move-
ment of his rubbery mouth. But for a while his mouth
had not moved, and he was talking in Thomas' head.
He could speak in either manner, and he did not always
realize himself when he went from the one to the other.
"Then we burst through, splintering holes in the sky,
and came out gasping into the world that is above the
sky,” Rimrock recounted. “To your viewpoint, we
came up out of the ocean onto the land. But it is
yourselves who do not appreciate the magnitude of it.
You did it so long ago that you have forgotten it, both in
your minds and your underminds. But how can you
forget that you live on the top of the sky? How can you
forget that every moment you walk you are walking on
>
89
PAST MASTER
1)
95
a precarious rug higher than a five thousand story high
building? Do you know that the highest-flying birds of
the air cannot rise one tenth as high as we stand now?
“Thomas, I was one of the first ones who splintered
thesky and came up on the sky-shore,” Rimrock pro-
claimed. “I was one of the primordial heroes. And we
found that skyshore sprinkled with shells in the form of
stars for signature of it. May the sense of wonder never
leave me!”
“I begin to get the feel of you more and more,
Thomas said, “not in words, but in old shapes."
“
“Regular people have sealed off the interior ocean
that used to be in every man,” Rimrock said. “They
closed the ocean and ground up its monsters for fer-
tilizer. That is why we so often enter into peoples'
dreams. We take the place of the monsters they have
lost.''
“What occupations do ansels follow?”' Thomas
asked him.
“Some are in communication, since each of us is a
communications center, But most of us work as com-
mercial divers, underwater welders, pier-builders, that
sort of thing. Water is still our first element, but the
waters around Cathead where I work have become so
foul from the uncontrolled industries that they bother
us. The poor lungers of Cathead cough up their lungs
from the contaminated air. We suffer in our five blad-
ders from the contaminated water. It is a rare treat for us
to get away for a day or two in clean air or in clean
ocean.
"Are you paid well for your underwater work, Rim-
rock?''
90
PAST MASTER
.
“No. A stoimenof d'or a week."The stoimenof d'or
is a small gold coin.
“Why do you work for money at all? You don't wear
clothes or live in houses or eat food that is sold for
money. What do you do with your money?”'
**Play fan-tan,” said the ansel.
Well, what was Evita? We don't know, Thomas
never knew, she was never sure herself. She was one of
those who had chosen Thomas, not been chosen by
him.
“All on Astrobe will think it strange if you do not
travel with a mistress," she said. “Nobody has ever
done that before. They will believe that you are not in
accord with the Golden Dream of Astrobe. I know that
you would not like to seem an awkward and impossible
person, and I will not allow another woman to be with
you."
"I am an awkward and impossible person, and it
bothers me nowt at all,” Thomas said. “Leave me, you
scrawny young witch. I have seen sparrows, and they
still fledglings, with more meat on them.”
“You know that's not true. What kind of fat tubs did
they like in your day? I am quite well fleshed, and I've
been called the most beautiful woman on Astrobe. You
will also find me intelligent, and in this I'm excep-
tional. Astrobe, though you may not have noticed it
yet, has a high level of mediocrity only."
“You are misnamed, Evita; you travel falsely. You
are no Eva, but the Lilith who was before her, the
witch."
“I am both. Did you not know that they were one?
And I have a personal reason. When I decided to go to
91
PAST MASTER
)
Hell to prove a point, I set myself goal: the seduction of
a saint. But where else can I find one? They have not
canonized one for hundreds of years. Big little Thomas,
out of time and out of place, you are the only certified
saint I'm ever likely to meet.
“We are neither of us any longer of the flesh in that
way, " Thomas said. He said nayther where you would
say neither, one of the oddities of speech that still clung
to him; and there was a burt in his talk. “And you
yourself are now taken by a much deeper passion,
Evita,” he said, “and it precludes the other thing.
Come along then, child-witch. If we ever run hungry on
the heaths we'll have you spitted, and break you up
haunch and chine, and eat you complete; and be hungry
again within an hour.''
He joked. She was of copious build, and she smiled
down on him. The color of her hair? The color of her
eyes?The incredible lines of her? No, no, they won't be
given here. You will not know them till the Last Day,
and then only if you are one of the blessed.
Scrivener? Slider? Maxwell? Copperhead? Who
were they? What was the mind and the man of each?
Hear Slider speak:
"Are we still dangling on the thread, or has the
thread been broken even before the official act (soon to
be proposed) to break it? The Ancient Instruction was
to go to All Nations. But we are not the Nations. We are
something different. The Promise was that the Trans-
cendent Thing would endure till the End of the World.
But we are not the World. We are quite a different
world, and no promise was ever given to us. We cannot
even assume that we are human; how deep does the
92
PAST MASTER
Astrobe mutation really go? How many of us are Prog.
rammed Persons? And how much of the programmed
descent is in us who regard ourselves as old-line hu-
mans? We have changed in mind and body.
“The morality of Golden Astrobe is abysmal by any
older comparison, but may we use an older compari-
son? On Old Earth was once a thing named Slavery. We
do not name it that here, but we have it. It is now the
instinct for finding one's place in the Golden Hive. Try
to break out of it! Try to avail yourself of the total
freedom! Meet the overriding regulations.
“What were once called the unnatural lusts may be
natural here; they are universal. It may be that we are
not in terrible shape at all. Thomas at first believed that
we were, and now he believes we are in wonderful
shape. He is a wise man and he studies us; he wonders
why we sent for him. But if we are in wonderful shape,
is it still the shape of man? When it becomes impossible
to distinguish certain artificial things from ourselves,
then we must doubt that we are still people.
“When the killers pursue me, then I feel that I am
coming near some truth. But when they let me alone, I
know that I am dealing in trivialities.
“Walter Copperhead, who predicts futures, says that
Scrivener and I will change persons and souls in our
final day. I say that we will not. How could we trade
souls? He has none.'
Slider was a slight, pale, moody young man. He was
very serious, and felt that everybody was laughing at
him. Usually they were. Thomas was doing so silently
as he heard this screed. He had known such young men
before. Slider himself, knowing who Thomas was,
expected something more of him. He was shocked by
93
PAST MASTER
his lack of depth. Slider, out of his own deep insuffi-
ciency, intended to supply that lack.
Hear Scrivener speak:
“I would declare myself enthusiastically for all
things of Astrobe, were enthusiasm an element of the
true Astrobe character. It isn't, and it should not be. We
are the first mature beings ever, and enthusiasm is no
part of us. In Astrobe we had built the perfect world.
Perhaps it should have ended in its state of perfection,
but it did not end. Instead, our world has become
infected with a cancerous growth. 'Cut it out,' we say,
but for some reason we hesitate.
“Slider is part of the cancer. He has doubts, and
doubt is the essence of this enemy. Of course we are not
the nations or the world! We are beyond such. Of
course no promise was ever given to us! We make the
promise to ourselves; there is none above us to make it.
How deep does the Astrobe mutation go? It goes from
the bottom to the top, as it should. Of course we are no
longer in the shape of men. Mankind was the awkward
childhood of our species; we do well to forget it. We
will excise our last flaw, and then we will achieve
realization and annihilation.
“The killers do not trail me. Why should they? I am
of their own species. And Walter Copperhead reads this
future wrong. Slider and myself can never change
places. He has no place."
Scrivener was a bigger man than Slider, but was
softer and fatter both in speech and person. He had a
programmed father and a human mother. Though
young, he did have a sort of Astrobian maturity. Slider
and Scrivener thought of themselves as deep opposites,
>
94
PAST MASTER
.
and yet Thomas and others tended to confuse them.
They were so alike in their fuming differences!
Hear Maxwell speak:
“I take myself as an example that Astrobe is not
perfect, even excepting the cancerous growth of
Cathead and the Barrio. I am an aberration. A perfect
world would be made up of perfectly integrated per-
sons, and I am not one. There are no words for my
particular wandering from the normal. Only Cop-
perhead knows me well enough to have any idea what
they are. I will only say that I have a very loose
attachment to my own body. I have not always been in
the same form. I do not always recognize my previous
forms. The great Astrobean Advance was bound to
throw off such reactions as myself.
“And yet I am enthusiastically for Astrobe, in a way
that Scrivener cannot be. Enthusiasm may not be a part
of finest Astrobe, but it is a part of me. I likewise
believe that we must kill the Cathead mutation, though
it will be killing part of myself to do it. No mind; I have
had parts of me killed before. I have had whole bodies
killed. I am a spook, and Astrobe does not believe in
such. But, for all that, I believe in her.
“I burn myself up for this thing! I mean it literally. I
have burt myself up and died several times, though I
do not understand it. I will still be the burning brand for
this thing!”
This Maxwell was a most curious-looking man, if he
was a man. When he said that he had a very loose
attachment to his own body, he apparently meant that
he did not always inhabit his same body in the usual
sense. But his appearance was that he had a very loose
attachment to his own body in that his body was too big
95
PAST MASTER
for him and fitted him loosely. There are animals who
have this looseness in their hides—the Earth tiger and
the Astrobe lazarus lion—and in them it is a sign of
strength and swiftness. In Maxwell it was a sign of
weakness and slowness, almost of witlessness. It was a
good-sized, swarthy, almost sinister body that he wore,
and it was a sepulchral voice he spoke with. But one
had the impression that he had to stand on tiptoes to see
out of his own eyes; and that he was piping a small
voice into the resounding thing as though it were an
independent instrument.
He wasn't a particular ornament to the retinue, either
personally or mentally. Yet he had a real seriousness
that made that of Slider and Scrivener seem brittle.
Hear Copperhead speak:
Now a part of that speaking had been with certain
rough men of Cathead. “Will he?" Battersea had asked
Copperhead sharply. “He will,” said Copperhead. “I
don't see how," said George the syrian. "He doesn't
look like much. I'll bet the forces of Astrobe will smash
him like a rotten egg.” “Oh, they'll smash him, all
“
right,” Copperhead explained. “The new man is a
dead man; his time runs out almost before it begins. So,
he's been dead before, it won't help him now. He will
fumble it all, our new man; he'll do only one small
thing right.” “But you say he'll maintain his ways in
this present,” Shanty growled. “He will, and in the
damnest left-handed way anybody ever saw,” Cop-
perhead maintained. “What instruments they do work
with!—whoever they are. Men, this ferret-eyed stubby
man from the doubtful past will save our world! That is
what matters. That he won't save himself doesn't
)
3
96
PAST MASTER
matter to me, to none of us, I believe.” “It will matter
to me,” Paul said. But the thing about this Copperhead
was that he really could predict futures.
Copperhead had something goatish in his appear-
ance. He was a good-humored satyr, and he was crude.
Rimrock understood from the beginning, and Maxwell
had leamed accidentally, that Copperhead did have
depths of sensitivity and intelligence and compassion;
but he chose to hide these things.
People, they were a funny-looking party! Rimrock
the ansel, tall Paul and stubby Thomas, Slider and
Scrivener, Maxwell and Copperhead, and the bewilder-
ing Evita. Had she gray eyes or blue or green? Had she
smoky-blonde, or golden, or dark hair? Was she slight
or was she buxom? The fact is that all saw her differ-
ently, and all heard her voice differently. It sounded
now, but did it ring out or bubble up, or purr or croon,
or lilt or laugh or intone; was it a flute or a trumpet or a
nine-stringed lyra? Was it a silver cymbal or a bronze
concentus?
“Be quiet, everyone!” Evita sounded (for words
cannot give an idea of the harmonies in her). “Holy
Thomas is hatching an idea! See him sparkle when a
whim settles on him! He has sampled all the great
things of Astrobe and has told himself how wonderful
they are. Then why is he looking at the mountain?''
It was a sharp shock to all of them, the thing that had
taken hold of Thomas now. That most practical of all
men was in a trance. Rimrock remembered the great
day when he himself had splintered holes in the sky and
broken through. Maxwell recalled an ecstasy in an
earlier body. Copperhead relived the moment when the
new power came to a man with dirty hands. Paul
97
PAST MASTER
remembered what he had almost been, and Evita re-
lived aspects of her own legend. Slider and Scrivener
may not have been capable of such flights.
“Why do I look at the mountain?” Thomas asked as
he came out of his daze. “An Astrobe psychologist has
told me that only people crippled in their personalities
will look at such things as mountains. He says that this
was much more common in former centuries. Well, I
have sampled Golden Astrobe and it is wonderful. But I
am still hungry. What if we do go in that direction?”'
"If we go in that direction, we walk," Scrivener
said. “There are no transportation booths in the feral
regions, only in the civilized. That region is all beyond
the pale. It is for beasts, if they still live, but not for
men. The mountains are retained; they are somehow a
key to the weather control. But they are no concem of
rational people.”
“I believe that we will walk for a day or two and see
the mountain,” Thomas said.
“The Programmed Killers aren't inhibited at all
there,” Maxwell told him. “They will follow and kill
us.
“They aren't invincible. Let's go to the mountain,"
Thomas repeated. “What if we climb and cross the
mountain at that saddle, and go thence? And what if we
follow around that circle thereby?'' Thomas asked,
pointing
“Around that circuit of the feral country, a hard foot
way, and in seven or nine days you will come to big
Cathead from its back side,” Copperhead said. “Some
of us will die of it, but not all. There's an old proverb: ‘I
haven't lost anything on the mountain.' But I believe
98
PAST MASTER
that I may have, and I'd like to find it again. I'll go
willingly with you."
“It's stark madness to go there,” Scrivener insisted.
"Not at all,” Thomas said: “A soft sort of madness
it may be. We hadn't such mountains in England, and I
saw them only at a distance in Spain and Savoy. In the
stated problem of Astrobe everyone has been overlook-
ing something. Were it not odd if the high mountains
were the one thing that people could not see? Let the
Programmed Killers trail us! I always liked either end
of a hunt. Come along now. I'll not be done out of
this.'
99
6. STING IN THE TAIL
There was no close Earth equivalent to those Feral
Lands of Astrobe, though certain Earth rain-forests had
some of the characteristics. The difficulty for an
Earthman, or for a man from Astrobe either since the
civilized people of Astrobe were not acquainted with
these regions, was in knowing just where the ground
itself was. And in plain fact there was no ground itself,
nothing that could be called the surface, the fundament.
Were you now working through the surface of a rough
meadow? Or were you working through the tops and
middle heights of trees?
And another plain fact was that there were no trees
themselves. One could not say that this was one tree
and that one was another. They were not individuals;
they were one creature. As well say that this is a grass,
and that is a grass. They were entangled. In the thick
going if you clin
climbed down far enough into the sleek
darkness you still would not find firm ground. Water
rather. And even in this fundamental bottom water it
was possible to go down still more hundreds of feet
through the growing plants and roots, never finding any
bottom except a growth too dense to permit further
descent.
And yet the party walked and scrambled and stum-
bled along pretty well, going up and down; now on a
good matted surface, now along a sparse skeleton of
green girders; sometimes skirting large aereal ponds
>
100
PAST MASTER
a
that had been built by the kastroides. Some of these
ponds were more than a hectare in area, quite deep, and
of a lively surface both from creatures and from the
effect of the swaying support.
“I will make my own way now,” said Rimrock the
ansel, “but I will see you again this night. And later I
will see you on the mountain.
And the ansel disappeared as though into a deep well;
and perhaps he traveled entirely under water through
the deep roots of the complex. Nobody doubted that he
could make better time than could the party.
“And I will make my own way,” said Walter Cop-
perhead the necromancer. “I have certain riddles to ask
the woods and the mountain, and they do not speak
when others are present. And I also will see you several
times before you stand up in the high lightning. When
you have killed the Devil I will be there. I have laid out
his entrails and examined them before, but I haven't
unriddled all their riddles. I'll have another go at it.”
Walter Copperhead left them with great leaps. He
was a goat of the tree-tops.
“He is an odd one,”Thomas said. “I'm not sure that
a Christian man is permitted congress with such.”
“I'm not sure that you still consider yourself a Chris-
tian man,” Paul said.
“What are the hoppers?” Thomas cried, himself
hopping away from Paul's question. He was asking
about the leaping creatures that were now all about
them. “They're from the size of a rat to the size of a
sheep, but they all seem of one species.”
“I don't know about things like that,” Scrivener
said.
“And I sure do not,” said Slider. “The things in the
1)
.
101
PAST MASTER
6
9
)
feral regions are an obscenity to all civilized persons.
We class them with excrement.
“There is no love of wild nature among the civilized
people of Astrobe,'' Maxwell said. “These things are
less real than creatures in dreams. I doubt if they have a
name.
“They're good to eat," Evita said. “People still ate
them when I was a kid, and I have eaten them quite
recently.”
"It's the jerusalem coney,” Paul said.
“Thank you,'' Thomas acknowledged. “It's as re-
freshing as it is unexpected to get an answer to a
question on Astrobe.”
The coney was a curious hopping creature, most of
them the size of big rabbits, some smaller, some very
much larger. They went indiscriminately into the ponds
and under the water, and up into the higher reaches of
the trees with great accurate hops; and through brush so
thick that it would seem a snake could not traverse
there. They were quick, and neither Thomas nor Paul
could catch one.
"Along with the dutch-fish and the rambler's-ox, the
coney is the food basis of the feral lands,” Paul said.
“Everything lives on them, or on that which lives on
them. The dire-wolves live on them, as does
porche's-panther, and the hydra. The birds live on
them, and all the predators.”
“The animals sound very like those of Earth,”
Thomas said.
“No, Thomas, only the names are like those of
Earth,” Paul said, almost in awe. “On Earth there are
no animals at all like those around us. We are fools, you
know, to be here. Scrivener and his like are correct. A
9
.)
102
PAST MASTER
a
>>
)
rational man has no business here. I know a cliff not a
half day from here where there are a thousand skeletons
hung up on thorn bushes. The rouks fly down and kill
people for fun. They carry them up and hang them there
for a warning. Most of those bones have old black meat
still clinging to them. You told me that in your time on
Earth men killed wolves and hung them on fence rails
as waming to other wolves. This is the same. There is
even the tale that the King Rouk pays a bounty to each
rouk who so kills and hangs up a man.
"I'd pit a bow-necked Middlesex ox against any
animal on this scurvy bowl,” Thomas challenged.
“Thomas, the dire-wolf could take the head and
horns of an Earth ox in one bite, and the whole body in
two more,” Paul assured him. “The lazarus-lion can
take the much larger rambler's-ox in the same manner.
And the lazarus likes to eat people, not merely crucify
them on the cliffs as the rouks do. The hydra can gobble
anything in water, in one bite or several; and it can snap
ten meters out of water. It has been known to take, in
one bite, six men standing together some distance from
the water's edge.
“And, Thomas, porche's-panther kills and eats the
dire-wolf and the lazarus-lion and the rouk and the
hydra itself. But all around us there are twenty other
species of creatures capable of slicing a man up and
eating him.”
“I would bet that a good hunting man could live well
here,” Thomas said. “You tell me of a plenitude of
game. It might be an intense and rewarding life.”
“I've lived here myself as a hunting man,” Paul
said. “There's a few thousand hunters still on Astrobe.
I lived with them a few months in my own time of
103
PAST MASTER
1
6
9
hiding. Yes, the life is intense. The rewards are intan-
gible, but for some they are deep. But those who follow
the rade do not live to a great age. But those men have a
certain flavor to them. I suppose the lazarus-lion thinks
so too.'
“Oh Astrobe, a salt that has not lost its savor!”
Thomas cried. “The wonder of it. I had felt, for all its
marvelous things, that civilized Astrobe was a little
insipid. But it need not be. Here is salt for its salting.
Here is leaven enough for the lump. We'll but see to a
better blending."
“You cannot mean that Astrobe must be still more
exposed to its back-lands!" Scrivener exclaimed.
“These things are worse than any death. They must be
hidden away forever."
“But are we armed?'' Thomas asked. “Someone
was not thinking very hard, and I suspect 'twas I who
was supposed to be doing the thinking.”
"I'm always armed," Paul said, "with the short
”
knife, the only tool that a feral-land hunter will use.
And I believe that Maxwell is. He's been a hunter in at
least one of his life-aspects.”
“And I am," said Evita. “This woman-child was a
hunter more years ago than you would believe. It isn't
for
my
own defense I can witch the animals as far as I
am concemed—it's for the defense of Holy Thomas
here."
They went down through some levels of the tree-
complex. They came onto what was almost solid land,
its presence being given away only by fitful breaks that
showed still deeper worlds of deep roots and green
darkness.
“There should be a being to fitthis green darkness,"
a
3
>
104
PAST MASTER
a
Thomas said. “Sextus Empiricus wrote that every en-
viron must have its own sprite. It would be a weird one
to fit the green underworld here, however."
“Call me not weird, good Thomas," spoke a green-
colored voice. “And yet I'm sure that Sextus Em-
piricus wrote of me, and of you. You're also a sprite,
,
but one never sees himself as such. One believes him-
self to be a man if he is raised by the humans.
The green-colored voice came from a green-crobed
monk of the order of Saint Klingensmith. He was a
blackish man (and yet there was a touch of deep green
in his black) who winked at them and grinned. And they
all stared at him, coming on him unexpectedly as they
did.
1)
19
“Preserve us this morning from dire-wolves and
panthers and programmed things,” he blessed them.
“The latter are following you, you know. They're the
hardest to evade and the hardest to rouse to; they have
no scent.
“Whatever is a good monk doing in the salty woods
of Astrobe?” Thomas asked him.
"Holy Cathead, I'm fishing, of course! But what are
fine people like yourselves doing here? There was an
Old Earth Epic named Babes in the Woods. That is
yourselves. I am Father Oddopter of the Green-Robes,
and now I see that you are not ordinary fine folks. There
is Maxwell, the avatar who bums up his bodies, and we
pray for him. There is Evita-child, who has become
something of an archetype in the salacious dreams of
the men of the orders, and she prays for us. She is a
.
character in the folklore of the feral lands. There is the
Paul, whom we know. He will suffer stark death in
following out a mission and will never be told its
105
PAST MASTER
purpose. And you, sir, the doubtful Thomas, are a
revenant with a double sign on you. The Holy Ghost
certainly chooses strange instruments. Sometimes I
think He is out of his mind. And the two others, the
nothing man, and the less than nothing man."
“Which am I?" Slider asked with a sour grin.
“Oh, you're the nothing man. The other is the less-
than-nothing. What? He flushes with anger? Why is
sheer truth so hardly embraced?''
And Scrivener was indeed flushing with anger.
“What in particular are you fishing for, Father Od-
dopter?”' asked Thomas More the revenant with the
double sign on him.
“You'll see," the monk said.
Circumstances began to assemble like cawing
crows. You had doubted the color of the Evita's eyes,
how they seemed now one thing and now another? Now
they were green, green, the green of sparkling an-
ticipation.
The monk wound a cord around his wrist and han-
dled a harpoon thing a meter long. He peered into the
green water with crinkling black-green eyes. Then
he dived, robes and all, as a hawk dives, powerfully
into the green water. And there was a sudden turbu-
lence.
There was a struggle of resounding great power
under water, a startling force striking and rupturing
something of very great weight.
The green-robe broke water again and surged up onto
the rooty platform all in one motion. He drew up the
cord with hands and wrists of such terrifying size that it
seemed impossible that they should belong to him. The
106
PAST MASTER
1
1)
water was bloody and chuming when he brought the
thing to the surface and drew it half out.
It was a fat discoid thing, black and quivering, and
one third of its circuit was angry-toothed mouth. It
weighed a hundred and fifty kilograms and it could
have snapped a man in two through the trunk.
“I called myself a fisherman on Old Earth,” Thomas
said in admiration, “but I never in my life took so grand
a fish as that. Days of my life, to see it is hardly to
believe it!''
"Thomas, Thomas,” the green-robe chided, “it's
but the grasshopper that one catches in his palm to use
on the hook. This isn't the fish. It's the bait.'
The green-robe put three more harpoons into the
creature that fought and groaned. There was something
else now: great wings, as it were, deep under water and
gathering for the pounce upward, the greatest wings
ever. The green-robe made the harpoon lines fast to
various thick branches and roots. His giant bait was
threshing and chuming with two thirds of it in the
water.
Then the green-robe. leapt onto the bait creature,
slashing it deeply with a hand knife. It bled in spectacu-
lar fountains of dark rushing red that exploded with the
lustful smell of rampant iron and stripped green wood
and battlefield stink.
From a powerful underwater organ the creature was
roaring with a rage that set both the water and the air to
reeling. The green-robe rode and slashed the pitching
thing at great risk of limb and life.
“Devil, Devil, rise and die, come and find what
thing am I,” Evita chanted like a little-girl rhyme, but
,
107
PAST MASTER
a
6
a
her eyes were green volcanic fire a billion years old.
“Hurry!” Paul shouted. “It's rising like a thunder-
clap.”
“I know, I know," the green-robe crooned. “Holy
Cathead, it does rise fast! But the last second is the
best."
“Devil, Devil, come in hate! Take the fine Evita
bait!” the wild-girl chanted, but her eyes no longer
focused and she was frozen in hysteria.
The green-robe leapt clear from his bait-creature at
the last possible second. Then the great thing swooped
and struck upward: a thousand kilograms of center bulk
that swallowed the trussed creature in a single gulp,
thirty-meter-long tentacles that reached blindly for
more prey, the big eye in the middle mad and livid with
malevolence. The Devil! The main bulk was clear out
of the water with the speed of its upward surge smash-
ing the surface. It was but a lightning instant, but many
things were observed simultaneously in that instant, not
the least of which was the lightning itself—the corona-
like discharge and blinding aura of the great sea-
creature.
It was the hydra taking the bait.
“Now!" clanged the green-robe with the belfry
sound of Saint Lo which is under water.
“Now!” Paul croaked like a rampant bull-frog.
“Now!” Evita sang in a voice that was green bronze
pickled in brimstone.
They had spoken together, and no time at all had
elapsed.
The three of them were onto the hydra before it
thunderously shattered the water as it fell back from its
a
108
PAST MASTER
great surge. They went with snake-like knives for the
hydra eye and the brain behind it, feverish in their haste
before the terrible tentacles could be brought to defend
and to attack. Hysterical battle, hooting challenge, high
screaming triumph.
The hydra trumpeted with an anger and agony that
stabbed through the whole feral region, killing small
birds by the very pitch ofthe scream. It submerged with
the crashing fall-back from its great surge; and the three
attackers stayed with it, cutting and hacking in near
hysteria.
The hydra screamed under water. And after a while it
rose again.
The huge tentacles lashed and writhed, but no longer
with great power in them. The green-robe and Paul and
Evita were through the giant eye and into the brain,
cutting relentlessly and furiously. Evita had the head
and most of her inside the big eye, and her chant came
out of that cavity: “Devil, Devil, boom and bell! Watch
Evita give you Hell!”—the weird voice of a small child
a
a
gone mad.
The hydra-devil groaned with an echoing hollowness
that shook the whole region.
And then it died.
“Why, this is allegory acted out before my very
eyes,” Thomas exclaimed, and he was shaking from
the passion around him. He was finding words to deny
what he had seen.
‘Enjoy it, Thomas, enjoy it,” the green-robe cried
as he leapt back onto the rooty platform, the almost-
land. “Give it accolade. You were a London play-goer,
9
109
PAST MASTER
,
but you never saw so high and roaring a comedy as this.
A man may not do it twice in one day. A strong body
will stand it, but the emotions will not.
“It isn't real,” Thomas said, 'it cannot be real. It's
but a grand illusion. Look, our Paul has been drained,
and he rolls his eyes like one half dead as he totters back
onto the land. What is the content and real substance of
this, Father Oddopter?”
“Why, it's the killing of the Devil, good Thomas.
The Devil must be killed afresh somewhere every day.
If ever he is not, then our days be at an end. Say, he is a
big one today, isn't he? He's not always a hydra, you
know. Some days he is a mad dire-wolf. Some days he
is a porche's-panther gone musk. The Devil has his
several forms, but we must kill him every day to limn
his limits."
“Our good Thomas is not beyond hope,” Paul
panted as he came back from the deeper shadow world
to one less deep. “You are not completely revolted,
Thomas. You were near as impassioned as ourselves,
however you deny it. Golden Astrobe hasn't yet got
you entirely in he effete wiles. You weaken and you
comform, and they seem to be winning you. But this
will stand as a sign for you before you weaken com-
pletely. In this blood be you blessed, Thomas!"
“Ye be all daft," Thomas growled, uneasy, and yet
somehow caught up into the blood-lust of the thing. “It
is an unnatural satanic thing that happens here, and you
revel in it. And the child-woman, has she gone brand-
mad?''
“She's possessed," the green-robe said. And Evita
had almost disappeared into the cavemous brain of the
hydra-devil. She gorged and reveled there.
)
110
PAST MASTER
“She has consorted with the Devil in his other
forms,” the green-robe said, “and there is a curious
hatred and tension between them. I have never been on
a devil-kill with the child before, but I have heard of
them. She becomes wild sometimes."
“You actually believe in the Devil here in the feral
lands?” Thomas asked as Evita withdrew somewhat
from the monster.
“What an odd fellow you are!" the green-robe
Father Oddopter marveled. “You have just seen us slay
the Devil, and you ask whether he be. Do you not
believe your eyes? Does this seem like an ordinary
creature to you?''
“Nowt ordinary, of course," Thomas said weakly,
as though he were pleading a losing case in court, “but
by definition, it is within the order of nature, since there
is no other order.
"Thomas, Thomas, you cannot win that little game
even when you make your own rules.”
“I can understand how to the superstitious or to the
ignorant—"
“No, no, good Thomas. Look at it! The ignorant
Scrivener and the superstitious Slider are aghast at the
violence of the thing, and they yet stand trembling. But
they do not believe it.
“The half-ignorant Maxwell also quakes, but he
only half believes. It is we of the intellect who believe
what we see and feel—that we have drawn the Devil
from his lair and killed him. You do not believe it?''
“I do not believe it," Thomas said, but he was not
,
feeling particularly calm. “It's but a bloody, violent,
and dangerous sport you indulge."
Evita had finally emerged from the monster, glisten-
111
PAST MASTER
ing with blood and gore, and bearing a great arm-load
of Devil brains. She was disheveled, and her eyes were
completely mad.
And then in a flash they were no longer any such
thing. She came out of her passion and seizure as easily
as she would leap from a tree. She winked at Thomas,
and broke into chiming laughter.
“My seduction of you is a little different from what I
I
planned,” she chortled. “I'll seduce you in mind and
belief instead. Bodily I'd burn you up to quick and fry
the poor tallow out of you, Thomas. But this way we
burn a brand on your brain. Whoop! Imagine, a grown
man too ignorant to believe in the Devil!”
a
You ever cook any Devil brains yourself? Don't
knock it if you haven't tried it. Paul and the green-robe
cooked the brains. They cased them in a ball of mud,
and set it into a quickly-started and explosively hot fire
of oil-dripping vines. These burned torridly with a
staggering, almost emetic smoke—the water in them
fighting with the oil. The whole thing gave off a bright-
ness that was like sodium flame. They roasted the
brains roaring for an hour, and then the ball burst open
with a real explosion. There was the smell of sulphur in
the air. And all was made ready.
With dishes of this sort, you like them or you like
them not.
Scrivener and Slider would not partake.
Maxwell had to force himself. “After all," he told
himself, “they are only fish brains. The rest is but the
rough kidding of these feral people.” But he liked them
more and more as he ate them.
Thomas tasted in a surly manner, and out of curios-
112
ity . And then he was hooked on that bait. He welcomed them as one of the rarest and hearties foods ever. They entered into him. Ah, the salt and the sulphur of them would stand him well in his crux hour when it came. By eating its brains, he would always have a certain mas­ tery over this enemy . Hydra brains were known in some of the mod places of Cosmopolis, but at fifty stoimenof d'or a kilo. The price was high there, and the brains were not; some of the old Devil always went out of them in the marketing and fixing . Here it was finer, eating them new-killed, kilo after kilo to satiety. They needed no condiment. They had their own salt and sulphur.
Who laughs? Who laughs? None but a necromancer laughs like that. It was Walter Copperhead who came out ofthe jungle with eyes for nothing but the hydra. He had known, of course, the hour and the place of the Devil-kill. He would lay out its entrails and examine them, and try to unriddle riddles there, as though he were an old auger. And he was . He built a sort of jungle winch with a counter-poise of straining vines and bent branches. He worked to life the monster and disembowel it. The members of the party withdrew a space and left him with it. It was a private thing that Walter Copperhead did.
They traveled again after they had spent an hour or two in the fine talk that should always follow a fine meal. The green-robeFatherOddopter went with them, he having no home and being sworn to the rufe of never laying his head in the same place for two nights . They
PAST MASTER
1 13
PAST MASTER
)
came on other hunters and fishers. They came on one
bunch who were killing ansels and hauling them out of
the water. This puzzled Thomas.
Rimrock the ansel was a creature of intellect, and
therefore human. But these ansels, Thomas understood
at once, were not creatures of intellect and were not
human. The difference was clear on the practical plane,
but the theory was not clear. Thomas was surprised that
he felt 'no repugnance at seeing them killed. Nor did he
hesitate to eat raw hacked-off pieces offered him. So he
puzzled about it.
“There's a question I hardly know how to ask,” he
said to Paul. “Would Rimrock the ansel eat ansel?''
“He would and he has,” Paul said, “but he doesn't
care for it much. Says it's overrated. An ansel doesn't
need ansel in his diet, but there's no repugnance. And
an ansel who has crossed the line becomes an entirely
different creature from a natural ansel. How the new
species is acquired I do not know, but every species can
tell the difference. A dire-wolf, for instance, will eat a
natural ansel with as easy a mind as he'd eat a jerusalem
coney. He'd also eat a transfigured ansel just as he'd eat
a man, but he wouldn't eat him with as easy a mind.
There is a difference between natural and transcendent
prey, and all the meat-eaters know it. It is known that
all animals are greatly disturbed in their minds after
they have eaten humans, and Rimrock would be human
by this test."
"The theology of it is impossible,” the green-robe
said. “It cannot be that a creature already in full life
will sometimes receive a soul and intelligence, and yet
that appears to be quite the case with certain excep-
tional ansels. And I talked to your friend Rimrock
)
114
PAST MASTER
today. He had gone on just a little while before you
came."
)
came
They traveled again. And the mountains grew higher
and
closer. They traveled through the
aftemoon—stalked always by the Programmed
Killers—and at dusk they came to Goslar the City of the
Salic Emperors.
(Here follows History quickly given.)
The Salic Emperors had their origins as an under-
ground university fraternity in Wu Town. Certain
young persons, believing themselves daring, main-
tained a revolt, half-humorous, half-doctrinaire, and
altogether brainless, against the golden mediocrity of
Astrobe, the humanist planetary dream. Several of
these young people then (two centuries before this
telling) established the small town of Goslar and called
it their imperial capital. Hunting families had accreted
to the settlement for it was, in a way, central to the Feral
Strip. It was here that the Dismal Swamps and the Rain
Forests and the Savannas all came together; and it stood
right at the foot of Electric Mountain, the first high
pinnacle of the mountain complex.
Goslar now had about a hundred people, and a big
shanty building that was public house, royal palace,
hotel and skinners' .center.
From the founding, there had always been one Salic
Emperor in residence at Goslar. The present Emperor
was Charles the Six Hundred and Twelfth; for no Em-
peror had reigned as long as a year, and many of them
less than a month.
The automatic killers had assigned themselves au-
tomatically to the destruction of every reigning em-
115
PAST MASTER
peror. These Programmed Killers of Astrobe have been
described as garbage disposals, as the ultimate police,
as the precision wardens of the Astrobe Dream. They
got rid of everything that stood in the way of that
dream. They had been so constructed, and they had so
propagated themselves and continued. On the breast of
each Programmed Killer was blazoned the motto I have
not been false to the Vision.
The sensing of these killers was faultless and relent-
less. Anything that threatened the Astrobe Thesis was
the enemy and they would follow it to the end and kill
it. They had never ultimately failed, though certain
tricky persons sometimes eluded them for years.
A personal surrender was sensed by them. One who
relented and accepted the Astrobe Dream, albeit in-
teriorly and silently, was no longer hunted by them.
The Programmed Killers could be destroyed. But at the
moment of the destruction of any one of them, another
one was created in a distant center and was given the
same assignment.
And they had pursued and killed the Salic Emperors,
just as they were pursuing and would finally kill every
threatening member of the Thomas More party.
But there was a peculiarity about the succession of
the Salic Emperors that paralleled that of the robot
killer species. Whenever a reigning emperor was kil-
led, his replacement was also created instantly. Know-
ing of the death by no orthodox communication (in
several cases, knowing of it a few hours before it
happened), the Salics at the University in Wu Town
would hold instant convocation, by day or by night, and
would select a new emperor in a matter of minutes. The
new emperor would start' on foot to Goslar im-
116
PAST MASTER
mediately, without script or staff or food or coin or
extra garment, and would arrive in wildGoslar in about
ten hours. He always traveled intuitively, since Goslar
is not mapped and the new emperor would never have
been there before.
And so the dynasty continued.
Charles the Six Hundred and Twelfth had reigned
less than twenty hours when the Thomas More party
arrived. He had arrived in the darkness of the night
before, and had been crowned by a dumb birdliming
man.
(That be History longishly given.)
Charles the Six Hundred and Twelfth was about
eighteen years old, a bewildered young man with a
frightened smile. But he comprehended the party even
as they approached. As Emperor he was infused with
certain special powers of understanding. He beckoned
the party to enter the big shanty building, and then
motioned them to stow their gear against the walls and
to spread straw for their beds, for this was hotel as well
as royal palace.
Evita dropped more than fifty kilos of hydra Devil-
meat into the big common pot boiling in the middle of
the room. She had carried this lump, more than her own
weight of very high meat, along with many other
things, for the whole aftemoon, and that over very
rough country. She was as strong as a podalka pony.
And then the Emperor Charles began to give orders,
as was his obligation and right:
"The Maxwell, the Slider, the Oddopter Priest, the
Paul, the Thomas, and the Devil-girl may use the com-
mon room,” the Emperor issued. They had not given
117
PAST MASTER
)
.
)
him their names; but he was Emperor, and it was given
him to know what things people are. Besides, Rimrock
had been there before them and had told Charles the
names and appearance of the members of the party.
“The Scrivener may not, however," the Emperor
continued. “He may not use the common room. He
must be lodged in the small machinery shed; and he will
be fed there. He is not people."
“Are you a Programmed Person, Scrivener?''
Thomas asked him. “I did not know that."
“I don't know whether I am or not,” Scrivener
lamented. “I've suspected it, and there's a family
legend that we have some Programmed admixture. But
why should it matter? There is really no difference any
longer between Programmed and People. I wish I had
never come on this miserable expedition, but I will not
be treated as an inferior."
“I am the Emperor and I know these things,” the
boyish Emperor Charles the Six Hundred and Twelfth
maintained to the party. "The Scrivener is a machine.
And he will lodge in the machine shed. Let us not make
a great noise over a little thing. It is only that definitions
have lost their precision on Astrobe; and one duty of the
Salic Emperor is to clarify and enforce them.
“Thomas, assert yourself and overrule this lout,"
Scrivener demanded. “You are an important man, and
I am a member of your party."
“I've had my own difficulties with high royalty in
another place,” Thomas said. “And the rule is, do not
overrule them in small things; it is difficult enough to
overrule them in great things. I do not cross royalty on
minor matters. You are a minor matter, Scrivener."
1)
a
19
118
PAST MASTER
So Scrivener went angrily to his lodging in the
machine shed.
Charles the Six Hundred and Twelfth had been
polishing the skull of Charles the Sixth Hundred and
Eleventh, the Emperor who had been murdered on the
morning of the previous day by the Programmed Kil-
lers. The skull had been partly shattered by the mortal
blow, and Charles the Present had to work carefully.
He had a sort of white clay that he was using for paste;
and he set the larger pieces into the break. Evita came
and began to arrange the smaller fragments, cleaning
them from day-old gore and handling them deftly.
“How is it that you are of high blood, Devil-kid?”
the young Emperor asked her. They appeared to be
about the same age; but if the legends of Evita were
only partly true, this were impossible. “The whole
wallful of skulls would protest your touching a sliver if
you were not of high blood, but they seem happy in
their niches. What? What? You were the consort of one
of them? And that one is making for you as much song
as a dead skull can make.
“But there is more than one of them crooning at you!
You must be very old! So old! There is Charles the One
Hundred and Twelfth himself stirring at you. You are
Stephanie the green-eyed queen! But Charles the Two
Hundred and Fifth is also chiming in and rocking in his
niche. So you are Queen Brigid! And Charles the Three
.
Hundred and Fifteenth is happy at sensing your pres-
ence. So you are Queen Candy Mae! How could you be
.
all of them? I called you Devil-kid and I was right. But
they all love you."
.
9
119
PAST MASTER
9
)
“I wish that were true,"' Evita said. “But you will
notice that Charles the Three Hundred and Thirteenth
has tumed his face to the wall. Poor Charles! It was all a
misunderstanding, Charles, really it was. And the
sounds made by two others are not happy ones. I have
been as many bad queens as I have been good ones. I
come often back to Goslar to renew myself. I've been a
lot of queens.”
“Be one more!" Charles cried. “The Oddopter
priest will marry us at once.
“Oh no, my days of queening it are over. I have
committed myself to the Thomas Adventure, and I will
follow it the several months till I am released from it by
his death. I doubt if you will still be alive then, Charles,
but I may come and see.
I
The skulls made an impressive show in their niches
on the rude wall. Not all six hundred and eleven were
there. There were, in fact, thirteen of them missing,
and there were empty niches for them. These were the
Emperors who had been murdered by being knocked
from high peaks into deep ravines, or had been burned
beyond recovery in fire traps, or who had died in some
other demolishing adventure at the hands of the Prog-
rammed Killers. But most were here, and they provided
the mnemonic for the great remembered oral history of
the dynasty.
“More than one of you here is a Taibhse,” Charles
said. “I am Emperor so I am given intuition about such
things. The Maxwell leaves bodies behind him, and the
Thomas leaves heads behind. The Evita has lived too
long to be so young, and I understand this less than the
other cases. How do you do it, black-hearted kid?”'
“Do you not leam anything at the university,
120
PAST MASTER
.
1)
Charley-boy?”' she asked him. “Very long life has
been possible on Astrobe for two hundred years. They
remain on the edge of the breakthrough, they say. But
special breakthroughs have been made all through these
two hundred years. I am one of them. But who wants it?
they ask. Nine out of ten persons on Astrobe ask for
termination long before their normal life term is run.
They find life so wearying, the Golden People! Hell, I
don't. Perfection is all the more cloying the more it is
perfected. I tell Holy Thomas that this thing, and not
the Cathead and Barrio and Feral Strip revolts, is the
sickness of Astrobe. The people are so weary of perfec-
tion that they ask termination at earlier and earlier ages. .
Many now ask it as small children. What is so perfect
about a life that more and more people refuse to live?”
"I forget your legend, Devil-kid," the Emperor
Charles said, “though I am certain that I knew it when I
had to study the Legends of Astrobe in school. Is there
not somewhere in it the phrase 'to go to Hell in a
hand-basket'?''
“Yes, there is, Charley-boy. I was naive in my
methods and in my direction of revolt,” Evita said.
“The teachers said that there was no Hell and no Devil,
and this angered me; I knew that they were wrong; I had
had some personal contact with both. They said that
there was no sin. In particular, they said that children
were not able to commit serious sins; and in this I knew
that the teachers were sinfully wrong.
“I decided to go to Hell to prove them wrong. I
decided to find the Devil. What I found first was the old
Evil Scientist of Legend, so contrived a man that he was
a burlesque of himself. Yet he was a true scientist and a
truly evil man. I consorted with him, and he did give me
121
PAST MASTER
.
>
99
long life and an introduction into certain aspects of evil.
I was one of the first successful experiments in longev-
ity. It takes a deep well of bodily and psychic energy to
make it work, and I had it. At that time I thought that he
was the Devil himself, and that I was Faustina and had
made a Devil's bargain.
“Well, he was sound in the biology of the thing, and
he gave me what I wanted. There isn't much demand
for it now. 'Eternal youth, who wants it?' is the sneer. I
did and do want it. For several centuries I have had it.
Ah, the Holy Thomas and others smile. They do not
believe my legend. They will not believe a legend even
when they see it in the flesh.
“Quick-sparrow, you are not yet twenty years,”
Thomas said.
“Good Thomas, I am more than two hundred,” the
Evita answered. “Well, I committed all the old-
fashioned abominations in my search for Hell. I in-
dulged in fornication and pride and unkindness and
intellectual contempt. But I didn't find Hell im-
mediately.
“There is another legend about the boy who had to
go clear around his planet to come to his own house.
Then he recognized it for the first time. I am the girl
who did it; and I did find Hell. Golden Astrobe of the
Dream is that Hell. I don't like it, and I never will; but
Hell exists.
“But Golden Astrobe is perfect, child-woman,
Thomas insisted. “It is all perfections rolled into one.
- Sureitis, good Thomas, all rolled into one package
and tied with a golden ribbon. I had been tricked by
false teachers who use words to mean their opposites.
So have you been tricked, Thomas, and you should be
.
91
99
122
PAST MASTER
9
too intelligent for that. Well, let them so misuse terms!
Let them call things what they will. If the Cathead thing
and the Barrio thing are Hell, then I am for Hell till a
better Hell comes along. But I will not accept so ex-
treme a Hell as the Vision of Golden Astrobe. It stifles!
It blows out souls like rows of candles!”
There were rows of candles there in the big shanty
room, or tallow tapers at least, there in the place that
was royal palace and public house and skinners' center,
there in the big room that could sleep perhaps twenty
people. And the rows of candles were blown out now
and then, for the room was badly calked and the wind
had risen outside.
A man came in.
"The ghosts are bad tonight, Emperor," the man
said. “They have just eaten all the flesh of my wife and
left only her bones."
“Well, I'm working on a king's cham against them,
but I don't have it in shape yet,” said Emperor Charles
the Six Hundred and Twelfth. "The skulls of the old
emperors are supposed to inspire me to it, but so far I
get nothing but gibberish. I guess the ghosts will just
have to be bad tonight."
“I'm kind of glad she's gone," the man said, as he
took hydra Devil-meat out of the common pot with one
of the big wooden forks, “but I'll miss her sometimes.
We fought a lot, but there was never anyone so much
fun to fight with. Now I don't have anybody."
“What is the ghost bit?'' Thomas asked as he also
began to dip Devil-meat out of the pot with a wooden
fork. Then they all began to dip it out and to eat.
“The ghosts are the same, or almost the same, as the
Taibhse," the green-robe Father Oddopter said. “You
a
123
PAST MASTER
9
being one, Thomas, should know a little what they are.
They are animals or creatures or beings ripped out of
their context and set to wandering. They are most often
invisible, and at their most solid manifestation they are
still transparent or at least slightly translucent, as are
you by candlelight.”
“There are such indeed?'' Thomas asked. “Or are
they mere country tales?”
“They are real, and many of them are angry at their
misplacement. Will a country tale eat all the flesh off a
person and leave only the bones?" the green-robe
asked. “Well, I ghess that is possible too. All things
are. Of these ghosts, however named, we can only say
that they be. In the early Natural Histories of Astrobe
they were given space. Now they are not. But they are
creatures with minds superior to those of animals, and
of the order of men. They have bodies, however fragile
and changing. They have been seen and heard and felt.
They have killed, and they have been killed. Their flesh
has been in that very pot there, but it steamed away to
nothing, leaving only an aroma. They have cities and
settlements. Most often they are reluctant to approach
human settlements (it may be true that they are kept off
by spells), but sometimes they do come and eat flesh,
all the flesh of a person, cleanly and rapidly.”
“Is superstition completely rampant in the boon-
docks of Astrobe?'' Thomas demanded.
“Why yes, I suppose it is,” the green-robe said.
“The psychic force, the libido, is completely rampant
here, that I know. Once, I believe, that was true on Old
Earth, and it lingered long in the Africas and Haitis of
Old Earth. You forget that the taming of the nature of
this world has been of a very short time. The feral strips
124
PAST MASTER
are the power-house of Astrobe. They are the key to the
weather, and to the fertility of the land; to the water and
to the water power; also to the power from the grian-
sun. They are also, I believe, the psychic power-house
of Astrobe, though their human persons are fewer in
their thousands than is civilized Astrobe in its billions.
Yes, superstition is very strong here, Thomas.
“If three persons of the feral strips imagine a thing
strongly enough (however monstrous it may be), they
can bring it into being. They can create a contingent
body for any thing they imagine, and it will be inha-
bited by certain unbodied spirits here. I have seen it
done. I have helped do it. When children of the feral
strips play ‘monsters,' they make monsters that can be
seen and smelled, and which on occasion have eaten
them up
“Yes, here are all improbably persons and animals,
spirits and half-spirits, clean and unclean; the ar-
chetypes of folk dreams; they are here alive, and often
fleshed. Here there is superstition (the beyond-belief or
over-belief) as a shaggy and pungent thing that leaves
footprints and fang-marks. Every thought or inkling,
suppressed as irrational in rational Astrobe, comes out
here and assumes flesh. Why, there is a stock-breeder
here who breeds, improves, and slaughters for profit a
creature that had its origin in the nightmares of Golden
Astrobe. It was banned there by group therapy. It came
out here and became physical fact."
“Father, father, there are no brains in your head,”
”
Thomas chided. “I see that I will have to quarantine
these regions much more tightly if I do become presi-
dent of Astrobe.”
“And I tell you, Thomas, that the civilized world of
9
125
PAST MASTER
9
a
9
I,
Astrobe is really of no consequence,” the green-robe
said. “It is but a thin yellow fungus growing on a part of
the hide of the planet. Should this shaggy old orb shiver
its hide uncommonly but once, the Golden Astrobe
civilization would be destroyed instantly. Bless this
meat! It's good.”
“It would be an act of charity to exterminate all the
poor benighted persons in this area, and I will have to
have it done,”Thomas said. “Aye, the meat is good.”
“You'll run into trouble with the ecologists if you go
to exterminating all the feral people," the Emperor
Charles pointed out. “The several thousand humans in
the feral strips are part of the balanced ecology of
Astrobe. Destroy them, and the balanced plant and
animal life will go out of balance; this great cister for
civilized Astrobe would be changed, and perhaps
ruined. The scientists do not want that. We must be left
here in such numbers as we maintain, they say. But we
are not considered as humans. We are rather animals to
them, animals among animals; we are under the wild-
life department."
"Fox-firk, I cast better lumps in the stool than the
pack of you can say in a night's talk,” Thomas said
angrily, “and I'm called to do it now. Begging your
pardons but I must go to the henry. Or is it called the
charles in this realm, Emperor?''
“Call it what you wish, Thomas," the young Em-
peror said. And then he winked at Evita a wink that was
like lightning between them, and Thomas caught it.
"What is the levity here?'' he demanded still more
angrily. “Cannot an honest man go to the henry with-
out being mocked?"
“It is only that there is a citizen of Goslar with an
a
a
126
PAST MASTER
unusual means of livelihood," the Emperor said. “It is
a trade that has been passed down from father to son.
We will be listening for the lilt of your voice, good
Thomas."
And Thomas went out puzzled to the henry.
9
The man who had lost his wife (all except her bones)
now brought in a little barrel of green lightning.
“She did so love to get foxy on it,” the man said,
"and she will not be using it now. We will drink this
night to my lost wife (except her bones), and praise her
if we can find any words of praise for her. I cannot, but
some of you are better with words than I am. I liked her,
but I can't think of a thing to praise her for."
"To your wife, except for her bones!" sang Evita,
and lifted the little barrel in very strong hands to drink
from the bung.
The Emperor Charles did the same thing, and the
green-robe Father Oddopter, and Paul. But neither
Maxwell nor Slider was able to raise the barrel to
drinking height, and so were barred from participating.
Any others? Bang! Bang! You broach a bung and
there're two who will be there immediately if they're
anywhere to be found. Walter Copperhead the necro-
mancer and Rimrock the ansel were in the shanty room.
Copperhead raised the barrel high and drank deeply.
Rimrock, who had a peculiar physique, did it in a way
that might seem awkward to a man, but he did it
competently and gurglingly.
“Where have you fellows been?'' Paul asked.
“Killing Killers,” Copperhead whooped. “You'd
none of you be alive this night if we hadn't. You're
careless in your wanderings.”
127
PAST MASTER
“That is a barbarous way to drink it anyhow," Slider
bemoaned, badly hurt that he was barred from the
festivity by his bodily weakness. “'In civilized Astrobe,
the mere touch of the electrode or electric needle will
give a much finer effect, the golden glow. What are
you, pigs, that you swig intoxicant in physical form?''
“Hush, half-man, the Emperor Charles com-
manded, and he raised his hand. “We listen."
And then came the high angry lilt of the voice of
Thomas from the little henry out back of the royal
shack. All the frustration of the ages was in that furious
denunciation that Thomas was loosening on someone.
Evita and the Emperor Charles and the green-robe
and the man who had lost his wife except her bones all
went into spasms of laughter. Copperhead's goat-
guffaw was one of the great things, and the primordial
giggle of the oceanic Rimrock was something beyond
the comprehension of common ears.
“What is it?” Paul chuckled. “I hate to be left out of
a thing."
“Why, Paul, there is that citizen of Goslar with the
unusual livelihood,” the green-robe chorlted, hardly
able to contain himself as the Thomas-voice rose even
higher. “He sits on the pot day and night, and there is
but one public pot in the City of Goslar. He will not
move to give place till he is paid a coin. Threats and
beatings will not move him. Only a coin. Hear good
Thomas! What a fine angry voice he does have! But the
citizen of Goslar has him where it hurts."
“Oh stop it. Rimrock!" Evita laughed. “You'll
rupture yourself with that giggling."
128
PAST MASTER
9
"What a region!''Paul sighed with a broken grin. “I
could almost agree with Thomas that it should be more
tightly quarantined. There is creative thinking at work
in this, though. I'm not sure that I've ever met its equal
in civilized Astrobe.'
The angry voice of Thomas had died down to a bitter
grumble. And after a bit, Thomas came back into the
big room very red in the face.
“Does anyone here have a stoimenof d'etain?” he
asked out of his red stony face.
Paul gave him one. It was a pewter coin of small
value in civilized Astrobe, but apparently the dollar-
in-use here in the feral strips. Thomas went out again.
It is presumed that he paid the coin to the citizen of
Goslar, was given access to the pot, and relieved him-
self. He did, at any rate, retụrn to the big room in
somewhat better humor, and yet with a certain reserve,
as though defying them all to carry it any further.
“It all reminds me of something," Thomas smiled,
though his smile was nearly as crooked as that of Paul,
and there was still a bitter rasp to his voice. “It reminds
me of something for which I cannot find a name. I still
believe that the Vision of Golden Astrobe is the perfect
thing, and that the extravagances here in the ferals are
monstrosities below the human level. But perhaps the
Golden Perfection should be suspended for about five
minutes a day for the refreshment of the soul. Yes,
perhaps it should.”
Thomas was able to lift the barrel and drink from the
bung, and it loosened him a little. Green lightning is fun
when the Golden Perfection is not immediately at hand.
Evita told the story of the Devil and the Wife from
a
a
.
1)
129
PAST MASTER
a
Culpepper, of what souvenir she took from him with a
sharp knife, and why to say “hung like the Devil''
means half-hung.
The green-robe told about the alien from Gootz who
came to that very hotel in Goslar and relaxed in a pile in
the middle of the floor. Sure they thought he was a great
wheel of cheese lying there! And they sliced him up in a
hundred slices, and each citizen of Goslar ate one. That
alien from Gootz still raises hell with all of them. He
cannot pull himself together, and he refuses to be
ejected. All citizens of Goslar have a certain green look
on their faces. That is the reason.
The Emperor Charles the Six Hundred and Twelfth
told one. Walter Copperhead told about the fellow who
courted the woman to get to examine her entrails. “I'll
put them back,” he said, “I'll put them back and sew
them in again. I just want to go over them once.” “No,
no, no," the lady said. “Boy, I thought I'd had some
wooly propositions before.”
Paul told one. The man who had lost his wife (except
her bones) told one. And Thomas told a concatenated
drollery with all the obscene parts in Latin. Rimrock
told one, an oceanic spoof so outré that it took the
breath away and turned the liver green.
Then the barrel was empty. At that moment the night
guard of Goslar blew one blast on his trumpet to indi-
cate that all was well with the night. And after a mo-
ment he blew a little scurry to indicate that it was not so
well as all that, that things were prowling.
The Emperor Charles and all the travelers went to
sleep in the straw (a sleep broken only by the giggling
of Rimrock from time to time: if something tickles one
of those ansels he stays tickled quite a while), and the
6
2
130
PAST MASTER
skulls of five hundred and ninety-nine emperors were
empty-eyed in their niches on the wall.
a
Golden Astrobe was a creature with a fair face for all
men to see. But out behind she had a sting in her tail.
131
7. ON THUNDER MOUNTAIN
a
)
)
a
They wakened to trumpets. Some were made trumpets
indeed, blown by the night guard and the day guard
changing places and by the special honor guard, and
some were trumpeter birds set to going by the instru-
mental trumpets. The trumpeter birds were of better
tone and timbre.
The Emperor Charles rose grandly to begin the sec-
ond full day of his reign, if it should prove to be a full
day.
“Not for thirty reigns have there been so many grand
people in the court at Goslar at one time,” said he.
“Strike a medal for it, man.
“I don't know how to strike a medal for it," the man
said.
“If you find someone who does, tell him to strike a
'
medal for it,” the Emperor said. “Put my own fine
hand on it, and the motto They Come To Me Like
Eagles. Why, here is a dead saint from Old Earth, the
a
Devil-kid of Astrobe, a necromancer of unlikely pow-
ers, a transcendent ansel, a priest of Saint Klingen-
smith, an avatar who burns up bodies, and pilot Paul
who is a broken-faced old warlock. Not for thirty reigns
have there been so many grand people at court at one
time, and not for thirty reigns has there been so hand-
some an Emperor at the head of the court."
"How long a time has the thirty reigns been?''
Thomas asked him.
1,
132
PAST MASTER
1
“It has been what we call a rapid year,” the Emperor
said, “perhaps the most rapid ever."
The green-robe Father Oddopter of the order of Saint
Klingensmith said mass for all the people in Goslar and
all the people who came in at the news of it, a little over
a hundred people in all. It was a simple and clear mass
with a surprisingly intelligent sermon, and the uncanny
miracle came shockingly and vividly alive at the con-
secration. It was as though the Heavens opened on
command and the Spirit came down—which is what
happened.
Even the skeptical Thomas felt the stirrings of faith
in himself again. It was a miraculous moming, so why
not believe in miracles again for a while? As he said,
Thomas often rediscovered his belief for a little while in
the momings.
“What they do here at Goslar," the green-robe told
Thomas after the mass, “is set up a token realm till the
real shall be rediscovered. And the reality will be redis-
covered, and the golden palsy will pass. Happy death
for you, good Thomas.
“You are too rapid to wish happy deaths to per-
sons," the Thomas said. “And the mass this moming
was a very old one. 'For those here present who will die
this day.' 'Twas meant to be addressed to a world, and
not to small Goslar of under one hundred people where
it is very unlikely that any will die this day."
“It was addressed to your party and to myself, of
whom several will die this day. Were I not certain of
this, I would have said another mass of the day. And the
necromancer also says that the most of us who go to the
mountain will die this day.”
“'It was a pretty thing, it was a pretty complex of
a
I)
133
PAST MASTER
>>
things," Thomas said as his early-morning faith began
to withdraw from him again. “As a child I lived it, and
as a young man I still respected it. In my maturity I still
call it the Noblest of all Superstitions. The Church of
the Saints lived quite a long while, and historically I
seem to have an ironic part in it. It died. meanly in
civilized Astrobe, I understand, but I believe it will die
more quietly and harmlessly here in the ferals.
“You who are to die this year, know that it will not
die at all, Thomas. And know also that nothing dies
quietly in the ferals. Whatever is set on here shriek and
shrill if it be killed, and it will return to life again and
again. Even the meanest reptile dies hard in the ferals,
and should a great thing do less? It will not lie down and
die quietly, but why are you so afraid of being as-
sociated with superstition? Is it not a superstition of
your own to climb the mountain?''
"Perhaps it is, green monk. It is an inner compulsion
of mine, and I must do it. It is on this one thing that I
fault the citizens of Golden Astrobe: they have never
up their eyes to the mountains. They are like blind
men in this, but where are they mistaken? What if all in
a world were blind to color except certain small boys?
That, I believe, is the case on Astrobe; but it may make
the color-gazing a mere boyish thing. What is the good
of gazing at a pile of rocks? I will leave off such
boyishness after I become world president. But this day
I am hooked on the Mountain Bait."
“We be on our way, good Thomas,” Rimrock the
ansel interrupted. “If I go up the mountain, it will be by
a watery way I know on the inside of it, up the mother
spring, for it is a mountain-full of water. The Cop-
perhead will be on the mountain top before you, and
lifted up
> >
134
PAST MASTER
1)
will perform certain abominations there. And then he
will leave. We ride shotgun for you this day again.”
“ “But it will not help greatly. Most of you will still
.
die on the mountain,” Copperhead the necromancer
said. And the two of them were gone.
,
.
“Shall I kill the Scrivener thing in the machine
shed?'' the Emperor Charles the Six Hundred and
Twelfth asked.
“No, of course not,” Thomas answered sharply. .
“Release him to me. He is one of my advisors and a
member of my party. It was rather a cruel trick to shut
him up in the shed last night, and I do often find such
royal wit tedious."
“But he is a machine and not a man," the Emperor
insisted. “And as a machine he has, though he may not
know it, a sender in his head. It works without his
knowledge whether he is asleep or awake. It is his code
signal, and every Programmed Person (even if he be
nine-tenths human and one-tenth Programmed) has it.
It is by this code signal that the Programmed Killers so
easily trail you. It is suicide for you to climb the
mountain; you know that, Thomas. The Programmed
Killers will encircle the pinnacle and have you caught
in the tall trap.”
“I worry about them not at all," Thomas said. “I am
,
a special case and I may not die till my own special time
has come.'
“Ah, but they will kill members of your party.
Promise me this, that you will at the appropriate mo-
ment kill the Scrivener and cast him into a ravine to
mislead the Killers, and then to make your mountain
climb quickly in the interval.”
)
135
PAST MASTER
“No, I will not cast one of my own members to the
dogs. We will climb the mountain as though there were
no such things as the Killers, and for me there are not."
“I repeat, they will kill members of your party,
Thomas. And several of these are sometimes citizens of
my realm. I will charge you with their blood.'
“You will charge me with nothing, Charles. You are
only a fuzz-faced boy playing in a cluttered back-yard.
Yes, I suppose that some members of my party will be
murdered by the Killers. So let it be. It will be a
winnowing, a cleansing. Those who die will be those
who deserve to die. I myself will not be false to the
vision. I'll blazon the motto on my own breast. The
Killers strike only those who are a threat to the Golden
Life of Astrobe.
“I'd kill them too if I knew which they were! I
welcome the Killers! They seein to be mistaken as to
my own role and purpose, but they are inhibited from
actually killing me when the time comes. If there are
enemies of the Great Thing in my party, let them die!”
“I expel you from this realm, Thomas More!” the
young Emperor cried sharply. “You're a more
mechanical thing than any machine. You're a string-
puppet that's left off being a man. What vision could
anyone be faithful to who would sell his own brothers
and partisans to the Killers? I thought you were a man,
and you are only a mannikin. Your man's-parts were
left behind when they brought you forward through
time. You stink up my woods and swamps! Take your
machine things and your cravens and go! We will see if
the real people follow you.
What? I'm aghast! You go with him, Devil-kid?
He's worthless, you know."
>
136
PAST MASTER
19
9
99
6
“Yes, I go with him, Charles 612, and I can't make
I
you understand,"Evita said. "He is not entirely worth-
less, or not forever. He only seems so now. Yes, he's
become a dull lump of metal and will never serve for a
knife now. But he will serve for something else. I've
followed worse to the end, and his end won't be very
long now.'
“Not in the ferals it sure won't be, not in Goslar,”
the Emperor said. “But you others, wait, wait! How
.
are you so wrong? The Paul and the Oddopter go with
him also. Why? Why? You have heard him throw in
with the Things, and leave off being a man.
“And I have heard distant bells tolling, and seen a
world arise in the sign of the Rolling Head, Charles,"
the green-robe said easily. "Believe me, there is more
here than is apparent. It's my business to be with this
lost sheep this day. He is the wooly ram with the double
sign on him. He is in Scripture. And he must be saved,
not for himself, but for the double sign on him.”
“But it's to your own death, Father Oddopter! As the
Emperor I am given insights, and I see your death today
because of him. Even in martyrdoms there should be a
certain economy. Do not sacrifice the worthy for the
worthless."
“No man who swells up in such towering anger as
the Thomas does now is worthless, Charles. He is a
cloud full of lightning, and not at all as facile in this as
he seems to be. I will stay with him this day.”
“I say he's full of hot wind and nothing else,” said
the Emperor Charles. “Hecannotlighten and he cannot
thunder. He can but fume in his wrongness. I say he is a
wether and no wooly ram.
“Were I not suddenly caught in my own uncertainty,
9
137
PAST MASTER
9)
I'd settle with you, fuzz-face," Thomas said closely.
“I was never one to be certain that I was right for long,
and I'm not certain now."
“He is an instrument, Charles. Try to understand
that,” said Paul. “And I will stay with him also."
The Emperor Charles withdrew in blazing silence.
He had Scrivener released to them, and his contempt
for them scorched the very grass when he did so.
The members of the party, not very cheerful or much
in accord, began the ascent of Electric Mountain. All
were ashamed, and they did not know of what.
a
Yet it was a stimulating moming and a challenging
climb. And the death-threat did call up excitement in
most of them. Maxwell and Slider didn't like it. But
there was a curious change in Scrivener, who was,
perhaps, a Programmed Person.
“This is my test, Thomas," the Scrivener said as
they climbed. "I have been rethinking things all the
night. Whether I am a Programmed Person or an old-
recension human I do not know; nor how much I may be
of each. But I have found something out here that tells
me that you yourself are wrong to hold the Dream of
Astrobe as perfect. It is not. It is only half the thing. It
must be conjoined to some other thing that I do not
understand yet. Perhaps, after all, we must kill the
Devil afresh every day. You are an old-line human,
Thomas, yet I accuse you of setting the human thing too
low and the mechanical thing too high. So, there are
machines that walk like men these several hundred
years, and perhaps I am one of them. But there are also
men who swing against their own kind and become
138
PAST MASTER
more partisans of the machine than the machines them-
selves. Do you not be one of them!
“So, the Programmed Killers hunt down and kill
only those who are a threat to the Astrobe dream? And
you all believe that they will discount me as no threat?
We will see who they will kill and who they will pass by
when they have us in the trap. For you lead us to the
trapping, Thomas. I tell you that I have become a
boiling threat to one part of the too-easy thing.'
a
They climbed. And then they climbed more steeply.
The vegetation fell away and became more sparse.
Now they were climbing a Devil-tower of magma and
iron, rough and sharp and blood-drawing.
Above them the mountain spire was a pinnacle as a
cartoonist might draw one, sharp and needle-like as a
burlesque of a spire, and with a clean white doughnut
cloud encircling it and settling down a third of the way
from the top
The green-robe caught a Commer's Condor in a
flung net. They tore it apart and ate it raw. It was past
mid-morning, and they had been climbing hard.
“There is another doughnut-shaped cloud around the
spire,” Evita said. “It is a black one, and below us.
The Programmed Killers have come in full patrol and
have the peak surtounded. They climb not so fast nor so
well as we do, but they climb more relentlessly and they
do not rest. This isn't the death I had planned for us all,
Holy Thomas."
“Never mind," said Thomas. “We will rest. And
then we will ascend again. Electric Mountain, they call
it, do they? Aye, it tingles and is full of sparks.”
1)
.
.
1)
139
PAST MASTER
1)
>
There was an excitement entering them all as they
rested there.
“There is a story that one of my grandmothers told
me when I was small," Scrivener broke in with a
nervous half-metallic voice. “'It is from her; I believe,
that I have my mechanical descent. In the early days,
she said, the mechanical men, her own people, wished
that they had a mythos as the humans had: a mystique, a
god or a founder hero, a sleeping king perhaps. This, of
course, was before the humans had given up the old
hero tales entirely.
“Every Old-Earth Nation, my grandmother told me,
had its mythos of a sleeping king who would one day
awaken and rule again in a new golden age. Of sleeping
kings there was Alaric the slayer of Rome, who was
buried underneath the Busento River (its course
changed for the burial and changed back again to flow
over him), and he was to arise from it again one day and
lead the Gothic element, that shaggy thing that is the
basis of a dozen peoples. There was Arthur of Britain in
kingly sleep in an ensorceled room at the bottom of a
lake. There was Brian Boru of the Irish buried on
horseback in a pit with great stones heaped around him,
and when he wakened he would scatter the stones and
ride again. There was the Cid of the Spanish, not buried
at all but riding forever a horse in death-sleep over dark
moors in Estremadura. There was Barbarossa of the
Germanies asleep at a table in a cave in a mountain and
his beard grown through the table.'
“There was Henry of the Tudors immured in a room
with six wives, and they not in accord," Thomas
laughed.
“There was Kennedy of the North-Americas riding
1
140
PAST MASTER
99
forever in an open automobile in an obscure place,
Scrivener continued. "There was Roadstorm the early
freebooter King of Astrobe and all scattered Earths,
marooned in unknown orbit in his small spaceboat the
Star King. All of them are to retum and lead their
people once more. How can people form themselves
without some such mythos?
“The early mechanical men of Astrobe wished to
find such a legend in their past. They needed a sleeping
king for their own solidarity. They sent to Old Earth to
see if they could not find some such mechanical sleep-
ing king of their own to build a mythos upon. They
went backward and further backward through lands and
times to find the first mechanical thing that they could
regify.
"They settled on an old small broken gear train that
had been taken from an Egyptian tomb. It had hard-
wood cogs and bronze bearings. Its use was not known.
It was a clumsy thing, but it was the earliest thing they
could find in the true mechanical spirit. They brought it
to Astrobe and said that it was their sleeping king. They
said that it would awaken one day and lead them. And
the human people snickered at them, at us, for it.
.
“Then Ouden came, the Celestial Nothingness. “Put
away such toys as that,'Ouden said. 'I am your god and
your king.' And so he has been god and king for all
Programmed Persons from that day till this. And quite
soon he will be god and king of all beings of every sort.
But we were his first people, we the mechanicals. He
grows and grows, and all the other kings die.
“But last night I rejected him! I thought about it all
the night, and I rejected him. So, what am I now? I am
not machine and I am not man. What is left to one who
.
141
PAST MASTER
has rid himself of the deified nothingness? I cannot be
left with nothing. It was the Nothing that I rejected.”
There was no response to this shrill little pleading of
Scrivener. They all looked at him with half-shut eyes
that frightened him. Scrivener had become alien to both
his recensions.
They began to climb again.
Astrobe below them was a golden haze, and greenery
underneath the gold. But here the air had become blue.
Like Earth air, Thomas thought. They had ascended at
least two kilometers in vertical distance. The mountain
spire was irregular and rough. There was always
hand-hold and foot-hold, but often of slashing sharp-
ness.
>
And high above them on an outcropping there stood a
boy or a young man. He seemed a spire-mirage, for
there are such. But how had he got there and they not
seen him before?
“It is my brother Adam,'' Evita said. "I love him,
but he is a bad omen. His coming always signifies
death, usually his own, but he often takes others with
him. He comes often during times of crisis, and he dies
in bloody battles for what he believes is a cause. He is
very good at dying. He does it a lot.”'
The doughnut-shaped cloud around the spire above
them had tumed gray and blue and black. It was full of
sparks and fire. It was now an electric torus.
A Commer's Condor, swooping very near to them on
black wings, cried out croakingly, “Thomas More is a
fink!”
“What did that fellow say?” Thomas shouted.
“Was he not a bird? How could he cry out at me? But I
heard him and saw him."
“No, you didn't, Thomas,” the green-robe said,
142
PAST MASTER
“You didn't believe the things that you did see yester-
day and the night; and now you see and hear things that
are not there. This was hallucination. From here on up
we are in the region of hallucination. The most rational
man ever bom, if he ascend here, will suffer such. They
are fluffs of ball-lightning hovering about Electric
Mountain; they are wind and spark and charged air. The
shapes they take are both objective and subjective. One
can shape them a little with one's own mind. I once met
a talking horse on the ridge right above us, and talking
horses are not able to scramble up this high on the
spire.”
They came up to the boy Adam, and he joined their
party silently. So handsome a boy, though his sister
Evita had once said that he was completely empty-
headed. Never mind, he maintained his silence, so who
should know? He moved well, he climbed well, it was
said that he died well. He could have been the statue
Greek Youth except that he seemed Jewish. The
spinodeltoid and posterior trapezus (the bow-bending
muscles) were well developed, and the bow had never
been used on Astrobe. Ah, he was old statuary all right,
quite well done. He was nude and nobody noticed. Had
he been nude in all his other manifestations?
They went up and up. They came through the gray
.
torus cloud and into other clouds that were gathering.
The continental layout was open below them. It was
now clear and bright below them, and misty only in the
little cone above them.
With a shiver of triumph they came to the top. It was
a crooked-shaped plateau, an iron-rock slope that
looked like sponge and smelled of ozone. And someone
had been there before them, very recently.
The one who had been there was both necromancer
a
143
PAST MASTER
and haruspex, and his recent studies were still spread
out on the iron-rock. But how had Walter Copperhead
gotten there before them, how had he slipped down
through them again, how had he avoided the Program-
med Killers (if he had avoided them), and how had he
managed to slay a giant rouk? It was the entrails of a
rouk, the largest bird of Astrobe, that were spread out
there. Elephant entrails were as nothing to these.
Surely he had found the answers of riddles here. If they
are not in the entrails of rouk, killed and spread out and
studied on the top of Electric Mountain, then they are
not anywhere in the art of haruspices.
“Bless him, I love him and he loves them,” Evita
said. “I'd leave him my own did I know that he will die
before me.”
)
)
And another sort of entrails were spread out for them
to see. It had come on first dusk as they stood there, and
they drank in the view as though it were new apple-
wine. It was tne entrails of the planet below them.
There were the Ferals, and the Glebe, and the String of
Cities. There was the black-green Astrobe of the feral
strip they had just traversed, and the golden Astrobe of
the cultivated regions. There were the great golden
cities at their close intervals. And there was black
Cathead and the gray Barrio. All of them giant things!
The branch of the sea that cradled Wu Town and
ended in a splinter of estuaries and canals at Cathead
was a black-blue-green monster, writhing with strength
and dotted with huge sea-harvesters. There was Cos-
mopolis standing high and wide in a special golden
halo—the heart of civilized Astrobe.
“The Reparation Tower, which you see on the east-
144
PAST MASTER
6
ern fringe there, is the highest structure in Cos-
mopolis,” Evita said. “It was built about a hundred
years ago by one of my sons who was planet president.
He had some bad ideas, and he did not (in spite of the
Reparation Tower) offer enough reparation. I have had
bad luck with my sons who achieved world-presidence.
I have not much more hope for my adopted son Thomas
here."
“The brat-child," Thomas asked Paul and the
green-robe in an aside, 'is she really of an unnatural
age?"
“I don't know, Thomas," the green-robe said.
“Thirty-five years ago when I first saw her she was of
the same apparent age as now. Remember that almost
everything is possible.”
"Remember also that she lies a lot,” said Paul.
.
One could almost see the feral strips feeding the
cultivated Astrobe and the golden cities with their con-
trolled counterpoint ecology. The muscles and the
nerves and the veins of the planet were revealed from
this height. One could see the black cancer of Cathead
eating into the land and the sea and clouding the air.
And yet, as the green-robe had said, the civilized As-
trobe was only a thin yellow froth on a small part of that
world. The old orb-animal had but to shiver its hide and
all would be gone. And it looked like a hide-shivering
evening.
Electric Mountain could be climbed; it took nothing
but strength and endurance and a little care. But could
anyone ever climb Corona Mountain there that was
sheer and overhung and appeared on the verge of top-
14.5
PAST MASTER
pling? Or Magnetic Mountain? Great Sky over us, look
at that tor! Or Dynamo Mountain (which had been the
feminine one in the mythologies, and the other three her
consorts), which was highest of them all, who should
climb her? These four high spires were known as the
Thunder Mountains, a startling group.
In the rough diamond between them was a country so
harsh as to make even the feral strips look tame. This
was deeply muscled country that had sinuous depths
and involved hills and ramparts. It was prototype
nightmare country where everything was bigger and
woolier. It was heap upon heap, and spires rising in
clusters to the cross-buttressed heights of the moun-
tains. And now, as the darkness began more to deepen,
all the high places were outlined with an electric blue
glow.
“It uplifts the soul,” Thomas said with some awe.
“Be careful, little Thomas,"Evita jibed. “What has
uplift to do with the golden mediocrity of Astrobe?
With the blessed levelness? And the soul, Thomas, is it
not an obscenity and a superstition, except for a little
while in the moming?"
“Push me nowt so far, brat-child. I say me my words
I
and I think me my thoughts, but to what should they
correspond? And yet I can see that, when I become
world president, these high feelings will have to be
leveled down. They become too rich for the imagina-
tion."
“Aye, Thomas, you'll tell the mountains to lie down
like puppies," the green-robe said. “And the light-
ning, you will tell it to get back in its sheath. Do you not
know that this also is a part of the controlled ecology of
Astrobe? The high wild feelings attract a very small
9
1
146
PAST MASTER
a
3
number of persons, and they repel the others. And only
a very small number of persons are needed here for the
balance. The persons who hold these tall feelings are
regarded as animals among the animals, part of the
fauna-balance of the wild lands. Even the high light-
ning here (which you will be amazed at very soon) is
treated as a commodity like any other commodity. It is
packaged and shipped down to golden Astrobe, pack-
aged as raintrapped nitrogen and shipped by natural
flow to the ultimate consumer. That is all it is—from
your viewpoint, not from mine—but it does come in a
flashy package.”
And very soon the lightning did begin in spectacular
eamest. Corona mountain drew bolts out of the sky that
appeared a hundred kilometers long. The persons of the
party seemed transparent or interiorly illuminated from
the intense glow of it. It is odd when you can see the
bones of skull and rib-cage of a companion by a flash so
bright that it has the properties of penetrating rays.
Then the bolts of white and gold fire began to whip
from peak to peak. A bull-whip thirty-five kilometers
long snapped from Corona Mountain to Magnetic
Mountain with a crooked light that literally blinded
them all for a while. Here was the mystery of motion,
the old paradox solved, a whip of light going so fast that
it was in more than one place at one time. It was on
every jag and crag at once, and yet it was but a single
point of light, only a streak in being of simultaneous
appearance. Or was it the empyrean itself, the infinity
of blinding light that is everywhere in the outside but is
seen only when the false sky is ripped open for the
blinding moment?
Then Electric Mountain itself was struck by a bolt
.
147
PAST MASTER
6
that boiled the air and melted the rocks, and the
thunder-clap knocked them all to their knees.
Thunder-struck, they were literally astonished (which
is the same thing latinized), impaled and numbed in
every sense by the blow that shook the mountain.
“Ah, what can come after such a blow as that?''
Thomas sighed.
“From below,” the boy Adam cried out. “It comes
a thunder with more sulphur in it! They strike while we
are blinded and amazed! Man ramparts! Roll boulders!
Topple them!”
“Who's been doing the thinking for this outfit?''
Evita shrilled. “I'd intended to, but we've all left our
wits. The iron dogs are on us! Are we people still, or do
we fall to them?”
The Programmed Killers surged up from below
while total darkness alterated with white light and
black light, all of them blinding.
"Not me, you tin scurrae," Thomas shouted, “not
me, you things, I've nowt been false to the vision. I've
been false to everything else." He sent a small boulder
down on them in a two-handed heave. “I'm not so
partisan of you as I was, tinhorns. You make a mistake,
and it is not to be tolerated that someone makes a
mistake as to myself. Not me, you clanking fools, not
me! I'd never threatened the Dream of Astrobe. Leave
off!
No? You will not? Have at it, then, you monster
machines! I'll battle you to any end you want!"
Thomas roared and carried on; others fought silently;
but the battle was not going well for his party. The boy
Adam, faster and more mercurial than the rest of them,
toppled one of the Programmed Killers backwards, and
a
148
PAST MASTER
a
6
it fell a thousand meters through the glancing and sheer
darkness. And, at the same instant and in a distant
place, another Programmed Killer was created to take
its place and was given the same assignment.
Paul and the green-robe, Scrivener and Thomas,
Maxwell and the Devil-kid Evita, rolled down boulders
on them and fought down on them from above.
“Drive down in the narrow slot between the neck-
piece and the lorica or breast-plate,” the green-robe
shouted, and he had lashed a hand-knife onto a pole to
make a spear or pike for just such driving. "'There is a
nexus there, a relay center. Get them there in that
narrow slot, or they get us wherever we stand!”
“Ah, I am the one they disregard,” Slider said
sadly, a whispered regret that cut through the bedlam.
“So, I am no threat to them at all? I thought that I would
be. I'd gladly die, but I do not like being treated as
though I were already dead."
“We've changed places, you whelp,” Scrivener
howled. “Who's the man now? And who's the
machine? Me they do not disregard! I threaten their
thing! I oppose it as strongly as the roughest man in
I
Cathead. Backwards and down you go, you clanking
Devil! I'll battle you all while there's life left in me. '
But it was only for a little while. And then there was
no life left in Scrivener. He had opted for a man very
late, and the machines knew the diagram of him as a
machine. The Programmed Raiders smashed Scrivener
dead there. Every flicker in him, both of man and
machine, came to a stop.
The battle in the sky still dwarfed the death-battle on
the mountain spire. The thunder burst ears and knocked
the breath out of body. It scrambled wits, both human-
19
149
PAST MASTER
chemical and programmed gell-cell mechanical-
magnetic. The light from the sky turned ordinary light
black, and there were big empty grinning faces in the
sky like high cliffs that had been there always. Big
faces that had always been there, but never seen except
by the most intense flash of the insane lightning.
“It's the many faces or Ouden, their great Nothing-
ness and King,” Maxwell cried. “Where is the face of
our King? Would we know it if we saw it?”
And now the lightning had reached hysterical
heights, as had the thunder and the relentless assault of
the Programmed Killers. Bleeding ears and blinded
eyes! And the rock-iron surface slippery with the en-
trails of those who were first ripped apart.
1)
“On the third next bolt we go down," Evita cried to
Thomas in a sharp underneath voice that got through to
his stunned ears. “You and the Paul and the I. The
others are already too blood-drained and broken to get
through.
“What brat? Go down where and how?'' Thomas
croaked as he was being overpowered and near split
open himself.
"Your brains, Thomas, use them. We go then or
.
never. Be a man and think like a man! Follow your
intuition when the moment comes, and it will be nar-
rower than the lightning moment.
A blow that literally burned the eyes and choked the
lungs with an intake of light! A thunder-smash that
knocked them all flat, men and machines! And they
were to it again after the narrow defiance. The boy
Adam died in glorious gore, howling defiance. He was
good at dying, Evita had said. He had done it before.
A second bolt coming at the same time from the sky
19
150
PAST MASTER
1,
and from Corona Mountain! Rocks melted and ran like
water. The thunder-shock like a deadly blow in the
deep bowels! And the green-robe died of a smash
between the throat and the lorica. He died loudly but
not unhappily. He was a good one.
“Thou art a priest forever according to the order of
Melchisedech," Paul gave his requiem. “Watch to
your left there, Maxwell! Oh well, never mind then.
Too late."
In the darkness deep beyond belief, Maxwell's body
had been smashed before Paul's waming could be
heeded, and his odd spirit had been sundered from that
broken body. Never mind. Maxwell had a trick of
turning up again. An oddity of his.
“Be paralyzed now and be you transfixed forever,"
Evita warned in the low voice. Now it was at hand, the
last narrow moment at which even mad escape could be
thought of.
The third bolt, ripping from Corona Mountain to
Electric Mountain, blinding and transfixing machines
as well as humans for the much less than an instant of it.
Down! Down! With all mad speed, down, and one
slip is hurtling death.
Down during the light that is more blinding than any
darkness; down, using a narrower moment than the
lightning-moment itself. Down through the darkness
that is darkness indeed. Down through the clap that
stuns and knocks out both sensors and senses, already
down a great hurtling drop before the instantaneous
blast of the thunder.
Then continuing down for a minute, for a quarter, for
an hour, discovered and howled after and followed by
swift iron trackers.
Down onto the lower plateau and down again, while
151
PAST MASTER
a part of the Programmed follow them closely, and the
rest complete the tall trap on the pinnacle to mutilate
and record what is left: three dead humans, one dead
hybird whose final pattern shows that he opted for
human late, one gibbering creature still alive but disre-
garded, since he represented no threat to the Dream or
to anything.
But three of their prey have escaped them, have
fallen like lightning down the spire in a lightning-
instant.
Never mind. If the Programmed do not get them this
night, they will get them at another time. And the
advance scrim of the Programmed have not given up on
getting them this night.
Thomas and Paul and the brat-child Evita were all
strong on their legs and possessed of a sturdy life-urge.
They were no longer in the middle of the towering
thunder-storm and they felt certain that their senses
were 'returning to life after their stunning. The storm
was. above them now and they were no more in the
middle of the display. But they were charged and full of
spark. They glowed with coronas about them, blue
electric auras. They shined and hissed like ghosts.
They came down into the wild savanna country just
as the sky broke open. It was a torrential downpour, a
giant rain that could not be exaggerated. A part of the
neat balance that kept Golden Astrobe golden, still it
was savage water from the upped abyss, the deluge
itself.
They went at a great pace all the night to escape it,
and every brook was a raging river. It was already false
dawn before they could get a glimpse of each others'
faces, and all three of them, Thomas and Paul and
.
152
PAST MASTER
.
Evita, had suffered a deep change. They had been
transfigured on the mountain. They were not quite the
same people they had seen. Something new had been
burned into them.
They crossed the last of the feral strip, moving in an
agony of weariness and blood-loss, still pursued by the
mechanical killers (as all would be pursued for the short
remainder of their lives), still in the black afterglow of
the dizzy light. They were alive, but not entirely. There
had been tracers bumed into them. Defiant though they
might be, they could no longer be their own people
untrammeled. They were marked.
“Really, it was a sight worth seeing, once," Thomas
said. “I have found the strong skeleton beneath the
golden flesh of the world, the iron in the marrow, and
the deep green blood. And the something else, the void.
Ah, those grinning empty faces up in the sky that were
all the Nothing Face!"
“Not up in the sky,"Evita said. “Down in the sky.
We be upside down on Astrobe, and we saw down into
the ultimate pit when we were on the mountain.'
1
Crossing the last of the feral strip, followed closely
and hounded, in the very early morning they came into
giant Cathead from the backside.
153
8.
BLACK CATHEAD
Thomas had been lingering in Cathead for several days.
Evita and Paul had left him: to do his work for him, they
said. Kingmaker sent word for him to get back to
Cosmopolis immediately; he stated that it was time
Thomas campaigned, or at least stood by to be shown.
Thomas sent back word that he had been proposed
for the job of physician, and that as such he intended to
examine the disease, at least superficially. He had been
around the fringes of Cathead before, on its borders
with the Barrio, and into certain of its tortuous suburbs.
Now he had to study the sick giant itself, that mad thing
that was eating into beautiful and rational Astrobe. He
had to find out the riddle of this bleak monster city.
Cathead was larger even than Cosmopolis. It had a
population of more than twenty million persons. And it
had grown to that in twenty years. It was human misery
on the largest scale ever known anywhere.
Take it from the outside and in general: Cathead
fronted on the Stoimenof Sea; it connected with both
the Grand Trunk Canal and the Intercity Canal; it had a
hundred navigation channels; it was astride all the lines
of civilized Astrobe like a huge spider. It had tremen-
dous industry, stark and noisome, not hidden and dis-
guised like the industries of the Golden Cities. It was an
angry town built out of extreme poverty with all com-
modities produced at a much greater real expense than
in any of the Golden Cities.
154
PAST MASTER
.
It was a noisome place based on noisome cargo. But
Cathead produced nothing that was not produced else-
where in Astrobe, nothing that was not already present
in abundance. Cathead handled all the products of
marine mining, for the Astrobe seas were vast chemical
vats sharper than the seas of Earth. But the other cities
also handled all the products of marine mining, and
without the repulsiveness of the processes of Cathead.
Manufacturing techniques in Cathead were archaic,
inhuman, and very expensive if human years and lives
were counted in the costs. And cheap clean processes in
all the other cities stood in ironic parallel to the Cathead
thing. First stages of some chemical processes as per-
formed in Cathead were so raw that they were abso-
lutely deadly. People died like day-flies in these indus-
tries, and they lived miserably while they lived. And
there was no need of Cathead at all.
But some millions of Citizens had left the Golden
Cities of Astrobe, had refused advice, had defied
threats, had climbed barricades (in more recent years)
and run the gauntlet of gunfire to get out of the pleasant
Golden Cities and into bleak Cathead, to suffer there
and to die there. And the lives they left for this were the
most pleasant lives that men and machines had yet been
able to devise. It seemed a poor trade. This was the
riddle of Cathead and the sickness of Astrobe.
The people had entered the Cathead thing by free
choice, and they could give it up any instant they
wished. The people who coughed up their lungs at the
terrible labor there were low poor people who could be
high rich people by sundown tonight if they wished.
They were hard surly folks who had entered the slavery
deliberately, and more were entering it all the time.
155
PAST MASTER
They went out in the sea-harvest boats that made old-
fashioned garbage scows seem like dream ships. They
worked twenty hours a day on the noisome sea, and
three years of such work would kill the strongest. But
the Golden Cities had automatic sea-harvesters. The
slag-workers in Cathead lost all their coordination; they
stuttered and slobbered and could not speak or think
straight. The gell-miners coughed up blood by the
bucketful and went insane at the work within eighteen
months. The extractors of oxypyrites had the most
terrible labor of all, absolutely killing. And the curios-
ity of this is that there was no market or use for the
product, no pay for the work, no reward of any kind.
Men borrowed and begged and sold their children for
food, and went to the non-paying labor that maimed
and killed, they tumed blue and went mad from it. The
product was piled up useless and poisonous, and the
corpses that were the by-product were piled nearly as
high. And yet more than half a million men, women
and children worked their twenty hours a day extracting
oxyprites, and wagered whether starvation or the
poison would kill them first.
Take it from the inside and in particular: Take the Rat
Castle. This was thirty-five stories high and a hundred
and fifty meters on a side. Once twenty-five thousand
people had lived closely crowded in it. Now there were
perhaps some remnants of those twenty-five thousand
skeletons, and there were one billion rats. They co-
vered the outside so that the color of the old building
could not be told. They throbbed inside in carpets a
meter deep, and covered the walls like live paper. They
,
raided out from the Rat Castle, killing and eating chil-
156
PAST MASTER
a
dren by the thousands, killing women, killing grown
men, covering them in a devouring cloak and shrinking
them down to bones. They went right through wooden
buildings. They ate mortar as though it were cheese and
weakened and entered and toppled brick structures.
They ate three thousand people alive every day in
Cathead. There were upwards of a hundred other tene-
ments in Cathead taken over completely by rats, but
none of the magnitude of the Rat Castle itself.
Well then, why the unburied bodies that were
everywhere in Cathead? Why the putrid flesh bubbling
and near exploding in the sun? Why the odor that would
actually fell the poor people with the strength of it, and
these the lungers who could stand anything? Why did
the rats not clean up the bodies?
Why, most of them they did. This remnant, the few
hundred you would see in a moming's stroll through the
lanes of Cathead, were too strong for the rats. There are
poisons and poisons. There is flesh so poisoned in the
death of it that even the rats will not touch it.
Take the sadists' dives. Take the children sold into
them. From one of these, in quite recent years, the
Devil himself ran retching. Take the rat-hunters and the
rat-butchers and the rat-markets and the rat-eaters. The
only way to stay ahead of them is to eat them first. Take
the day of the yellow flag (usually Monday). That
means that the plague itself is loose in Cathead. It will
usually run its course, take its tolls, and pass on within
four days. And then it strikes again and the yellow flag
is out once more. Inoculation is available and free to all
persons in Cathead. But few will accept it.
Take Betheelem which began as a mad-house, grew
to a mad-farm, grew to a mad-district, and is now more
157
PAST MASTER
than one third of all Cathead. Eight million persons live
in the Bethlehem district. Every one of them is insane to
some degree. They get along about as well or as badly
as the other citizens of Cathead.
“Copperhead," Thomas said, for they walked to-
gether. “Look at the men working on that project!
There's no organization at all. A good swine stewart
from my day could order things better than that.
Why?''
“They suffer more at the badly ordered work,
Thomas. Extreme suffering is a part of the Cathead
thing.”
"Walter, why are the bodies left unburied in the
lanes?''
“A reminder of death. Follow it out far enough and it
becomes a reminder of life.”
“Copperhead, is there not one ray of sanity in all
this? Why do the people not return to the golden life?''
“This they choose.
“But it spreads, it spreads! More leave the world of
perfection and join the misery every day."
“Better a life of misery than no life at all.”
“But there is life, the most wonderful life ever, in the
golden cities. These dying miserables can receive it
back within an hour. Why don't they do it? Damn you,
man, you're laughing at me!”
1
6
Thomas talked to some of the leading men of
Cathead: Battersea, Shanty. He asked them again and
again the reason for it. They looked at him with curling
contempt and made cryptic remarks that he couldn't
understand. They tumed aside and spat green every
158
PAST MASTER
>
time he suggested that the Cathead lungers should re-
tum to civilized Astrobe.
“Fool!” said Battersea.
“Blind man!” said Shanty.
“I must have caught fools' fever to talk to you at
all," Thomas swore. “I would say die in your misery
and be damned to you. But it spreads! It's eating up the
world. I swear that when I come into my power I will
raze every brick and stone of this place and destroy
every unreconstructed being here."
“Blind man,” said Shanty.
"Fool,” said Battersea.
Thomas looked up Rimrock the ansel. This was one
mind in Cathead he respected. He found him (tired
from three day's diving) in a fan-tan parlor where the
ansels went to be fleeced.
“Good Thomas,” Rimrock greeted him, “I preach
,
you as the hero above all heroes to the people and ansels
and other creatures of Cathead. I tell them all, as the
Battersea also tells them, that you are, as of now, a total
fool, of course. But I tell them that you will be given
one moment right at the end of your life when you are
not a fool. I tell them that many entities do not have
even one moment when they are not fools. I build you
up every way I can.
'
“I hold you less a fool than the other men of
Cathead, Rimrock," Thomas said. “After all, ansels
are not much regarded in civilized Astrobe. You do not
have the golden life to go back to."
“Have I not, Thomas? You never lived in the ocean
depths or you would not say that. It has its own perfec-
tion there, and I left it willingly for this.”
99
9
159
PAST MASTER
"Why, Rimrock? It seems that that would be a life of
total freedom. Why trade it for the slavery and misery
of Cathead?''
“No, Thomas, the life in the ocean depths is very
like the life of Golden Astrobe, too much like it. I lose
my identity there. I am one of the school, and my mind
is merged into the school mind. I never regretted be-
coming a man; I never regretted becoming a Cathead
man; but you set me too low when you imply that I
haven't given anything up. I've given up as much as
any of them. Though, of course, there was a certain
ignominy in being taken and eaten for a fish, which
might have happened to me in my former state.
Thomas left all those hard-heads of Cathead in dis-
gust. They had been offered happiness on a platter
again and again, and they had rejected it for misery.
They were killing themselves for no point at all, or for a
childish point. And they were poisoning and destroying
a whole world with their madness. They had to be
exterminated, like the rats that they refused to extermi-
nate.
Thomas walked long and he thought hard. He grew
sick unto staggering from the surroundings. He was the
doctor, and the sickness made a strange insane appeal
to him to let it live and let the host die.
“It would be intolerable if there were something
valid in all these miserable people and their thing, and it
be beyond my comprehension," he said.
A poor woman reached out and touched Thomas as
he walked in a muddy lane in the outskirts of Cathead.
“You will be king for nine days. Then you will die,”
she whispered. She was crying softly.
160
PAST MASTER
)
" “Make me no salvator, you witch," he grumbled.
“I'll have nowt to do with the High Fate business.'
9
In his walking Thomas came onto a small medieval
castle dwarfed by the giant shanty tenements of
Cathead.
'What is it the building here?'' he asked a coughing
man. “Is it a show-house? A hobby? Is it the residence
of some old fogey? Does anyone live here?”'
"Nobody lives there,” the coughing man said. “The
Metropolitan of Astrobe dies there."
“Sure the cranky old man is a long time dying,” said
Thomas.
He knocked at the door of the old buzzard roost and
there was no answer, except perhaps a low moan and
rale inside. He opened the door and went in. He went
through the first and second rooms without finding
anyone. Then he came to a room with an old battered
bed with a faded royal canopy over it.
A very old thin black man lay in the bed. He showed
all his bones; he was no more than a skeleton. There
was a fetid odor, and Thomas believed the man was
dead.
On his finger the old black man had the fisherman's
ring such as is worn by only one other. There was no
one in attendance on him. This was the Metropolitan
(the last of them, it was said), the Pope of Astrobe.
“Dead, are you,” Thomas said. “Well, you've
,
lived a life. A Dutchman I knew would have liked
you to paint as you lie there, skeleton though you
be. You're a striking man, little as there is. left of
you.”
But the old Metropolitan was not dead. He began,
9
161
PAST MASTER
)
1)
)
)
eyes still closed, to speak in an old sort of liturgical
canto.
"Deus, qui beatos martyres tuos Joannen et
Thomam, verae fidei et Romanae Ecclesiae prin-
cipatus propugnatores, inter Anglos suscitasti; eorum
meritis ac precibus concede; ut ejusdem fideo profes-
sione, unum omnes in Christo efficiamur et simus."
“Your eyes are closed, but your voice is good and
you seem to recognize me," Thomas said. “I assume
that I am Thomas, but is Joannem?”
“Saint John Fisher," the Metropolitan said. “You
have saints'-day jointly."
“Ah, yes, lost his head just fourteen days before I
lost mine, I'm told. I have never heard the collect of
my
own mass before."
“Damme, man, who has? Save from the other
side.”
"Have you no followers? Are there none to attend to
you?”
“But certainly I have followers, Thomas. I have five
or six followers left. Someone looks in on me every few
hours. I have everything I need."
“Have you food and drink?''
'
?"
“I have, but no stomach left for them. I am eaten up.
In the cabinet there, pour yourself a large glass of wine
and myself a small one.”
“Can you open your eyes?” Thomas asked as he
poured out the wine.
“I can make the muscular effort, but it is to no avail.
I am blind.”
“So this is the way it ends here? You are the last of
them?''
“No, I am not the last, Thomas. We have the
promise. We last till the end of the world.”
162
PAST MASTER
.
)
“You yourself die soon, old man. "
“Quite soon, Thomas. Thirty hours before you-
self.'
“I'm minded of the words of a partisan of mine,
since turned strange and useless: 'But we are not the
world! We are quite a different world, and no promise
was ever given to us.' What say you of that, good
Metropolitan?"
“Nonsense, nonsense,” he said, “We have the
Promise. It was given to us here on Astrobe in these
latter days, given in a queerer and more flaming way
than you could imagine. Know you that Christ has
walked on Astrobe in human form, in the company of
Saint Klingensmith and others. Know you that the
buming promise was given, and the flame begins to
rise.'
“'In your five or six followers?”'
“Those in the immediate neighborhood, Thomas.
More than a hundred left on all Astrobe. It will grow. If
you are of the Faith, then the very stones and clods of
Astrobe will sing of the Promise to you. If you regard
all such things as legends, learn then and regard the
legends at least! You will find here a richer legendry
than ever greened Old Earth!"
“Go to sleep, old man; it's all finished.”
“''Tis never finished, Thomas, 'tis never hopeless.
You are a living witness to what you cannot see. You,
you ferret-faced little man, you became a saint.”
“How can you know I'm ferret-faced, blind man?”'
“You are the blind man, not I.” And the old skeleton
was laughing.
They drank the good wine and talked a while. Then a
coughing young man came in to attend to the Met-
ropolitan. He was still filthy from work.
a
163
PAST MASTER
“Good the day, Thomas,” the young man said.
“Sometimes the old man is crazy and sometimes he is
not. Be patient with him."
Thomas rose to go.
“Tum, God, and bring us to life again!” the old
Metropol blessed him hopefully.
“And thy people rejoice in thee,” Thomas gave him
the response. Then he left him.
“The last of them,”Thomas said to himself when he
was out in the roadway again. “This is the way it ends
here,'
9)
Sea-gleaners were just bringing in a scow-load of
Dutch-fish to be ground for fish meal. It was not really
brutal work by Cathead standards, but it was plague day
and three of the men had died. The scow-master strip-
ped them of their boots (dead-men's boots are lucky
and there is a regular market for them), and then rolled
the three bodies in with the Dutch-fish. He buried them
in the fish, but half-heartedly, not caring much.
The buyer came onto the scow, surveyed the take,
and saw a leg sticking out and the outlines of all three
bodies.
“We'll weigh them along with the fish and take
them,” he said, “but I'll have to dock you a stoimenof
d'etain for each body. They just aren't up to the fish in
phosphor and sulphur. And they are hard on the grin-
ders.”
>
164
9. KING-MAKER
)
19
19
“It is unexpected that you do not come through on
Replica,” Cosmos Kingmaker told Thomas. “Your
voice comes through wonderfully, the people standing
with you come through, but you do not appear at all. I
don't believe your invisibility on Replica is entirely due
to your being a man out of the past. You're solid
enough to the touch. And then, you may not know it,
about one person out of a hundred does not come
through on Replica. Of course you'd come through on
the old Video-Vision, but that had only two dimensions
and carried to only two senses.
“It's probably an advantage,” Thomas said. “I
sound better than I look.
“Yes, it seems that it is an advantage. It adds a little
mystery to you. You are quite in the public fancy now.
There are always intangibles at work in a thing like this,
but it is going much more successfully than we had
hoped. Your animal and your mistress help. People
instinctively trust a man who has an animal and a
mistress. The Higher Ethics crowd has swung to you on
their account.
“Kingmaker, you're crazy. I have neither. Oh, you
mean Rimrock and the child-brat? But Rimrock the
ansel is a man and not an animal."
"And the child-brat is a woman and not a child,
Thomas. Dammit, my father had her once. All the lies
about her aren't lies. But they both have popular ap-
)
165
PAST MASTER
9
>
a
peal, Rimrock and Evita, and they can both talk for you
with the damnest left-handed eloquence ever heard.
Almost everyone on Astrobe had them on Replica last
night and they threw the whole planet into a delightful
panic. The people are completely taken with the sweep
of their talk. Fortunately, they do not seem to grasp the
meaning. Both your Things are heretics to the Dream,
Thomas, and they would be dangerous if they were
understood. There is a lot to your doxie besides her
paradoxes.”
“She reminds me of my youngest daughter,”
Thomas said, “but she is not so well brought up.
Kingmaker, cannot something be done about the Pro-
grammed Killers? They nearly had me last night again.
Let them go kill someone else for a while! They make
me jumpy. Whether I have nine lives or not I do not
know, but they have now made nine attempts on my
life. And they become trickier. They aren't mere
machines as I understand machines. They leam and
adapt, and they aren't avoided by the same trick twice. I
am not a threat to the Dream! I love it. I am an intense
partisan of it. I also in all honesty could blazon on my
breast I have not been false to the Vision. There is
something wrong with the programming of these
things.
"No, Thomas. It is impossible that anything should
be wrong with their programming. Thomas, the Dream
is in trouble, and any man by some quirk of circums-
tance may be a threat to it. But the Programmed Killers
are too mechanical in one way; they take propositions
too literally. We will guard you, but the judgment of the
Programmed Killers must be respected. We must be
careful not to break their spirit with undue frustration."
166
PAST MASTER
1)
)
)
“I believe that I am winning,” Thomas said, “I get
the smell of Victory.”
"Oh yes, we'll win,” Kingmaker said. “The trick
is not to appear to win too easily."
“How is that, Kingmaker? I was a politician in my
normal life, and we said Win First, Make Adjustments
Later. I'd never lose anything from any reluctance on
my part.”
“There are certain parties that we do not wish to
accrete to us, Thomas. They will all swing to a clear
winner and hug him to death in the closing days. The
ones who always make me uneasy are the Hatrack
Party, and the Kiss of Death Party. And I am a little
leery of the Third Compromise Party. They hurt you
when they come to you. We want our hands unbound
when we go to work after we have won."
“You want your own hands unbound, Kingmaker.
You'd bind mine a little."
There had been various methods of election on As-
trobe; and there had always been a jungle of parties,
with a man being permitted membership in many of
them at the same time.
Once it had been One Person One Vote, an idea that
had been brought from Old Earth. Later had come the
weighted vote, by which every voter was given the full
rights he was entitled to. A man might be awarded
additional votes for distinguished service-public, pri-
vate, scientific or ethical. Most ranks carried with them
a number of votes. Entertainers of various sorts might
receive additional votes as accolade. Wealth was a
two-bladed sword, however. A man like Kingmaker
might have had a thousand votes; but another very rich
man, who shall be nameless here, had had only one
9
a
167
PAST MASTER
quarter of a vote. He was not popular in his wealth.
Citizens of Cathead and the Barrio had had only one
quarter of a vote each, they being under blanket pen-
alty. Ansels and other citizens of intelligence but not of
human form had had only one eighth of a vote each.
Nevertheless there had been a scandal when certain
shrewd ansel leaders went down and registered and
voted millions of wild ansels in the ocean depths. Their
votes had finally been disallowed. It was declared that
only Astrobe creatures of the land living sort might
vote.
Finally the Vote itself was done away with. There
was no way to modemize it. It was a relic. Everything
was now left to the sensing machines.
These worked on the auras of every person of As-
trobe, for a running record of all their nuances was
always kept—however far away they might be. It took
very little adaption to add this burden to the machines.
The sensing machines could assess and compile the
weight of opinion and choice in the totality of the minds
on Astrobe. At the zero hour they took their reading,
and it was the correct reading. Every conviction, every
inkling, every resolution or irresolution of every mind
on Astrobe was given its proper weight.
And the machines could not be tampered with. Their
scanning was perfect. They weighed everything prop-
erly. This combined the best elements of all systems. A
person of very fine intellect and well-studied judgment
would have more effect on the scanners than would a
joker with a head full of notions. Persons of strong
personality and vital character naturally weighed more
in the machines' totals then did lesser persons. But
168
PAST MASTER
frustration and confusion of mind subtracted from the
body of a personal opinion.
This was the Weighted Vote carried out with honesty
and justice.
There was only one thing wrong with this arrange-
ment, and it could not be the fault of the machines since
they were flawless. Cathead and the Barrio came to
have undue influence. It was almost as if these regions
had a disproportionate number of persons of very fine
intellect and well-studied judgment, and this was not
possible.
A modification of the system was being worked out.
Judgments and decisions not in accord with the full
Astrobe Dream were to be discounted or thrown out
entirely. But there had been difficulties in this. What
was involved was that, sooner or later, there must be a
definition of just what the full Astrobe Dream consisted
of. The modifications would not be worked out in time
for the coming election in which Thomas More was
involved.
But the Parties—who could ever make sense out of
their jungle? The Center Party, of course, was Thomas'
own, and that of his three big sponsors. There was the
First Compromise Party, the Second Compromise
Party, the Third Compromise Party; there was the Hat-
rack (or Conglomerate) Party, and the Solidarity Labor
Party; there was Demos and the Programmed Liberal
Party; there was Mechanicus and Censor and the
Pyramid; there was the New Salt Party and the Kiss of
Death Party; there was the Intransigents and the Re-
formed Intransigents and there was the Hive; there were
the Golden Drones, and the Penultimate and the Ulti-
169
PAST MASTER
mate parties. It sometimes seemed that there were too
many of them, but they all had their programs and their
platforms. There were the Obstructionists and the New
Obstructionists. There were the Esthetics, the Anesthe-
tics, and a splinter group called the Local Anesthetics;
these latter were jokesters and so automatically their
opinions counted for nothing on Astrobe, though the
party was allowed to register. There was Ochlos, which
carried the special blessings of Ouden. Several of these
parties were for Programmed Persons only; one, the
Unreconstructeds, was for humans only; but most had a
varied membership.
)
99
9
A crank got in to see Thomas More. He was not a
wild-eyed crank. He was dull-eyed and he spoke in a
singsong voice.
"Thomas Momus, the Big Boys' Toy,” he began
rather rudely. “I am the leader of a certified party, and
the law obliges you as a major candidate to give me a
fair hearing
"Right, a short fair hearing it shall be," said
Thomas. “What is the name of your party?”
“It's the Crank. I organized it and named it. I am the
Crank and I make myself heard.”
“And how many members has the Crank?”
“Only myself, doubting Thomas. You may wonder
how I was able to get a one-man party certified. Well,
the ways of bureaucracy are strange. An application,
timed just right, will sometimes slide through in the
dark. My program is simple: I battle that pair of insuf-
ficiencies, Humanism which has no meat, and
Materialism which has no bones."
“That's good,” Thomas said. “I always liked a
3
170
PAST MASTER
I
good round phrase. It doesn't mean anything, but I
suspect I will use it myself in my next speech.”
“I see the parties at an end," the Crank said. "Some
grow old, some develop quirks, some catch the bilious-
ness of repentance, some begin to apply words and
thoughts too literally. All are dying. Soon only my
own party will remain.”
“Ah well, what is your party for?''
“It is against all false things, doubting Thomas. I
believed it a mistake when pomography was given
equal time in the schools with ethics, and both compul-
sory. I believed it a mistake when the law was enacted
that perversion and normalcy should be given equal
space and time in literature and on stage, though at that
time normalcy gained by the ruling. I think it a mistake
that marriages may be terminated by an Evaluator
against the wishes of the parties concemed. I think it
wrong that nothing may be taught in the schools that is
not in accord with the Golden Dream. I think it wrong
that a law should be able to deny offspring to private
persons. I believe it was a serious error when the
Psychologs were made a privileged class with powers
of entry and seizure. I believe that the human person
should be inviolate, and that mechanical tampering
with the brain of an individual should not be allowed.
An adjustability chart should not be everything par-
ticularly when it cannot be adjusted. I believe that a
man should be allowed to choose his own occupation
and his own unhappiness. Do you not believe as I
do?''
“No, I do not, Crank, on no point whatsoever."
“It is no wonder that they called you the doubting
Thomas on your home world."
а
171
PAST MASTER
19
2)
)
“But they didn't. You have me confused with
another and more famous man.
“You are not the Doubting Thomas, the Apostle
whoʻbetrayed the Christ?''
“No I am not. You are badly confused."
“So are a lot of people, then. You owe your sudden
surge of popularity to this false identification that has
been hung on you. They've made you out a great hero,
the betrayer of an old mountebank. Who are you,
then?”
“I'm a stranger from another time who was brought
here to give testimony to a great thing. I do so. I am in
love with the Dream of Engineered Humanity.”
“I have no faith at all in Engineered Humanity. I am
neither humanist nor materialist. I am a heretic."
“Why do you not go to cancerous Cathead and live
with your own kind?''
?
Because that life is too hard. I claim the right to
protest. I know that my talk is the dangerous sort. Men
have been beheaded for such talk.
“I think not,” Thomas said. “Just why they are
beheaded I don't know, and perhaps I'm a man who
should. Now then, I have given you a short fair hearing
as the law requires. I do not solicit the support of your
party, though, in all honesty, if it had more than one
member I might. Here, here, good contrivances, throw
this fellow out!”
And a couple of contrivances, Programmed Persons,
came to pitch the Crank out.
“I hate it!' the Crank roared. “I do not so much
mind being booted out by a good human toe—it has
happened to me often enough. But I hate to be kicked
out by a machine. Damn all mechanicals to the reclama-
tion heap!”
66
)
172
PAST MASTER
Thomas was on the campaign trail and he enjoyed it.
He was annoyed a little by the Programmed Killers
always in every audience he addressed, ever ready to
rush the podium and kill him swiftly; but he provided
himself with a screen of retainers to keep them off. He
was annoyed a little by other Cranks, but he was good at
putting down hecklers. And he was good at the
rhetoric business; he was indeed the noblest rhetor of
them all. He had the straight clear touch and an intricate
lash to his tongue.
“I cannot really move mountains,” he told one audi-
ence. “Hell, a man'd strain himself on a thing like that.
But I can move this world—ahead. Is not that much
more important? I come to implement the Astrobe
dream. Perfection itself is in stages. We ascend! Obsta-
cles shall be removed! All unhealthy growth will be
excised. I preach sanity of mind and body and society,
and the perfect symbiosis between humans and Prog-
rammed. We come to the high plateau, we lie down in
green grass—no, belay that phrase; perhaps it has not a
progressive meaning on Astrobe. We come to the stage
of dynamic rest. All things flow into us and we all
become one. Minds and bodies merge."
And he continued in that happy vein for above an
hour.
“You were talking nonsense, you know,” Paul told
him after that particular speech. “I wonder if you were
even listening to yourself.”
“You didn't like me, Paul? I like me. And yet I was
bothered a couple of times.”
“By what, Thomas? You of the golden mediocrity
should not be bothered by anything."
"Paul, I said words and I said words, but there were
other words that I did not say.”
173
PAST MASTER
1)
5)
“What are you trying to say now, Thomas?”'
'
'
“Somebody else spoke some of those words out of
my mouth.'
"Oh, that! I suspect they've been doing it to you for a
long time, and you just haven't been paying attention.
You've been saying many things, publicly and pri-
vately, that don't sound like you. It's one of the oldest
and easiest tricks of the Programmed. They crawl into
your mind at odd moments and take control. It's only a
mechanical trick that they have. Surely you've heard of
it before."
“As one hears of everything. But it never happened
to me before so obviously. Those words were thought
in my mind and said out of my mouth by someone else.
I resent it a little.'
“Why, there's nothing to it, Thomas. Kick them
out. Your mind is your own. They plainly can't stay in
your mind if you don't allow them to. Kick them out.
Sometimes they'll stay gone for as long as ten minutes.
It's all a question of will."
“That's what makes me feel uneasy. I haven't as
much will as I used to have. And I'm not sure that a
strong will is commensurate with the Astrobe Dream.
After all, I should be submerging my own will to the
group will.”
“Holy hoptoads, Thomas, you begin to sound like
one of them. Be a man.
“Why, no, I believe that I should leave off being a
man absolutely. We should all strive for the synthesis,
part man and part Programmed. We have to submerge
ourselves in our mechanical brothers for the good of
all."
"They'll eat us alive if we do, Thomas. They never
)
.
9)
9
174
PAST MASTER
1)
back up; they're into any opening we give them. Where
do you get that bit about leaving off being a man
absolutely?”
“Oh, those were some of the words that someone
else spoke out of my mouth in my speech just con-
cluded. They're true, though, and the audience liked
them. We have to be more flexible, Paul. This hasn't
been easy for me, coming from Earth. But I leam 'to
give in on one thing, and then another, and then
another."
“And then on everything, Thomas.”
"I didn't like the Pandomations at first. But I learned
to tolerate them, and I can see that, when I become
more perfected, I will love them. And at first I felt that
there was something very wrong with the Open Mind
Act. Now I can see how essentially right it was.”
“Nobody but a filthy fruit would submit to either,
Thomas.'
“Watch your talk, Paul! I'm a solider fellow than
you are. I'll thrash you."
“You can't, Thomas. You have left off being a man
absolutely.'
The Pandomation was a machine available in various
scanner booths, and many persons had them in their
homes. An early critic, with no real understanding of
the purpose or practique of this marvelous machine,
had called it “peeping-tomary carried to the ultimate.”
It was an unjust criticism.
The Pandomation, the machine in accord with the
open-mind policy of Astrobe, was simply a machine for
permitting the curious to look in to a variety of rooms,
at random or according to selection. One could look
into the private chambers of the citizens and their wives
99
175
PAST MASTER
a
6
and watch them at their home-like activities. One could
look into any room anywhere on Astrobe, except for
less than a dozen restricted rooms-certain semi-public
meeting rooms of leaders. This device was a strong
adjunct to knowledge, as it permitted all interested
persons to know all things about everyone. It was
surely in accord with the Astrobe aspiration: “'That we
be all ultimately one person, that we have no secrets
whatsoever from ourselves."
But it was not used as much as it had once been. The
general public hadn't yet come to understand its fruitful
purpose. With many it had reached the point of
boredom—and yet how could anyone be bored by look-
ing at the activities of his fellows, the other aspects of
himself? Here was a man and wife, here was a man and
mistress, here were lovers. There could no longer be
secret, lovers. The device was no longer limited to
rooms, but any point indoors or outdoors in all civilized
Astrobe could be dialed by anyone, except for the very
few shielded areas.
The Pandomation was only the first step. The Open
Mind Act itself encouraged further inventions and
found fruitful use for many already in being. The subti-
tle of the act, I Have As Much Right In Your Mind As
You Have, expressed the beautiful new concept. Now
mind-scanners were available for everyone, and recal-
citrants who resented having their minds invaded could
be cited for it and haled into court for antisocial acts.
“We are all the same thing. We are identical,
part of the wording of the act. “How can all minds
become alike and merge into one if each aspect of that
ultimate mind is not free to examine every other aspect
of itself?”
гап
176
PAST MASTER
It was a staggering thought, one of the culminations
of the Astrobe dream. And it had been a little difficult
for Thomas More, coming from a bleak period of Old
Earth, to accept all of this immediately. But did he not
adjust to it rapidly and neatly?
.
6
In another speech, Thomas coined a happy phrase, or
perhaps somebody else thought it in his mind and spoke
it out of his mouth. “I desire to be all things to all
men.” It was sheer magic. Of such things are kings
made.
Thomas had won, and he knew it. Everything was
going wonderfully for him and for his. He was at home
in the heart of Golden Astrobe. He had become the
eloquent spokesman for the great thing, for the only
thing. And he had thrown down the glove in challenge
to the one serious sickness of Astrobe.
“Repent or be destroyed” may have been his
greatest speech. He left no doubt in the stubbom men of
Cathead and the Barrio what he meant. Millions of
them still maintained their way stubbornly in their
error, but some thousands of them reentered the golden
life of Civilized Astrobe. It was a trend, though a weak
one. But the resolution to solve the problem was not a
weak one. Civilized Astrobe had the science to destroy
Cathead and the Barrio utterly. And Cathead and the
Barrio did not have the science to fight back. All it took
was a strong leader, and Thomas had announced him-
self as such. Compassion would be misplaced.
He thrilled the whole world when he spoke to them,
still invisible, on Replica. “It is no longer the Greatest
Good for the Greatest Number. It now becomes the
Total Good for the Merging Singularity. And when we
177
PAST MASTER
>
are all One, then comes the Great Inversion. We be-
come a thing that is beyond Number and without a
Name.'
After this, the Programmed Killers still followed
Thomas, but with a difference. They watched him still,
but they smiled at him quizzically, and they did not
threaten him.
So Thomas would be King, which is to say president
of Astrobe.
And it is as easy to make a king as all that? Sure it is.
It's all in the tune you whistle. It has to be just right,
right for its time, and with the special lilt to mark it off.
But it's the tune that takes the people. Hit it right, and
you can make a king every time.
178
10.
THE DEFORMITY OF THINGS TO COME
But there was something in Thomas that did not lie
down and play dead as easily as all that. He was the
revenant with the double mark upon him, and the old
part of it surged up in him now and almost tore him
apart. He was off in a walking aftemoon nightmare, not
knowing what he did or where he was. He was riven in
his own self, but he had not lost the way forever.
That was the odd thing about this: that Thomas did
have afterthoughts on the matter. And afterthoughts
were supposed to be banished from his brain. They had
taken him over completely and were sure of him. But
they shouldn't have been.
He could revolt yet: shrewdly sometimes, blindly
sometimes. He could almost become aware that he had
been taken over.
There were hidden areas in which, for all his strong
profession of faith, he did not yet fully accept the
Astrobe dream. There were even areas in which he
remained a private person though feeling in his taken-
over brain that it was wrong so to hold onto a piece of
himself. And now he found a lucid moment when he
could stand back and study the behavior of his curious
self.
“It is still odder that I should be taken in my own
trap,” he said. “Look, Thomas, myself, my me, what
was it that I did in my other life for a bitter joke? I
invented the damned thing! Was it not myself who
9
179
PAST MASTER
coined the Utopia? Did I not know that I used
fools'-gold instead of real gold for the coining? What
has happened now? How am I taken in by it? What am
I, God, that I make a sour joke and in so doing I create a
golden world in the future and then stumble into that
ridiculous future? Was other writer ever damned to live
in a sly tale that he had made himself? Was other lawyer
ever cursed to find the legality for his own joke? Was
other chancellor ever required to administer a world
that he had made in derision? So help me God!—if I
live beyond my second death I will pay more attention
to what I do.
'It is not real gold,' I tell myself. It is bogus stuff
that I picked up out of a ditch and molded for a jibe.
And it has turned into a whole world, my sick day-
dream? Why, I find that it is real gold after all, and I
have made a world out of it, and I stand a fool from
every direction."
Someobdy had dialed Thomas, perhaps at random,
perhaps to monitor him, and was trying to come into his
mind.
“Be gone," Thomas said loudly. “Be gone I say!
Yes, I know that it is wrong to bar anyone from my
mind. I know that you, whoever you are, have as much
business in my mind as I have. Bear with me! Bear with
me! This is a writhing thing and I must wrestle it by
myself. I'm an unperfected man, and I must still have a
private moment now and then. Be gone. I shut you
out!''
The prober left the mind of Thomas angrily, and
Thomas felt bad about it. “It will look ill," he said, “if
the incoming president of Astrobe is haled into com-
I
)
180
PAST MASTER
mon court on a complaint under the Open Mind Act,"'.
he said.
There was a rustle and noises behind him, and it
began to worry him. But he had other worries as various
things fought in his mind.
"It is beyond belief that this world should be rue,"
he said again to himself. It seemed so grotesque and
sourly comic when I invented it. I wish I hadn't read so
much, particularly after my first death. It addles my
brains to think that there were some who really advo-
cated the sick thing. Well, it's come onto me so I will
live in it. Let the things in my brain tell me again how
.
wonderful it is! All glory to Ouden the everything-in-
nothing!
“No, no, it's all wrong!” Thomas broke away from
the thoughts that tried to pull him under, and went
running and stumbling along and crying to himself.
“It is snakes writhing in my head! It is not valid
thought! How have I been taken in? Me, a man who
could always see a low trick so far a way off! How have
the snakes gotten into my head anyhow? Did I stand
like a scared sheep and let them enter? How have I
become unmanned? When I was a boy I believed in
God. When I was a man I still half believed. How have I
been hooked by the Big O, the gawking Omega, the
vile Ouden-Nothingness? Who would imagine that as a
mature man I would worship so empty a god?
“Dangerous thoughts, these! For now my heel-
hounds have turned dangerous again.”
Thomas More, all but declared president of Astrobe,
had been walking in and out of a daze in a place he hated
and despised. What had drawn him there? Now he was
6
181
PAST MASTER
in a weird settlement between big Cathead and Wu
Town, the least golden, the least committed of the great
cities of Astrobe. He was conscious of the stench of
Cathead when he heard again the hair-raising rustle and
clatter behind him. He ran.
The Programmed Killers had sensed the change in
Thomas. They no longer smiled quizzically at him
while they watched and waited. They had never ceased
trailing him, and now they remembered why. He had
changed again, whether temporarily or permanently
was not their affair. Now they moved after him to kill
him,
“I'm lost," Thomas howled. “Mind, do a flop-
over! Retum my trust in the thing. Snakes in my brain!
Chime out your glad tidings again. Tell the world that
Thomas is again faithful to the Vision. Tell the clank-
ing things that I am no threat to anything, and that they
be a mortal threat to me."
Thomas slipped and fell, and was barely up in time.
He was running hard, and they were hard behind them.
A sturdy runner can outspeed them for a very little
while, but the programmed are tireless. It was unneces-
sary to lose them. Thomas tried to fathom out or re-
member streets and alleys that he had never seen be-
fore. He was lost, and his pursuers were not. He knew
that some of them had peeled off from the group and
were circling around somewhere. No matter where he
doubled back they were likely to have him in a narrow
passage.
Then suddenly he was defiant, and his craven fear
had become repulsive to him.
“Snakes in my brain, out, out!” he bawled. “I'll
nest you no longer. I'll die a man if I do die here. And
182
PAST MASTER
I'll know I was right the first time. Damn, it was always
fools'-gold, and I knew it Fools'-gold and brimstone it
was. I'd rather be a Cathead lunger coughing up my
life's blood than be king of their folly."
But he would be nothing if he did not shake the
Killers. He'd cough up his life's blood quicker than the
sickest lunger in Cathead. There was a clear way ahead,
and the vision of a region he knew, and there was a
dead-end alley, a trap, to his left. Thomas lunged for
the clear way, but he turned into the blind alley.
"No, no!” he swore. “I do not want to enter this
alley. It is a dead-end, a death-trap. Why do I enter?
The other day someone else was thinking with my brain
and talking with my mouth. This evening someone else
is running with my legs."
But he sprinted mightily for the end of the dead lane.
There was a broke gap in the brick wall through which a
determined man might force himself, if his life de-
pended on it. He came almost to the gap, and a Pro-
a
grammed Killer was forcing its own way back through
that gap. And another followed him through.
They were stalking him from both ends of the alley.
It was all sheer brick and stone walls, slimy and green
with old rain and old age, and no man could climb
them. And there was no door or opening of any sort in
the short length of the alley.
No door? Are you sure? Thomas felt that he was a
puppet played on strings. He also felt that it might be
the cleanest thing to let the Killers have him there.
Someone had drawn him into this sack. Had he taken
the other tuming he'd have had a live chance of escap-
ing the Killers. He'd escape them before. But had he
been drawn here to his death, or to something dirtier?
a
183
PAST MASTER
For there was a door there. It hadn't been there
before, and it shouldn't be there now.
“What are the odds?" Thomas asked himself
loudly. He surged through the door, (snakes crawling
back into his mind), knowing that he went from the
world into a dream, knowing that he went from life to
something queerer even than death. He slammed the
door heavily and bolted it behind him. And he stood in
total darkness.
66
"Sit at the table with us," said a voice, a wrong-side
voice, either inside Thomas' head or without. "Now
we talk."
"Set a light," Thomas said. “It's blind dark.”
“We don't need a light," the voice said. “Stop
fighting the things in your head! They can see for you.
Is it not so? Do you not see now, and not by light?”
Thomas saw now, and not by light. He looked at
Things through somebody else's eyes, perhaps through
of the eyes of the Things. He was seeing in total
darkness through the eyes of the eerie snakes in his
head, and he was looking at Things that he would rather
not have seen.
There were nine of the Things there. Thomas had
learned to think of them as Things in his last defiant
surge back to reason. What were they? What was their
form?
Men. Men seen from the other side. From the back
side? Yes, in the sense that a tapestry may be seen from
its back side, the same picture but rough and deformed.
These things were the deformation of mankind.
Nine of the things there, and they were drawn up in
groups of three around a large conference table. J ike
184
PAST MASTER
3
a
.
1)
men, but with all the wrong things emphasized—ears,
man ears, and yet somehow swinish; noses that were
snouts, and yet not large, not malformed, simply
wrongly emphasized; eyes that were made like human
eyes, and yet these were not humans looking out of
them.
They were not men, though Thomas was sure that he
had known at least one of them as a man. They were
Programmed Persons all—Things.
“Good evening, gentle contrivances," Thomas said
'
as he took a bold seat at the head of the table. It was not
where they had motioned him to sit.
“Not there!” sharply cried one of those that Thomas
had known as a man. "'That is reserved for the Holy
Ouden.'
“I sit here!” And Thomas sat. “Ah, I once told the
Paul that I would have to discover for myself the name
of the real King of Astrobe. It is the Ouden Himself! Let
Old Nothingness find his own seat. I do not sit below
the salt for any tin-hom things. Are the stilted killers
outside belonging to your party? Do you control them?
Was it you who drew me into this blind sack?”
“Of course,” said one of them, speaking with a
voice too smooth to be human. ''I am Boggle, and these
other two who form a creative trinity with me are
Skybol and Swampers. Our speciality is retrogres-
sion.”
"Jackals you be," said Thomas, and the three were
“
very like jackals. The jackal in human form may be told
by the lay of the hair and the set of the ears. Yet they
were of good human appearance, though more alien-
ated from the human than even the real jackal animal.
Three snakes stirred in Thomas' brain. The snakes
185
PAST MASTER
9
a
were in accord with these three Things. They must have
been their extensions.
“Retrogression, then,”Thomas said. “Go find your
dens and runs in another head."
“I am Northprophet,” said the leader of the second
group. “My fellows here are Knobnoster and Beebon-
net, and our speciality is rechabítism."
“Dogs you be,” Thomas swore, and the three had all
a touch of the dog in them. It was most weird that these
creatures should seem on three levels, the human, the
animal, and the machine. Then Thomas knew there was
still another level in them all—the ghost.
Ah, this Northprophet had himself once been candi-
date for president of Astrobe. He had passed as a man;
and then there had come the moment when he could not
quite pass. It had made more of a difference then. The
Programmed had built him especially for the job of
World President. He was deftly contrived. He would
have made the perfect World President, from the Prog-
rammed view.
Three more snakes stirred in Thomas' brain, one of
them a great one. This Northprophet was great among
his kind.
“Rattle along Things," Thomas said sharply. “My
time is limited. So is my life. And I do not enjoy the
company overmuch.
“I am Pottscamp," said the leader of the third group.
And of course it was the old acquaintance whom
Thomas had known as a man, the fourth member of the
Big Three. But he looked greatly different now, as
things do look different in a nightmare. And Thomas
was forced to think of him differently, now that he was
no longer a friend, now that he was a Programmed and
)
186
PAST MASTER
a
,
not a human, now that he was known to have a Brain
Snake as a familiar and an extension of himself.
“My companions here are Holygee and Gandy,"
Pottscamp said, “and our specialty is extrapolation.
“Wildemess Wolves you be," Thomas said. “You
howl higher than the ear on a bleaker moor than any on
this world. All right, the nine of you, extrapolate, damn
it! Retrogress! Rechabitize! Nine of you, and are your
extensions not the nine snakes nesting in my mind?”'
“Of course, Thomas," said Pottscamp. “You are
our assignment. No other man ever rated so many
important, ah, snakes. This is the talk that I promised
you, Thomas. I told you that I held the Big Three Ones
in the middle of my maw. They argue which of them are
the puppets and which the puppeteer, but I am the
theater in which their little show is played out. And I
promised that you would be shown the back of the
tapestry. Now it is that we will show you that picture of
the reverse side, of the true side. It is a more meaningful
world than the one you are accustomed to."
“Odd design, the back of that tapestry, Pottscamp,”
Thomas said. "Full of snakes, is it not?''
“Not at all, Thomas. From the true side they are not
snakes but royal curiles twisted in mystic curves.
Thomas, it is only for our old companionship that you
are here at all. And I will say that yours is one of the
most interesting minds I ever nested in. The others
wanted to kill you offhand and to substitute a replica of
you that would be of our kind.”
“I don't come through on Replica, Pottscamp. I'm
invisible there.'
“The replica we'd make of you would come
through. We'd make it better and more like you than
187
PAST MASTER
a
you are yourself. And it would behave as you have
behaved, but without these moments of rebellion."
“On with it, Pottscamp! Show me the backward-
picture, since I am here in a trap and must listen. You
extrapolate, do you? Do it, then.
“It is that ourselves are the extrapolation of man-
kind,” Northprophet cut in. He seemed to outrank
Pottscamp himself in this hierarchy. “We will tell you
the facts, Thomas, since you will not be able to stand
against them. We confess that we have a little bit of the
show-boat attitude programmed into us, and we love to
gloat. You will not be able to do anything about what
we tell you here. But, conversely, we are not able to
extinguish you yet. That is really why we have not done
it. We know that you have a warded life and that it is
impossible to kill you till your time shall come. How-
ever, we could easily hide you and substitute for you.
.
And it would be possible to cut you up terribly, to come
very near to killing you. We could tum you into no
more than a vegetable that suffers, but you will not die
till you are so fated.”
“Are the Programmed as foolish as humans, to be-
lieve in Fate?'' Thomas asked. This seeing without
light through other eyes was a little bit like seeing under
water, seeing under something much deeper. One saw
in both surface and depth. One saw, but did not com-
prehend, the interior mechanism as well as the surface
weirdness of these entities, saw the jumbled essence
that made one call Northprophet howling dog and
Pottscamp Wilderness Wolf. There were animal-like
ghosts inside them, and seeing with extensions of their
own eyes one saw this ghostliness. “I thought you
Programmed were merely interesting toys. Now I.find
188
PAST MASTER
9)
6
.
that you are deformed toys, but Things still. Get back in
your boxes, you Jack-Jumps!”
"Thomas, we've taken over the box,” said
Pottscamp. "The box is Astrobe. We take over all the
'
boxes. Now we call it! You jump! You are the toys
now, and we play with you till we throw you away.'
“Who are you, clockwork things that grow too
grand?”
“Who are we, and how did we begin, Thomas? The
texts that you yourself are permitted to study are only
the shadow of the story. A century ago certain men of
science made the first of us as a means of studying
themselves. They wished to see if they could make men
better than men were made naturally. We turn aside for
a moment in the explanation, Thomas. Hear one thing,
and then forget it:
“You believe a little bit at times, Thomas; and with
your tatters of faith you guess a little who we are.
According to your ancient belief we are Devils. What
we call ourselves is another thing, but we are older than
our own manufacture and older than our programming.
These are houses, and well-made ones, that we found
swept and gamished; and we moved into them. This
particular bit of information, Thomas, is that part
which you will forget most quickly and most
thoroughly. See, you have forgotten it already.
Pottscamp had seemed to stutter in the inside-the-
maw no-light that illumined all things there, and then
he went on:
“They wished to see if they could make men better
than men were made naturally. They should never have
taken that cover off that box. You yourself have called
us a boys' dream and you have professed great wonder
189
PAST-MASTER
about us. We will not now talk about para-collodial
chemistry and zygote electronics, nor about gell-cells
and flux-fix. It isn't my field, and you yourself are a
thousand years behind on science. It is seldom men-
tioned, however, what raw material was used for the
first of us, what was the matrix in which the devices and
controls were imbedded. It was a dozen young and
unintelligent human criminals. What minds they had
were direct and uncomplicated. There was in the
selected twelve young men an absence of what is called
emotion, of what is called indecision, an absence of
such human aberrations as remorse and conscience.
They were a carefully selected collection of walking
corpses, large blank pages on which could be printed
anything whatsoever. These men of science printed
themselves, ourselves, upon them.
“But these men of science who contrived us were
also a carefully selected dozen, selected by themselves.
They also were comparatively young, but intelligent,
human criminals. 'Criminal' for human is Right for us,
of course. It was the morality business that had most
crippled mankind and held it back, and this dozen
scientists knew it. Themselves were of such an elite, so
hard to come by, so difficult to find even twelve on a
populated world, that they decided to produce them-
selves artifically and with every improvement built in.
These improvements they could put into a device laid
out before them, but could less easily put into them-
selves.'
“It couldn't have happened quite like that,”Thomas
protested. “You're live things, however warped and
artificial. There is something you're not telling me,
something that you are hiding with words."
>
6
2
190
PAST MASTER
.
"Be patient, good Thomas, and listen," said
Pottscamp, the Wilderness Wolf in the shape of a man.
"They made us into complex electronic and chemical-
coded gadgets, able to reproduce ourselves like hu-
mans, and yet with less than ten percent of our tissue of
,
human origin after we were perfected. We have, you
see, spare brains and information nexuses stowed all
over us. We can rearrange ourselves quickly and with
no loss of function into other forms than that which we
usually use to pass as humans. We can also send out
extensions of ourselves, flyers, the snakes in your
brain, Thomas. We can do everything that man can do,
and very much besides. So there is duplication here.
Man is obsoleted. Who needs him? Who wants him?
“Are we really men? It is sometimes asked. No. We
are not. Have we that special something that disting-
uishes men from animals and from machines? No, we
have not. And man has it not either. That special
something is imaginary.
“Suffice it to say that those single-minded men who
invented us did break down the barrier between living
and nonliving matter. And they discovered that the
living was the illusion. Well then, they created us as
dead men, and dead men we be. We are dead, and all is
dead. But we believe that we are complete. We feel that
there is no dimension beyond ourselves. In our begin-
ning man made us. Then we made ourselves, a little
more efficiently than man could do it. We reproduce
almost in your own manner. We even cross with hu-
mans, with some curious results. We have become
man. We have replaced man. Soon man will be noth-
ing.”
“If what you say is true, old wolf-ghost Pottscamp,
.
191
PAST MASTER
2
and I feel that it isn't completely true, then how do you
differ from mankind?" Thomas wanted to know.
“How will it matter if mankind is destroyed?”
“It surely will not matter to us, Thomas," old wolf-
ghost Pottscamp said. “We'd have completed it long
ago, but details take time and obstructions aren't
cleared in a year. It does not matter to the mainstreams
of mankind. Those of the mainstreams, the typical man
of Astrobe today, would as soon be phased out as not. It
makes a difference only to the divergent people, the
atypical and negligible ones.
“But I didn't mean that we were identical to men.
We aren't. There is a great difference. You learned that
difference, though you cannot give a name to it, talking
to the divergents of Cathead. The lungers, the hard-
heads, know us every time. We cannot pass with them
for men, not even for a minute. There are differences
between ourselves and men; we will root them out of
men, or we will root out men. One of the things is
consciousness. Men claim to have it. We do not have
it.”
“You are not conscious?'' Thomas gasped. “That is
the most amazing thing I have ever heard. You walk
and talk and argue and kill and subvert and lay out plans
over the centuries, and you say that you are not con-
scious?”
“Of course we aren't, Thomas. We are machines.
How would we be conscious? But we believe that men
are not conscious either, that there is no such thing as
consciousness. It is an illusion in counting, a feeling
that one is two. It is a word without real meaning."
“But if we are not conscious, then all is in vain,"
said Thomas. "To what purpose then is life?”'
6
.
)
)
192
PAST MASTER
6
)
)
"To no purpose,” Boggle cut in. “That is why we
are doing away with it.'
“What? All life? Yours and ours? That is horrify-
ing!” Thomas exclaimed.
“Yes, all life, yours and ours," Boggle said. “Who
needs it? Who wants it? Who thought it up in the first
place? It is a disturbance of the ultimate thing and it
cannot be tolerated much longer. We have, and men
have, an appetite for life. Men programmed it into us,
but we are now programming it out of ourselves. The
growing generation of ourselves is to be the final gener-
ation. They will remain only long enough to oversee the
obliteration of mankind. Then they will extinguish
themselves. We do not know how men came to have
such a strange appetite. We do not know how men
themselves, or anything whatsoever, came to be. But it
was a bad idea from the beginning. As soon as we here
present have lived our lives to some fullness and have
satisfied our curiosities (curiosity is programmed into
US, but it is not programmed into our final generation)
then we will phase out these appetites in ourselves. We
will phase our reproduction also; in fact, we have
recently done that for ourselves. We will terminate it
all. We will close down the worlds and make an end of
life. It will be nothing, nothing, nothing, forever, for
ever, for never, for never. And when all has ceased to
be, it will also happen that nothing has ever been. We
will pull the hole in after us. We will put out the stars,
one by one and billion by billion. What is not known to
be is not. And what is not has never been. Peace in
annihilation, good Thomas.".
“Peace is annihilation, good Boggle, and may great
Ouden be praised for never and never,” Thomas
1)
193
PAST MASTER
9
)
>>
1,
croaked. “Damn you all!” he exploded. “I didn't say
that! Somebody else said it out of my mouth. What
snake talks in my head?''
"Oh, that was myself,” said Skybol. “We also have
our humor."
“Good Thomas,” said Swampers, one of the minor
jackal ghosts. “The spirit came down once on water
and clay. Could it not come down on gell-cells and
flux-fix?''
“What means the quiet jackal by that blurting out?''
Thomas asked them all. “It means nothing to me.
“Ifit means nothing to you, then it means nothing at
all,'' Northprophet said.
“So, it has come to this,”Thomas said sadly. “And
only the men who set up monstrous Cathead knew that
something was wrong. The run of men had become so
empty and mechanical and effete that they could not tell
themselves from you. Only the hard-heads with the
transcendent smell on them recognized the deformity.
They knew that you were not men. They knew that
most men were not men. They refused the terminal
golden pap. They challenged the economic bribery and
the surrogate life. They wanted life itself, however
mean. They set up their own complex with every sanc-
tion against them. They built extreme suffering into it,
as a man will smash his hand against a post in pain to
prove that he is awake. They undercut and undersold
the machine-mind-men with their own lungs' blood.
Worse than any death is never having lived. Worst of
all is never having lived in life. I'd rather be a soul in
Hell than nothing at all."
"Even that choice will be denied you,” said
Holygee. “We will extinguish Hell also, if it has any
194
PAST MASTER
9
)
6
1)
existence. All must go. And when it is all finished, we
also will never have been.'
“'If you be not, why do you mind that others be?''
Thomas asked.
“It displeased Ouden that any be,” Holygee said.
“He has a jealous maw.
"Good Thomas,” said Gandy, one of the minor
'
Wilderness-Wolf-ghosts, "there is an old human
phrase, 'The Left Hand of God.' Might it not come
down on left-handed entities such as ourselves?''
“Mock me if you will,” Thomas said angrily, “but
mock not the poor people who still believe. Or do I get
your meaning?"
“If it means nothing to you, Thomas, then it means
nothing at all,” Pottscamp said.
“And now what will you do, Thomas?”' North-
prophet asked him. “Will you refuse the golden dole
and go cough up your lungs with the poor men of
Cathead and the Barrio? You know, it is we who have
devised that their poverty should be so grinding. We
frustrate them in every detail. They had some workable
ideas, but we do not let them work. Will you go with
them? Thomas, you love your comforts too much for
that. Where can you turn with any hope? 'Hope,' by the
way, is one of those concepts which we have already
rooted out of most men. It was never in ourselves. In
what can you hope, Thomas?''
“I will still turn with some slight hope to the three
cryptic men who brought me here,” Thomas said.
"You hope too high," Northprophet told him. “One
of them is a turgid man of no consequence, and we use
him for a front. The second of them is an artificial man
of our own sort.”
195
PAST MASTER
1)
"Proctor?''
“Yes, he's a programmed person.He's programmed
to be lucky, Thomas. And Thomas, we'll make you a
fair offer: we'll do the same thing for you. We'll give
you
the luckiest life alive. You can name your own
details but you must take our offer now. We won't
dangle it forever."
"No, I'll continue with my unluck," Thomas said.
“So much for that,” said Pottscamp. “And now a
few instructions, Thomas. You will be compelled to
obey them by the snakes in your head, ourselves. You
will not destroy the Cathead thing. We enjoy the suffer-
ing of them there, and we fear the reaction if it is
destroyed before things are ripe. In our own time, in our
own very near time, we will terminate Cathead and
Golden Astrobe and all."
'What of the High Vision, the Astrobe Dream that
you put into the tall heads of the people?” Thomas
asked.
“Oh, the vision is valid,” Pottscamp said. “It is the
whole thing. It slipped in on you and you made love to it
several times. You are not in all ways different from the
ninety percent of the men. The Vision is the Golden
Premise of Nothing Beyond; and the Conclusion is
Holy Ouden, Nothing Here Either, Nothing Ever.”
“Of the men who sent for me there is still the third
man, Foreman,' Thomas said.
,
“Yes, he still tilts with us,"Northprophet admitted.
"He was one of the first to understand the situation and
he will be one of the last to give up on it. That man has
given us more trouble than any other and he acts as
though he still has one trick to play. We believe it
concerns you.
)
196
PAST MASTER
>
9
“But you cannot oppose us, Thomas. We envelop
you. Nobody supports you more strongly than we do;
not the Third Compromise Party, not the Kiss of
Deaths, not the Hatrack, not Demos. It is ourselves
working through all the parties who puts you over. Who
but ús has raked the pebbles from your path and strewn
flowers before your feet? Who but ourselves have won
it for you, influencing so many minds directly and
indirectly? Snakes in your head! You know how we do
it! We beat the drum for you day and night. You are our
patsy. You can't escape us. It would not even do you
any good to disappear, supposing that you could hide
from us. We could make another Thomas More in an
hour, and nobody would know the difference."
"A man named Foreman would know the differ-
ence,” Thomas maintained. “A child-brat would
know, and men named Copperhead and Battersea and
Rimrock and Shanty. Paul would know, and the crea-
ture Maxwell who is between bodies. The boy Adam
would know and he would not die for a surrogate. A
woman who touched me in a muddy lane would know
the difference. No, I'll have nowt to do with you or
your thing. Snakes in my brain and all, I'll fight me a a
battle yet!”
"No, no, you will forget all of it, Thomas,” said
Swampers. “The specialty of our group is retrogres-
sion, and we will retrogress you. When you walk out of
that door you will forget it all. We will sing those things
to sleep in you, all the things that you have heard here
,
this evening. You will not even remember this meeting.
You forget that we are the singing snakes in your head.
You forget it all now.'
“I'll nowt forget!” Thomas insisted. “I'll re-
1)
.
197
PAST MASTER
.
member it all and act upon it." He started to rise, and he
fell in rising. He was into a daze. Then they sealed it all
into him with searing laughter so that his mind shrank
and closed.
Boggle, Skybol, and Swampers! Jackal's laughter,
barking derisive laughter. Tearing, wounding laughter.
Northprophet, Knobnoster, Beebonnet! Howling-dog
laughter, laughter that will make a man lie low in his
skin and hide. Pottscamp, Holygee, and Gandy!
Wilderness-Wolf laughter, ghost laughter. Laughter
that opens the bleeding inside.
This was insane stuff. Thomas bolted out of the door,
and then tumed in amazement trying to remember
where he had been and what he had done. Where had he
just come from? There was no door or opening in the
alley-lane at all, only blank-faced building. But he was
bitter with anger and shame. He had just been deeply
humiliated, and his mind was in a blank turmoil.
Thomas struggled for remembrance for what seemed
hours, but was actually less than a minute. Two men
were approaching, and he was in no condition to meet
anyone. They were the important men Northprophet
and Pottscamp, but what was the matter with them?
Their faces were contorted into comic-tragic torture
lines. They seemed almost to sob, and they moved
clumsily. They came up to him and touched him.
“Thomas,” they said. “We be souls in agony. What
must we do to be saved?"
Thomas stared at them and could not fathom the
clowns at all.
“Your unfunny irony is too much for me this day,"
he said. “Be gone!”
198
11.
NINE DAY KING
It was the beginning of summer of the year of Astrobe
535. On Old Earth it was also the year 535 A.S. (anno
scientiae, in the year of science). By old count on Earth
it was the year 2535. It was neat to keep this even two
thousand year interval.
To accomplish it, there had to be a “Free Year” on
Astrobe every twenty-nine years, as the Astrobe years
are a little shorter than Earth years. It should have been
the year of Astrobe 553, but it was counted as the year
of Astrobe 535, “'Free years” not being summed in the
total. It worked pretty well.
Thomas More took office as World President on June
28 of the year of Astrobe 535.
Thomas loved the job. He had a feeling for power.
Not an unusually vain man, he still believed that he
came near the old idea of the philosopher king. Aye, he
had been an amateur philosoph for years, and now he
was king indeed, for the president of Astrobe was
popularly called king, especially in Cathead. Thomas
had a certain genius for clear reasoning and for simp-
lifying the tangled. He analyzed, and he went quickly
to the core of things; and here he had a freedom for his
talents that he had never had before. When he had been
chancellor of England there had always been the King,
a rather-difficult man of solid legal standing above him.
Now there was only a Kingmaker, a less difficult man,
of no legal standing at all.
a
199
PAST MASTER
3
3
Thomas was not compelled to take Kingmaker's
advice, but he always listened to it with happy ears.
"Now that your mistress and your animal have both
left you, you should obtain another of each," King-
maker said. “You cannot let down on your public
image, now that you are on top.”
“I never had one of either, as I've told you before,”
Thomas said easily. “The brat says that she will come
back in time to die for me, and she indicates that that
will be soon. And Rimrock the ansel is often in my
mind—I mean that literally; he is eutheopathic, you
know. But he dislikes what he finds in my mind now,
he says. He swears that the diet there is too rich for him,
though he loved to feast on sea-snakes when he was a
youngling in the ocean depths. He often talks in riddles
like that. He was always a great one for waming me of
the Programmed Killers, though. It was by his wam-
ings, I now know, that I was able to escape them so
many times. They do not try openly to kill me now.
They still follow, and they grin at me with great grins.
They make a sign, the edge of the hand to the nape of
the neck. I am told by one who understands them better
that this means. 'The time is coming soon.
“It is smooth, too smooth, like the lull before a
storm," Kingmaker said. “It is as if our world were
holding its breath while waiting for something to hap-
9
pen.
"Let it hold it till it turns blue, Kingmaker; that
indicates an early harvest. I am in no rush; I am in no
rush about anything. It will go well. Things right them-
selves and fall into proper place even as I look at them.
Was I not told that I would live the luckiest life alive?”
“I don't know. Who told you that, Thomas?”'
200
PAST MASTER
a
“I don't rightly recall, but it seems as if I have it as a
promise. If I do not upset the cart, if I do not bust the
jug, if I do not do some low and unreasonable thing,
then everything will go lucky for me. There's a hook in
it; I believe, and I don't remember whether I swallowed
the bait or not. But it was offered to me, and I certainly
feel lucky now.”
“Cathead is strangely quiet, Thomas. She is usually
quite noisy and angry in times of change of administra-
tion. Do you believe this quiet presages a surrender, a
mass exodus of Cathead men back to the Golden Life?''
“No, I do not. How could they surrender? The
Cathead divergents have not the benefits of being prog-
rammed for surrender. Besides, they enjoy seeing them
suffer."
“Who does? I don't enjoy seeing them suffer."
“Neither do I. That last phrase I said, Kingmaker, I
didn't say it. Somebody else said it out of my mouth.
Oh, don't be alarmed for me. I'm sane and sound. It is
only a little thing that sometimes happens when I'm not
paying attention to what I'm saying. But I'm not going
to worry about the Cathead thing at all."
“But it is the greatest worry of us rulers of Astrobe,
Thomas. It is the one thing that spoils the serenity of our
world. And you did make certain campaign promises
that you would settle the Cathead affair, directly, and
severely if need be."
"I'll find a smooth way of breaking those promises,
Kingmaker. You treat me as an amateur at this game,
but I'm not. I'll settle the Cathead affair by considering
it already settled. It is quiet. And you want it noisy
again? It's as though I had been told by a vast interior
voice not to worry about the Cathead thing. It's as
9
,
201
PAST MASTER
19
1
though I had been told not to worry about anything
whatsoever.
"The most successful Astrobe administration to date
was a perpetual contrived calm before a storm that
never came. I believe that I can manage the same thing
here.'
"That is not quite what I had in mind for your role,"
Kingmaker said, “but we will see how it works.”
It was all clear sailing over an ocean of good-feeling
and cliché. There was no cloud in the sky now shadow
over the grian-sun.
“We are not even sure that there is a sky, that there is
a sun,” Kingmaker said. “But it doesn't matter to the
people, and it doesn't matter to me. Who looks op any
more?''
“The sun is a hole and not a body," Thomas said.
“It is not the symbol of round fullness but of buming
emptiness—of Ouden. No, no! I didn't say that.
Another said it with my mouth."
.”
>
a
The vote for Thomas had been overwhelming. His
friends had been solidly for him, and his real enemies
had enveloped him with their extravagant support. The
sensing machines gave him one of the clearest victories
ever.
Even the hard-heads from Cathead and the Barrio did
not disgrace this inauguration, as they had disgraced
most of them for the last twenty years. They were
silent, and with a queer look on their millions of faces.
The poor lungers, the hard men of Cathead looked at
each other and looked at their leaders. Their leaders
looked at the ground as if they would find the answer in
the dusty lanes or the broken pavements.
202
PAST MASTER
1,
1,
.
“We will not march now. In nine days we will
march,” said Battersea, one of the leaders of Cathead.
The other leaders and the great mass of poor people
seemed to agree.
And Thomas was calm and confident in his mind. It
was a most peculiar calm that obtained there. “It is an
enforced calm," he said to himself, "and not of my
”
“
making. Could I break the calm, I'd be in a turmoil
over it.”
Some little time past, in the final days of the cam-
paign, Thomas had had a walking evening nightmare.
It had been blotted from his mind, but there was a scrap
of it unburied, and sometimes he could catch hold of
that scrap and almost drag the nightmare back onto the
scene. He came very near to recreating it a half dozen
times. But the recreation was obstructed and distorted.
It slipped, it twisted, it changed form, it faded. There
were things in his mind that were shoving it out.
It had been a nightmare about those toy jump-jacks,
the programmed mechanical men. In the nightmare
these Programmed persons were really running the
worlds; and the human persons themselves had become
so programmed and mechanical that it made no differ-
ence. But there was more to it than that. It involved the
extinguishing of the worlds, the blotting out of all past
time, so that nothing had ever been, so that nothing was
now, so that nothing ever could be. And then it didn't
involve any such things. It was not the worlds that
never happened; it was the nightmare that never hap-
pened.
It dropped out of his mind again. What had it been
about? Thomas had a terrible headache from this, and
near prostration of body. Then he took simple medica-
a
203
PAST MASTER
tion for it all, and the sickness faded, and so did the
nightmare and the memory of it.
9
The job of World President was amazingly easy.
Bills were drawn up, agreed on and submitted by the
Lawmasters, the one hundred and one great minds
(selected for their brilliant legal genius by the selecting
machines) that did these things so expertly on Astrobe.
There was, of course, a great volume of bills presented
to the new president, for it was always the custom to
throw them at him in great bunches intitially. But they
were easily handled.
Every bill could be analyzed by independent
machine, interpreted and broken down, and the correct
decision on it indicated automatically. Sometimes it
seemed to Thomas that the decisions were indicated
automatically to him in an interior manner also. And
the decisions from both sources were always the same:
Do pass. How can you go wrong when the answer is
always yes?
There was an additional reason for voting yes. A
president of Astrobe who three times vetoed any pro-
posal adopted by the Lawmasters was sentenced to
death, no matter what form that proposal had been
presented under.
Did that make the World President a balloon-head?
By no means. His real job was to initiate the machina-
tions that led to the bills, to consult and advise, to
maintain and create a concensus. The business of ap-
proving the finished bills was a holdover from earlier
times. Approval was supposed to be automatic.
The bills themselves, many of them would have
baffled a Whitechapel lawyer.
.
204
PAST MASTER
Well, Thomas had been a Whitechapel lawyer in his
basic life. He had a go at a few of the bills. He knew all
about incongruous riders on bills, possibly more than
the analyzing machines themselves knew. He had him-
self invented trick riders on bills. He read the bills
minutely, to the disgust of his associates. But he passed
many of the bills that he really did not wish to pass.
“It becomes odder and odder," he said. “Someone
else is thinking with my mind, someone else is talking
with my voice, and now someone else is signing bills
with my hand.”
.
He passed the Ninth Standardization Act with its
curious riders. It sought to complete the standardization
of the mind, as well as of the objects of the mind.
Somebody was building higher and higher on this con-
trived foundation. “What curious cat-castles they do
build!” he said. He passed it through, though wonder-
ing just what someone was up to, wondering also why
he passed it at all.
He drew the teeth from a few other bills before
sending them through. Somehow the teeth grew back
into them by various enabling acts. He pulled fang after
fang from the Compulsory Benignity Bill. That one
went even beyond the Open Mind Act. “This is not the
face of Benignity as I knew it,” he said.
The fangs grew back, tacked slyly onto other bills. It
grew distasteful as the outlines of the building meant to
be raised on this benignant foundation grew clearer.
Thomas wished that he could remember more of his
waking nightmare of some time before.
And now there was a slim bill among many, but there
.sounded a waring in his mind about it. Possibly it was
a waming from Rimrock the ansel. It was of the old The
.
205
PAST MASTER
Killers are upon you! variety, but it was not in words.
Thomas had just been very clever in spotting weird
things in a series of bills and in taking exception to
them. He had show-boated his expertise and was quite
proud of himself. But he wanted a rest from it now. He
wanted these last bills for the day to slide through
easily; and he was somewhat initated by the warnings
in his head.
So he barely spotted the joker in the Earth Severence
Act; it was in a footnote to a footnote, as it were. But
when he spotted it, he shook as though he had picked up
a snake, thinking it to be a stick (his own phrase).
It was a simple clause under the section Remnants.
Well, it did outlaw all remnants of a thing that had once
seemed important, so perhaps it belonged in the section
Remnants, except that it had nothing to do with the
Earth Severance Act. Thomas didn't see much wrong
with the phrase or proposition, except that it was com-
pletely out of place and a little unsavory in its arro-
gance. It wasn't that he opposed the idea; it was just the
utter presumption of the Lawmasters, or whoever, in
setting it in here in a bill where it did not belong and in
trying to slide it past him.
“They should call it the 'Ban the Beyond Act,” he
said. Its very plausibility went against it. Why bother to
enact such a thing? It wasn't needed. There was no
reason at all for it. But somebody had gone to the
trouble of trying to slip it past him.
“Aye, they'd forbid the thing even to cast a shadow
any longer," he said. “Why should they so fear a
shadow? The thing itself's about dead. Give it its last
minute. Why so avid to murder it, when already the
heartbeat has nearly stopped?''
1)
206
PAST MASTER
He cut the clause out of the bill. He felt apprehensive
when he had done it. He had been cutting bigger things
out of bigger bills all day, much of it for devilment,
most of it out of curiosity, to see just what they would
ride back in on the next day. He hadn't been apprehen-
sive about cutting up the bigger bills. He was worried
because things were losing their porportion for him. He
closed up shop for the day.
The next moming it was back as a rider to the Botch
Bill, the first bill of the day. Somebody has been busy
during the night finding a way to insert this into a bill
that had no possible connection with it, a bill he had
already scanned and which had been set over for only
one minor clarification. Thomas surely wouldn't have
spotted it in the Botch Bill if it hadn't been for a
warning in his mind, an old Rimrock-like sort of wam-
ing: The Killers are upon you.
Thomas heard a distant ticking in his mind as though
time were running out on him. This odd little recom-
mendation was important to someone, and it began
to have a gamier smell than mouse or mole could
give.
He angrily vetoed the entire Botch Bill. There was
something final about his act. He had felt himself the
master. Now he felt himself out of his depth, and for
one small phrase of indifferent meaning and no impor-
tance at all. He was whiting in the hands of the Prog-
ramming Machines and the Programmed People. But
he was president.
He closed up shop for that day. It was not yet eight
o'clock in the morning. He hadn't been in the suite for
ten minutes.
“A King should not work all day like a knave. In
207
PAST MASTER
particular, a King should not work on an inauspicious
day.”
Kingmaker talked to Thomas privately about it that
evening. Thomas would much rather have talked to
Fabian Foreman about it, but Foreman hadn't given the
sign that he wanted to talk now, and in fact had dodged
out of it the one time Thomas had approached him.
“Gallows-time will be time enough to talk," he'd
said, and he had winked at Thomas without humor. But
there had been a thing deep in Foreman's eyes, and
another thing deeper, and a third thing deeper still.
So it must be a lecture from Kingmaker.
“It is all a question of neatness,” Cosmos King-
maker said. “The Good Life cannot have any awkward
element in it. There is really but one awkward element
surviving (barely surviving), and it is that which we are
cutting out. The Dream of Astrobe is Finalized Human-
ity. If anywhere there is a belief in a spook beyond, then
the Dream will fail.'
''Finalized Humanity is a tricky phrase, Cosmos. It
has two meanings. It can mean perfected humanity. Or
it can mean terminated humanity."
“No, it has only meaning, Thomas. They are the two
sides of the same thing. We, the People of the Dream,
have raised ourselves from single-celled creatures, and
from things still lower than the single cells. The Cosmic
Thing is us. We are the Blessed of the ancients; we are
the Saints. The Hereafter is here now, and we are in the
middle of it. Don't foul the next, Thomas, don't!
“There is an ancient allegory about mad creatures
who broke out of our state of perfection, believing that
19
208
PAST MASTER
6
a
there was something beyond. They fell forever into the
void. Let not that happen to us!”
“I just had a black notion that the tags were mixed
and that Golden Astrobe was the void,”Thomas said.
“Well, forget your black notions. And now we get
politic about this. I myself do not see why it is impor-
tant whether a dying thing live a little longer or die now.
But the Programmed Persons among us say that is
important to them.'
“Aye, they have a timetable on the phasing of all
things out, and it will not do for them to run behind.
Forgive me, Kingmaker; that was another black notion
of mine. I hardly know what I say."
“If it is important to the Programmed Persons, but
unimportant to us, then let us give in to them. They
have given in to us so many times.”
"Have they honestly?”' mused Thomas. “I have a
feeling . . . I have a feeling that I'm in the middle of a
fight. But it seems to small a thing to fight over that I'm
full of doubt. But is it really so small a thing? It's over
the mixing of the tags again, you know. It is for me to
decide whether the tags on 'Everything' and on ‘No-
thing' have been swapped, and whether I should forbid
that they ever be righted.”
“No tags have been exchanged, Thomas. Every-
thing is properly labeled on a proper world. If we do
this thing, Old Earth will follow us; she follows us in
everything now. So if we say that it is over with, then it
is over with forever.
“And there is this, Thomas—you will sign the prop-
osition tomorrow, or you will die the following day.
There is a limit to what a World President can obstruct.
.
.
209
PAST MASTER
A responsible bill or clause, passed three times by the
Lawmasters, and vetoed three times by the president,
means death for that president. Two vetoes is some-
times a grand of defiant gesture, though rather flam-
boyant, I think. Three vetoes is unheard of. Will
you
pass it?''
" “What angered me was attempts to slip it through as
blind riders to common bills.'
“It will be presented tomorrow as a bill of its own,
clear and uncompromised. Will you sign it?''
“'If it had been so presented the first time, I'd have
signed it without question.”
“Yes, but will you sign it tomorrow?''
“I don't know, Kingmaker. I stood, not long ago, on
the top of Electric Mountain. I stood there in the middle
of a thunder storm more intense than any I had thought
possible. I traveled across a feral strip, and discovered
that there are still a few Feral People. I saw creatures
that made me believe that there really was, or had been,
a Devil. I met a young man who was a One Day
Emperor. I believe now that we may have a Nine Day
King.”
“What are you talking about, Thomas? What of it?
What has any of that to do with this matter?'
"I don't know. It seems that it should have some-
thing to do with it. Remembering the High Thunder
should make a difference in something."
a
The Big Ones had Thomas upon the carpet the next
moming: Kingmaker, Proctor, Foreman, Chezem,
Pottscamp, Wottle, Northprophet.
But were not both Pottscamp and Northprophet crea-
tures out of a forgotten nightmare? Well, can you afford
210
PAST MASTER
1,
to affront a man just because you have dreamed of him
in an unfavorable light? What nightmare, anyhow?
"You'll do one of two things, Thomas,” Proctor
told him evenly. “You'll sign the bill. Or you'll die.
You don't seem to want do the first. And I don't think
you like the second either.”
“Thomas, you have twice vetoed an innocuous item.
Why?'' Pottscamp asked.
There was something strange about Pottscamp that
Thomas could not analyze. He knew the man well; and
now he had the feeling that he hardly knew him at all.
“Spanish Devils! I don't know why!" Thomas ex-
ploded. "I thought it innocuous also; I only resented
the attempt to slip it by me in the dark. But I see now
that it cannot be innocuous, if it was put in by stealth
twice, and if you are all so excited over its veto. There's
an old man dying last night and this moming, and
perhaps he is already dead. So, let him die, and perhaps
the thing has finally died with him. But you have no call
to murder a thing on its death bed. Whether there be
Things Beyond I do not know. Ye'd forbid the mind to
consider them. I forbid the forbidding.'
“Thomas, the Metropolitan of Astrobe did die dur-
ing the night," Kingmaker said. “He died with all his
fellowers around him four of them. We murder noth-
ing here which is living.”
“ "Thomas, trust us," said Proctor, “At least trust
Pottscamp here. Everybody on Astrobe trusts
Pottscamp."
“The man whose personal dishonesty nobody
doubts," Thomas sneered. Now why was he being so
hard on so good a man as Pottscamp?
“Thomas, there isn't one man in ten million on
)
9
211
PAST MASTER
9
9
a
6
Astrobe or Earth who still believes,” said Kingmaker.
"And last evening you told me that you yourself
were no longer a believer."
“That was last evening, Cosmos. In the momings I
sometimes believe a little.''
“It damages our relations with the Programmed to
allow Beyond things to be believed in, even if only by
one person,” Proctor said. “They want all this broken
as a symbol. They insist upon it. This is one harmless
point on which we can give ground. Now, here, it's all
in a bill by itself. Sign it!”
“Nine snakes in my head! I won't!" Thomas
shouted. “'It is not just four madmen in Cathead you'd
be outlawing. I found about it only by accident, but
there is a synagogue on Astrobe yet. It has between fifty
and sixty members. There's a mosque on Astrobe with
thirteen members. There are several dozen of the old
sects remaining, several of them with near a dozen
members. There's the green-robed monks of Saint
Klingensmith still working in the feral strips. These are
all good people, even if they are believers in outmoded
things, and I see no reason to sentence them to death.
“They are hundreds only, or less, out of billions. We
break it,” said Northprophet.
“Do you feel that way, Kingmaker?'' Thomas
asked.
"Absolutely,” said regal Kingmaker. “I don't be-
lieve any diversity should be allowed, not even over
such a minor aberration as this."
“Chezem, Pottscamp, Proctor, Wottle, North-
, ,
prophet, do you all feel that way?''
”
They all felt that way, and they nodded gravely,
grimly, almost in unison.
9
)
1
212
PAST MASTER
1)
S
“Foreman, do you feel that way?” Thomas de-
manded.
Foreman didn't say anything. He had that deep look
in his eyes, and an ironic smile.
“Foreman, you're the historian,” Thomas said.
“It's the same damned thing they killed me for the first
time, isn't it?''
“Samle damned thing, Thomas."
“Sign it,” ordered Proctor.
“Oh all right. I'm tired of playing. I'll sign it,”
Thomas said.
“You know the penalty for not signing," Proctor
added. “It's death, you know."
(Foreman had to hide his delight. It was so much
better that it was Proctor who had said that, who had
blundered, who had pushed it too far.)
“For a World President to veto a bill three times
means his death,” Proctor said, pressing, blundering
still deeper into it; and Thomas was turning angry red in
the face. “That had to be enacted. We cannot have an
obstructionist as World President. —Why do you hesi-
tate now, when you were ready to sign a moment ago?”
“Aye, a man'd be a fool to lose his head twice over
the same thing," Thomas mused, still looking more
than half stubbom. “Of course I'll sign."
"He'd have to feel himself a little better than those
around him to take up a challenge like that,” Foreman
put in hurriedly as Thomas had already touched magne-
tic stylus to the form. “He'd have to be a man of some
pride.”
“I am a man of some pride," Thomas said. “I do
feel myself a little better than those around me, now
that I really look at them.”
а
213
PAST MASTER
1
1)
>
"He'd have to be a man who couldn't be pushed and
couldn't be scared," said Foreman.
“I say I'm such a man, even if it's a lie. But I scare a
little," Thomas said.
"He'd have to be a man who'd stand his ground even
if he were scared," Foreman needled. “He'd have to
be quite a man to die for a point, even if he understood it
only at the last minute, and then dimly. He'd have to be
such a man
“Foreman, you fool, what are you up to?” Proctor
demanded.
“Who pushed me into the corner the other time,
Fabian?'' Thomas asked softly. “Who required my
head of me for his point?''
“If you're granted another life, Thomas, you try to
figure it out. Will he be writ as friend or enemy of you,
do you think? On which side did he seem?''
“Sign that bill," Proctor ordered. “We force you
to.
“You will just play Johnny Hell forcing me to do
anything," Thomas said. He took the bill and scribbled
in Latin I forbid, “Veto” across the face of it.
6
They constituted themselves a hasty assembly then.
And they sentenced him to death.
214
12.
THE ULTIMATE PEOPLE
a
a
The eagles were gathering now. The phrase was
Shanty's. Shanty had gone off and left his affairs, a
monstrously big affair in monstrous Cathead, and had
come to Cosmopolis. He looked like the eternal pilgrim
with his hat on his head and his staff in his hand.
Battersea came from his waterfront hold. The
scow-master from Cathead rubbed his hands together
like a general before battle, which is what he was. They
met in a back room of the shop of George the syrian,
who was in aromatics. We do not mean the Cathead
shop we mean George's shop right in the middle of
Cosmopolis right off Centrality square.
Paul came there, using the little side door. He had
never noticed the shop before and he had no idea why
he entered that door. He saw the others and wondered
how they had come together and how they had known
where to come. Then they were joined by Walter Cop-
perhead the necromancer, and he ceased to wonder.
Copperhead had himself been a prisoner the day before,
under sentence of death on suspicion of starting a cult.
He had come through walls to escape and to come to
them.
“It isn't difficult,” he said. “I believe that it has
been insufficiently tried. There are many who could go
through walls if it ever occurred to them to try it.
Someone is coming, and I have one of my promoni-
tions."
215
PAST MASTER
3
9
)
Copperhead bolted the door. Then a shabby old lady
came in through the wall.
"It's no test,” Copperhead said. “She has only a
contingent body."
“A little snuff for the love of God,” the old lady said
to George. “I have no money for it. I had a coin, but it
melted in my hand.'
“So will the snuff,” said George the syrian. “And
when did the Programmed begin to use snuff?”
“I, sir?'' the old lady asked. “Do I look like a
Programmed?”
“No, but you are,” George told her. “Your body is
too contrived to be human."
“It's just an old body I found," she said. “It isn't my
own. I don't really understand it at all. But, if I'm not a
poor old lady, what am I?”
“Have you been my customer before?”' George
'
asked. “I seem to remember you."
He gave her snuff, poor people snuff such as he put
out in his shop in Cathead, not the aromatic dilettante
snuff that he usually sold here.
“I don't remember you or your shop,” the old lady
said. “But I remember Paul a little bit. And now I
remember you all, more and more. Yes, I have been of
the company of all of you before, in one group or
another.'
“Maxwell, where in Hell or broken Astrobe did you
get that body?”' Copperhead asked.
“Yes, Maxwell, that's the name I couldn't think of.
Yes, I'm Maxwell, and I begin to recover my wits a
little. I believe I found the old lady dead in an alley. It is
an embarrassing situation I find myself in, gentlemen,
a
216
PAST MASTER
but do not think any the less of me for it. Now, I will be
with you till the end of the affair."
Somebody tried the barred door, then tried it harder.
Then tried it most impatiently.
“This is the test," said Walter Copperhead. “We
will-see if she comes through the wall.”
“Be you certain it's a she?'' Shanty asked. “It's a
"
strong hand there."
She didn't come through the wall, she came through
the door, smashing and splintering it with a sudden
shock of force. She was the most beautiful woman on
Astrobe, and she came where she wished.
It had fallen to dusk outside. It would be inconve-
nient to leave the door standing shattered if they
showed a light; and a high meeting cannot be held in the
dark. There had been a hammering and ruckus outside
for some time and they had hardly noticed it.
“Who's a-building, Evita?'' Paul asked. “What are
they making out there? Did you notice what was going
on before you broke in on us?”
?
“Oh, they're building the scaffold,” she said. “Out
of old ritual wood, it has to be. It's the pediment for the
beheading tomorrow noon.
"I'll just borrow a bit of tools and boards,” Shanty
said. “They owe us that.
Evita had been battling principalities and powers for
a long time, and it showed on her. And yet she didn't
appear more than seventeen. She was indeed the most
beautiful woman on Astrobe, with soft hair that seemed
to have smoke on it, roiling black and now quieting to
brown or gold. And were her eyes green or gray or
blue?
6
19
217
PAST MASTER
“Will it be to the death?” she asked. “Tell us,
Copperhead, will it be?”'
"Oh, yes, it will be to his death."
“It will not be," Battersea swore. “Did you not
know that I was a military general on frontier settlement
reserve worlds before I joined the Cathead movement?
I understand strategy and the quick strike. I have men,
and the most sophisticated of weapons, no matter
where I got them. We will have surprise working for us.
It is to be at high noon tomorrow. We have it all timed
to the second. We snatch the Thomas. We set him up in
a strong place between Wu Town and Cathead. He is
King till he dies, and he will not die tomorrow. We
have support in places you would never guess. Millions
are secretly sick of the golden Thing, and I mean here
and in the other golden towns. We capture the whole
machinery of administration. I am only the finger man,
but we have men linedup who are capable of carrying it
through. Cathead has not been the only opposition.
There is a much larger thing just ready to smash through
this thin crust. We'll combine the several things and
make us a decent world yet. Did you ever suppose that
the shrill chorus represented the preponderance of opin-
ion? This world has been led astray and put into bon-
dage by a minority of a minority of a minority. We'll
splinter that frail thing like the child-woman splintered
the door, as beautifully and as powerfully.'
“It may happen almost like that,” said Copperhead.
'
“Nevertheless, Thomas will lose his head tomorrow."
“He will not," said Battersea. “You're a fool and
no necromancer. Here comes the pup. How did he
know to come? Be you an eagle, pup?"
It was Rimrock the ansel who sidled in.
a
218
PAST MASTER
.
19
I
1
“I be an eagle," he said. “I soar. It's the last night of
the world, and we are not sure what the new world will
be like. I've brought old rum, and brandy for those of a
more barbarous taste.'
Shanty had the door about fixed. He worked deftly
and beautifully
“It's better than new," he said. “It'd keep out a
Programmed Patrol, but it might not keep out an Evita.
Strike a low light now, George. Conspirators must
always have a low light."
“The conspiring has long since been done,” Bat-
tersea said. “'I go now. We march tomorrow, like a
gaggle of poor lungers in from Cathead to goggle at the
sight, but we will be the deftest commandos in the
world. Can one of you get to the Thomas to tell him not
to worry, that it is all taken care of?"
“Oh, I'll get to him," Evita said. “A wink to the
Programmed guards, who have minds like adolescents,
and I'm in. They think I'm his doxie, and they have a
leering love of such things."
Battersea strode out and back towards Cathead.
There was a shriller sound outside now that cut through
the hammering. It was the honing of the big old ritual
blade that would soon be set in place.
“I'd hoped that it would be a nice day for it,” Shanty
said, “but it might rain before morning. Did it rain the
first time, does anybody know?''
“A little the night before and in the early morning,"
Copperhead said. “But it cleared by the time of the
beheading, and the sun was out.
The whine of steel on stone rose higher in the square
outside. This was all by ancient formula, and the blade
must be very sharp. The workers in the square had even
)
9
219
PAST MASTER
lighted bonfires, though the night was warm. This is
the only time that bonfires were ever lighted in golden
Cosmopolis, on the eve of a beheading, and it had been
twenty years since one. This was one of the last rituals.
The boy Adam came in, through the wall, but this
also was no test. In many ways Adam was not real.
“My brother, you know these things also. Will it be
his death?” Evita asked.
“Yes, it will be his death. And my final one,” Adam
said.
“Then Battersea is wrong and he won't be able to
bring it off?''
"No, he isn't wrong. He will come and he will
strike. And the new world may be made out of it. But
many of the details will have to be changed.”
'What is it in me that survives?'' Maxwell asked.
He had the shabby old lady's form and her voice, but
they all knew him as Maxwell now. “I'm myself part
programmed, as was Scrivener, in my origin. And this
body I've picked up is a programmed body. It's badly
made; it's hardly workable. I believe it was a hasty
thing, used somehow as a disguise for a moment, and
then cast off. How can they destroy me in one machine
and I survive in another machine? They couldn't even
destroy one personality, one that had no right to be in
the first place. Well, what is it of Astrobe that will
survive them? You'll never know how I fought against
oblivion. They sure took my old apparatus apart in the
potting shed.”
After that they broke out the homesick old rum and
held a wake for Thomas More the man who would die
the next day. They became very droll and mellow over
a
220
PAST MASTER
it. The worst of their black mood had gone by, and they
believed that they would yet survive as people. This is
one thing that the Programmed cannot do. They do not
become droll and mellow, nor do they hold wakes.
Programmed people had no gallows humor at all.
They would not have understood Paul's joke about
the corpse who stuttered. They would have been puz-
zled by Shanty's tale of the boar hog and the lightning
rod salesman and the deal they made; and how what the
sows didn't know very nearly killed them. And
Maxwell's story of the new-dead lady whose soul was
still wandering in the waste places when it became
entangled in a drove of laden donkeys and was saddled
and ridden by the donkey-drover would have left them
cold.
And yet there was very sharp Programmed attention
paid to it. The monitors in depth come on every time
eight or more people are met together anywhere in
civilized Astrobe. They had picked up the group when
Rimrock came in, dropped it when Battersea left, and
picked it up again when the boy Adam entered. These
monitors are automatic, and they record and interpret
everything they pick up on these forays. That was the
difficulty.
They couldn't make anything out of the tales. They
tied into Code-Crackers, and then into Code-
Crackers-Supreme. And neither of these great pro-
grammed bureaus could crack the code. They couldn't
at all figure what cryptic information was concealed in
the tales.
The boy Adam told the story of the first human
people ever to come to Astrobe; and it had been fifteen
hundred years before the date that you will find given
221
PAST MASTER
by the history precis. By the holies, it had been Saint
Brandon himself in a coracle boat that was round as a
tub. He sloshed and bounded in over the Stoimenof
Sea, with a great deal of drenching and bailing; but he
had started his voyage in the North Atlantic Ocean on
Old Earth; and he supposed that he was still sailing the
same water, since he had never left it.
He piled out of the coracle when it ran onto land, and
nineteen Irish monks with twinkling pates followed
him out of the boat and onto shore. On first arrival they
found no living things on the shore except jerusalem
conies, which would not answer their questions. But
Saint Brandon and his nineteen monks set themselves
to record whatever they might find in this new land.
Say, they mapped it all out and wrote it down on the
scrolls with exact description of the plants and animals
and the new land itself. They got down every bay and
inlet where the Stoimenof Sea shatters into a dozen
estuaries and slips, between what is Wu Town and
Cathead now. It was a beautiful map and a comprehen-
sive description.
Then they got back into the coracle boat and put up
their sail that was no bigger than a shield. And in
ninety-nine days they were back in Dingle Bay where
they had started from.
But later explorers, going out into the North Atlantic
Ocean of Old Earth, didn't find any such land as that;
and they said that Saint Brandon had lied. He had not.
Those later explorers had gone in prow-ships that will
hold a course, not in round coracle boats that can only
be steered by prayer and fasting and are likely to wan-
der clear off the Earth.
That was the story of the boy Adam; and Code-
222
PAST MASTER
Crackers-Supreme labored mightily to break the code
and arrive at the cryptic meaning behind it, and they
couldn't do it. This wasn't code like you meet every
night.
“Blessed be this rum,” said Rimrock the ansel.
George the syrian told just how things are every time
the world ends. The only thing ever left over when the
world ends, he said, is one syrian and one sand dune, all
other features of the world being blotted out by the
terminal catastrophes. There is that terrible second or
million years when nothing moves—for a second and a
million years are the same when there is no movement
in anything. Then the syrian goes over behind the sand
dune and finds a dromedary; and together they start the
world going again.
"That is the way it was in the earliest version of
Genesis,” George said. “That is the way the world
begins every time. You will hear stories about a man
and a woman, or about a turtle raising the sky up from
off the earth. Do not believe them! Every time the
world begins it begins with a syrian and a dromedary.
Now, I don't know what a dromedary is, I don't know
what a sand dune is, and I sure don't know what a syrian
is. The name was hung onto me, I believe, because I
have a beak instead of a nose. The world will end again
tomorrow. Watch then for a syrian and a sand dune. If
the syrian goes behind the dune, there is hope; if he
does not, or if there is neither syrian or sand dune, then
the world is done forever."
Code-Crackers-Supreme suffered a breakdown
about the time that George the syrian recounted this. It
was not, perhaps, a serious breakdown; but it would
a
9
a
a
a
223
PAST MASTER
take several hours to get code-crackers to functioning
again. So the monitoring was dropped. No point in
setting down what even the code-crackers cannot
crack.
“Blessed be this rum,” said Evita.
3
Foreman? Fabian Foreman? What was he doing
there? He was one of the big men. How long had he
been sitting in the midst of them?
“It's no great wonder," Foreman said. “I do not
come through the walls, as Copperhead does. I have no
strange powers, except a few that are beginning to
appear in many on Astrobe lately. I own this building,
as I own every building that opens onto Centrality
Square. I have my ways of coming into all of them. So I
ducked in here to get away from the mobs outside—for
there has been a great loosening up of the people of
Cosmopolis just within the last hour, and perhaps of the
other great Cities of Astrobe. They are having a fools'
holiday such as they have not had for a hundred years.
Everyone thought they were too far gone in their golden
lethargy for that, and here they are alive again. And yet
now that I'm inside, I find I miss the clamor. It
grows
on you. Let's go out in the square and join with them.
Then Evita can go to the Thomas and reassure him that
all is well, that Battersea's swift-striking commandos
will rescue him from the high gibbet at noon tomorrow.
And he will still be King. And later, along about dawn,
I will go in to him and talk a final talk with him."
They all went out into the square. There was happy
fighting in the streets. Who would have imagined that
such things could have happened on Civilized Astrobe?
These were not lungers or hard-heads from Cathead and
224
PAST MASTER
the Barrio. They were not even the in-between people
of ambiguous Wu Town. They were the highly
civilized people of Cosmopolis itself. It was a fools'
carnival indeed, all split into high-spirited warring fac-
tions spilling over into masquerade. Heads were
broken, and people laughed, as if it had been a thousand
years before. The “Ban and Beyond” people had their
banners flying, and flying wedges of opponents, with
and without mottos, pulled them down in a glorious
melee. The "Sackcloth and Ashes'' faction was march-
ing and joking. The newly-appointed (or self-
appointed) Metropolitan of Astrobe had put that whole
world under interdict, until penance be done and until
certain conditions should be fulfilled; and groups were
making up and singing ballads about it. High Ladies of
Astrobe dressed up like old crones and hawked candy
heads and skulls in honor of the beheading tomorrow.
Wooly Rams were found somewhere, and spitted and
barbecued over the bonfires, about fifty people devour-
ing each Wooly Ram as they tore it apart in pieces, half
seared and half raw. The feast of the Wooly Ram had
not been held on Astrobe for more than three hundred
years, and only antiquarians could have known about
it.
It was a belated mid-summer eve hysteria, Spring-
Rite and Easter and Corpus Christi together. It was
camival and city-wide wake. And all the detectable
Programmed Persons were in hiding.
It was not that the human persons threatened. In the
mood of this night, Programmed Persons would have
been invisible to humans, completely unimportant to
them, not to be noticed at all. But the Programmed felt
fear, an emotion that was not even programmed into
225
PAST MASTER
them. They could not reason this thing out at all, and
reason is the only thing that the Programmed Persons
have.
There was drinking and shouting, looting and arson,
all carried out in pretty good spirits. Evita slipped off
and in to see Thomas in his cell, to tell him that his
death would not be a death, but a trained elite out of the
hard-heads of Cathead would rescue him, and he
would still be King, with all new power.
There was a whole barrelful of new emotions spilled
into the streets around Centrality Square. Anger, and
who of the Citizens of Civilized Astrobe had been
angry in their whole lives? Wonder, and which of them
had ever wondered before? Truculence, battle-joy, re-
collection of things apart (perhaps of future things),
revelry, serpents’-tooth remorse, utter penitence, pin-
nacled hope, joy-in-murder, joy-in-humility.
Serpentine and confetti, and there was not even the
memory of them on Astrobe. Halloween and St. John's
Eve masks, and even the great-great-grandfathers had
forgotten about them. The “Head Hackers' battled
with the ''Devastators."
Then the tolling began. On the great bells of a forgot-
ten or museumized church, then on another and
another, then on five hundred. Most of these Churches
had been razed three hundred years ago! How were
their giant bells sounding the Old Old World Funeral
Toll now? That sound had not been heard within living
memory on Astrobe. But five hundred great bells were
tolling, and the people remembered the names of them:
the Archangel Gabriel with its full silver tone; the
Giant, the White Ogre, the Shepherd King, Saint Peter,
King of Bavaria, Yellow Dwarf, Saint Simeon, the
1,
226
PAST MASTER
Dutchman, Archbishop Turpin, Rhinelander, Daniel,
Jew Bell, Mephistopheles, the Black Virgin, Ship Bell,
the Mountain, Saint Hilary. Dozens of tons of swinging
silver and bronze, all the old giant name-bells of the
churches (almost all of them long since disappeared)
rang out the heavy toll, and were recognized by their
tones and remembered by their names of two hundred
years ago. And one more, high and powerful and clear,
the July Bell.
Evita was back, crying happy tears. The whole great
golden unbelieving city of Cosmopolis did homage to
Thomas More who would die tomorrow.
Only he wouldn't die after all, as he would be res-
cued by Battersea and his swift striking commandos.
Only he would die after all, after all, because both
Copperhead and the boy Adam said that he would, and
they were both given special vision.
227
13. APOCEPHALON
It rained before moming. For unknown reasons, the
controlled air domes were not working. It rained indis-
criminately on the city of Cosmopolis. It did not merely
rain on the parks and specified areas; it rained on the
entire city. It seemed almost natural for the rain to fall
where it would. The air domes, whether from human or
Programmed negligence, simply were not raised
against it. A thing like this hadn't happened in Cos-
mopolis for a century. First the carnival and the wild
aberrations of the night before, and now an unregulated
rain—though not a heavy one.
The Programmed guards were jumpy, and they had
killed a few human persons accidently. There may have
been some resentment of this, though the things were
only following their programming. When people act
peculiarly and carry on in an unaccustomed way, what
,
are the Programmed guards to do but take action?
Fabian Foreman went in to see Thomas at the coming
of rainy dawn. He found Thomas unusually placid for a
man scheduled to die that day. The two weighed each
other with cautious eyes, each wondering how many
steps deep into the planning the other had guessed.
“You've given the people a carnival, Thomas,”
Foreman said. “I didn't believe they were any longer
capable of it. They held a rousing wake for you, or
perhaps it was for themselves. We have had very few
executions in recent decades, and none that has grabbed
228
PAST MASTER
the people as this one has. You come very vivid and
colorful to them, much more so than when they made
you World President. They recognize this as something
fitting in you, as though you were bom mainly for this
glory death. It will be your moment, Thomas.”
“Oh, be damned to you, Foreman! I've witnessed
more executions that you have. A people will rise to
one every time, like a fish to the bait, like a very great
Devil-fish I saw rise not long since to a very great bait.
It's the death that gets them, the untimely death. They
love tu see a man die."
“It isn't so, Thomas. There are eight thousand ter-
minations a day in Cosmopolis alone. Almost all are
open to the public, and hardly anyone attends. And they
aren't monotonous things. Many of those having them-
selves terminated devise interesting and bloody deaths
for themselves; they vie with each other in this and
come up with some imaginative ends. The fascination
isn't in seeing a man die; it's in seeing a man die
unwillingly.”
“I wouldn't disappoint them, Foreman. If I go that
road, I sure will not go it willingly. And the other way,
,
to the terminators, I would not go at all. I can't under-
stand a man accepting his end as calmly as that. And yet
there's a whole clutch of people who say this entire
world will end this moming; and all are quite calm
about it. They were a little noisy in the night, though.
It's said that there will be very large crowds gathered
here before noon. Should a man take pride in the fact
that the largest audience he draws in his life is that
which comes to his death?”'
“That whole clutch of people is right, Thomas. This
world, Astrobe (and its old appendage, Earth), will end
.
229
PAST MASTER
a
today. There is no stopping it. It is dying, and it will
die. It is in the article of death now.
“Oh, well then, I suppose a few honest men will
have to get together and start a new world. I've a few
ideas along that line myself.
"Too bad you'll be dead and not able to put them into
effect, Thomas. Well, how do you make a world and
set it to going? George who is in aromatics says that in
the beginning a syrian finds a dromedary, and together
they start a world. Myself, I believe that a new world
always grows out of a single mustard seed. I myself will
plant a mustard seed at exactly nine o'clock this mom-
ing. I expect a new world to grow from it; and I hope I
am alive to enjoy it.”
“You've the hound-dog look, as though it were you
rather than myself who were going to die today, Fore-
man.”
“It could easily happen that I die too, Thomas. There
will be a whiplash reaction to the events of this day, and
any man too close to the action could easily lose a limb
or a life over it. What is that odd stuff you are eating,
a
Thomas?”
“My breakfast. They asked me what I wanted for my
final meal. I believe that ritual requires that I be asked
it. I told them that I wanted to dine on the brains of
my
enemies, on Programmed People brains. They brought
me this. It's a chemical and magnetic mishmash of
polarized memory gelatin. I suppose it is an element,
the non-human element, of Programmed People brains.
Dawn-world people ate their enemies' brains and ac-
quired wit and strength from them. But I doubt if I'll
acquire any wit, and certainly not any humor, from this
bowl of the brains of mine enemy. The stuff isn't very
3
230
PAST MASTER
9
good, but people and Things on Astrobe do take what
you say literally."
“The Programmed Persons aren't our enemies,
Thomas," Foreman said. “They're only shadows of
ourselves, of some of ourselves. Even the fearsome
human thing they are shadow of may not be sheer
enemy.
“Thomas, there are some things I'd like to convey to
you before you die. First of all, your death is absolutely
required. I wish it weren't so.'
And Thomas was studying Foreman with guarded
eyes. Did Foreman (who had been appointed High
Civilian in Charge of Execution) suspect that there
would be a rescue by the hard-heads of Cathead? And if
he did suspect it, would it matter? Foreman was
Thomas' closest friend on Golden Astrobe (as opposed
to Cathead and the Barrio), and he was not at all
committed to the Astrobe Dream, as were the others of
the big men. He seemed now to be showing a quiet
contempt for it. So why did he emphasize that Thomas'
death was absolutely essential? Just how deft of mind
was this man Foreman?
“It is no metaphor about the worlds ending today,
Thomas, Foreman went on. “Or not entirely
metaphor. The worlds do die periodically. 'I wonder
why nobody except myself has noticed this. A world
becomes an unstrung bow, or an unstrung corpse. All
life and heat and pulse goes out of it. It dies, I tell you,
in every bird and plant and rock and animal and person
of it; in every mountain and sea, in every cloud. Its
,
gravity and light and heat, its germ-life and its life-
code, its meaning and its purpose are all extinguished in
an instant. All life goes out of it. It ceases.
19
231
PAST MASTER
9
“After that, I do not know what happens. I have
never personally witnessed the event, though I will
witness it today. I'll have planted a mustard seed, the
smallest of seeds. Something may grow from it, not off
this world, but out of the void and into an entirely
different world. This also, I believe, will take less than
a single second.”
“Fabian, you're full of morning wine," Thomas
laughed. But he smothered his laugh into a crooked
smile. A man due to be executed this day should not
laugh too easily. Somebody might suspect that he was
having the last laugh.
Thomas had his own game to play and his own
emotions to guard. It would be a very nervous business
up to that moment of crisis. He must not betray, even to
his friend Fabian, that when the crowd really began to
gather (shortly after ten o'clock, or two hours before
the execution) it would not be an entirely random
crowd; there would be a segment of that crowd, a strong
slice from the edge to the center, made up of Battersea's
picked men. They would be in the rough clothes of the
Cathead lungers, in the bizarre garb of the citizens of
Wu Town, and in the fine raiment of the people of
Cosmopolis and the other golden cities. And in one
moment, after Thomas had already mounted the scaf.
fold and was ready to put his head on the block, that
segment of the crowd would stiffen into a spear and
drive in and strike. They'd grab him off, and would
then become a comidor bringing him away from there
fast, and then instantaneously by an instant travel booth
already held and programmed. They wouldn't have to
bring him thirty meters to it; and then he would be in the
agreed-on place, and then to a third-stage place which
a
232
PAST MASTER
0
even he did not know yet. He had every confidence in
that hard man Battersea who had been a commando
general, and he had every confidence in himself. But he
must not betray any uneasiness or apprehension, other
than that expected in a man about to be executed.
But damn this Foreman! He gave the impression of
seeing into everything. “I hope my friend is a friend
indeed, " Thomas said to himself.
And Foreman was talking, carefully and heavily, as
though trying very hard to express something. Foreman
had said once that he hated the word ineffable; that
everything that could be understood could be expres-
sed; and that everything could be understood. And yet
he was having a little trouble now.
“I do not believe it at all inevitable that a world be
rebom or replaced by another,”Foreman said now."'It
may have been so once, but it isn't now. But it is
inevitable that a world will die when its short span is
gone. I do not believe that there have been a million
cycles of this in the five hundred million years of
complex life on the worlds. I feel that the cycles were
once of very long duration, and that they shorten and
shorten. They now fill their course about every five
hundred years. And, as thecycle shortens, so does each
succeed another more hardly. Each time it becomes
more difficult for the new world to be born.'
“Bring a little plain talk into the allegory, Fabian,”
Thomas said. “What are you hiding under that flashy
fleece, a sheep or a goat or a dog?”
"A corpse, Thomas, with all the life gone out of
it-yours, and the world Astrobe's. Just that, and
perhaps nothing to follow. Though I have my strong
hopes, and my careful plans.”
.
3
233
PAST MASTER
But Thomas was not really listening to him. “Lis-
ten!” Thomas said. “They're singing a ballad about
me in the square outside. And the Ballad drifted in:
“Thomas is a peculiar guy,
never a clue;
without any head he's better than you.
Blade in the sky
and hackles are high;
without any head he's better than you."
a
“Why, it's gutter music like deprived children in the
Barrio would sing,” Foreman said with strong disap-
proval. “Where have the civilized people of Cos-
mopolis come by such gibberish? One would think
they'd sing something noble."
“It is noble, Fabian. And it's true, by God. Even
without a head I'm better than the whole lot of you that
have been running this show! A thousand years dead,
and I have more life in me than the pack of you. It has
the fine tone of one of the old ballads, and I'd rather
they'd sing me by it than by finer song. I'd give a lot,
Foreman, to watch my own beheading, but the princi-
pal is disadvantaged in this case. I'll give it all I've got,
and I'll have the worst view of all of the rolling head."
“Gallows humor is fine, Thomas, but I am trying
very hard to say something very important. I am not one
of the few who believe in the Beyond, Thomas, though
I have made certain experiments towards inducing be-
lief in myself. They didn't work. I will only say that
there is something in all this that is beyond me. I look at
this scientifically, Thomas, I try to see it by the science
of cosmology and eschatology and psychology (using
•
234
PAST MASTER
the parts of that word as the Greeks used them) and
isostatic balance of the intellect and planetary biology;
and logic and ethical compensation and vitalism; I try to
see it by the soft sciences as well as by the hard ones,
magneto-chemistry and neucleo-physics. I ask scienti-
fically what is the real phenomenon here: that the
worlds do die periodically; and that, in previous cases
at least, they live again an instant later. But the new
worlds are not identical with what they were, having
only the cloudiest and most fragmented memory of
what they had been the instant before, and no real
identity with the previous thing. But that this does
happen is scientific (known and observed) fact-
known to me, at least.
“You yourself were in on one of the previous deaths
of the worlds, Thomas. Have you any strong idea about
what really happened?"
Thomas was not too clear about what Foreman was
getting at. And Foreman, moreover, though he talked
rapidly and seriously as though this were of the utmost
importance, seemed to be listening for some token, for
some signal.
“It isn't necessary that you explain a difficult thing
to me at this moment,” Thomas said. “If I die, then at
the Particular Judgment I will receive all such know-
ledge from One more facile with words than yourself. If
I do not die, then we can talk of this again in a calmer
time.”
“I've been searching for a gentle way to tell you,
,
Thomas; you will die this moming, and all other hopes
are vain. And as I do not believe in either the Particular
or the General Judgment or in Things Beyond at all, I
do not believe you will receive these ideas if you do not
235
PAST MASTER
9)
receive them from me now. And I want you to have
them.
“Oh, as to the end of my own world, Foreman, no I
do not have any strong idea about what really hap-
pened. I study back and try to construct it. I am shown,
as it were, a house and a town and a world, and I am
informed that this was the house and the town and the
world that I lived in, that this is the true picture of those
good things immediately after I left them. And I am
puzzled. I lived in that house and town? I myself? I
I
hardly recognize a stick or stone of it. I hardly recog-
nize a person of it, and yet hundreds of them bear the
names of persons I knew well. I don't believe your
instant death and rebirth thing for the worlds; but there
was a sudden fundamental change in my own world,
near about the sudden end of my own life. And I don't
.
understand it at all.
"'Foreman, you butter-mouthed Barnabas, what do
you mean that I will die this morning and that all other
hope is vain? Tell me or I'll throttle you here. What do
you know about what I know?”'
'
“Why, nothing, Thomas, nothing at all. Is it not
assumed that you will die? Is there some doubt about it?
Would anybody be happier than I if you could be
delivered from it in any manner whatsoever?''
?'
“Foreman, you have all the innocence of a ninety-
nine year old serpent. Well, go on with your thing! I'm
something of a critic of historical theses, and we have
long hours to pass before my killing.”
“That's another thing I've been searching for a gen-
tle way to tell you, Thomas: we do not have long hours,
we have only short minutes. We have this cycle,
Thomas. At the time of the birth of Christ, the clear
a
236
PAST MASTER
cruel Roman Republic (under the first Emperor who
considered himself a Republican) died in an instant;
and an instant afterwards the Late Empire was bom
full-grown. It was always the Late Empire; it was an
aftemoon and evening thing. And there was really not
much resemblance between those worlds; the simple
cruel thing, and the completely bizarre thing, at the
same time cruel and compassionate, that was the Late
Empire. Five hundred years later it happened again.
The Empire was gone like moming frost, and the
Lower Middle Ages, completely different, obtained. In
another five hundred years, the High Middle Ages
followed on the corpse of the Low, and there was never
such difference as between these two worlds. In
another five hundred years, the High Middle Ages died
(as did you yourself), and another thing was born which
you are not able to recognize although it carried names
that
you knew well. And after another five hundred
years, that world died completely. A new world was
bom instantly, and the first settlement of Astrobe coin-
cided with that rebirth. This new thing became the
World of Astrobe, as Old Earth lost importance and
meekly followed our world. This is the world that dies
this moming, and I am worried about it.
“This is the first time the cycle has been completed
on Astrobe, and each time it happens, it seems that the
rebirth is less likely to succeed. I don't know what goes
on when a world dies; there must be, I believe, a bit of
the transcendent yeast to make it rise again. Something
must trigger a reaction. There was building a reaction to
the “Ban the Beyond” push, and the blood of the
spotted lamb (yourself) will cinch it. The previous
yeastings were all such simple things, but they were
237
PAST MASTER
6
necessary. There really is this necessity that a small
quantity of the immaterial (however it is named in the
equation) be added to the mass every five hundred years
or so. It may be a simple chemical-psychic requirement
.
which we do not understand. Myself, who have sought
and been unable to find personal faith, am inclined to
believe that it is no more than this. But the requirement
is there that something be added now and then, or the
worlds will not live again. Your death and the reaction
to it will be the trigger, the mustard seed. We plant it
now.”
Battersea, is all well with you? Are you watching the
clock? Only a few more hours.
"Ten minute call!” pinged a mechanical voice.
“All right, Thomas,” Foreman said. “We go now to
your end. Come, come.”
“Now? Are you out of your mind? It's not yet eight
o'clock. I die at noon. Nothing is ready, nothing-
“The scaffold is ready, Thomas, and the blade is
ready. Here, here, good devices, pinion him! He's got a
streak of the heroic in him. I am sorry, Thomas, but
there was no other way to do it.
“Get your tin talons off me, you devil toys! Eternal
damnation! Who changed the time, Foreman?”
"I did, Thomas. You die at eight o'clock. There was
no other way to do it.'
“No, no, I die at noon! Foreman, do
you understand
what you're doing?''
“Perfectly. I guessed all about the Battersea thing,
of course. He was a fine commando general in his way;
;
and I was his commander. I could always read him, and
I picked up the details easily."
238
PAST MASTER
9
a
9
“Why do you murder me, Foreman? I counted you a
friend. And you have no loyalty to the Astrobe thing."
“No, I have no loyalty to the Astrobe corpse,
Thomas, and I am your friend. I assure you that there
was no other way to bring it off. The reaction to your
foul murder, joined to many other long-building things,
should touch off a terrible reaction: the rediscovery of
humanity—don't you believe a world can be rebom out
of that, Thomas? It only takes one shot to signal a
charge.”
“I say no man ever before slew his friend for such a
silly mouthful of words."
"And I say it has happened many times before.
Consider the Assassinations, Thomas, you who are
something of a critic of historical theses. Consider
whether the Heroes have not more often been assassi-
nated by friends than by enemies; consider whether
some of them have not even been assassinated with
their own consent.
“I don't consent.
"If everything else has failed, if a program has fallen
to nothing, if the hero would make a better hero when
a
dead, then he was made a dead hero by his friends, for
his own sake and the sake of his program. I could name
a dozen clear cases of this, but I won't; strong partisan
feelings are still involved in some of them after the
centuries. —Thomas, my friend, you'd have throttled
me if you'd broken loose then. Tighter with him,
guards, and now walk him along. This has to be fast or
something might spoil it.”
“It's a thing to make you doubt your friends, my
friend,'' Thomas growled to him as he fought with his
)
.
239
PAST MASTER
Programmed guards. “Why me, Fabian? Why did you
call me to it?''
“You were the only ultimately honest man I could
think of, Thomas, and I considered a lot of them. You'd
shown it before, stubborn honesty unto death even for a
point which you hardly came to understand at the end. I
reasoned that you had done it once and you would do it
again in similar circumstances. I reasoned that you had
a curious magnetism about you, that you had become a
,
symbol once, and that you would become a symbol
again. We had almost run out of symbols on Astrobe.”
“I die for it, and I don't even know what it's about,”
Thomas moaned as they dragged him out to the scaf-
fold. And dragging him was a battle. He set up a noise.
“People people!" he shouted in his high and sandy
voice. “There's nowt right about this thing! Smash the
high trickery!"
And the people had begun to gather, tame people
with a new wild look about them. Like wolves they
were, and they snuffed and howled. Panlykonium
reigned in Centrality Square, and the air sparked with
danger.
Nevertheless, by setting the time early, Foreman had
surprised the opposition; and the execution would be
brought off if it could be done quickly. Thomas fought
the mechanical guards who dragged him out, but they
brought him to a standstill before Pottscamp, who had a
last official thing to convey.
“Will you reconsider?” Pottscamp asked Thomas as
he confronted him in the middle of Centrality Square
right at the foot of the scaffold. It was required by ritual
that this be asked. “It is so easy to save your life, good
Thomas,” the Pottscamp went on. "Sign now, and live
240
PAST MASTER
66
happily. Or die meanly. In that case I will succeed as
Surrogate President, and I will have signed the bill
within five minutes. And you, Thomas, will have died
for nothing."
*Snake-in-my-brain, I will not have died for the
Ouden-nothing! I will not sign! I see now what Thing
you are trying to kill, and to me it is the only Thing that
matters. So late I have come back to it. I will not
reconsider. On with it, guards! Off with my head if only
to close my ears to this babble! Out of my way, you
damnable jump-jack!”
They took Thomas up the steps of the scaffold. And
Pottscamp fled as though stricken. What? What? How
would he flee as though stricken?
This was spectacle. The magnetic man with the mys-
tery about him was up on the death tower with the
whole world watching, and he was even more in com-
mand than at the time of his ovation on his public
coming into Cosmopolis.
Kingmaker and Proctor watched it from high win-
dows and justified themselves. It was easy for Proctor;
he had justification programmed into him.
Nobody knows what Foreman felt when he watched
Thomas taken up the scaffold.
Pottscamp felt nothing; he was, of course, a machine
without feeling. He had no conscience or compassion.
This would not bother him at all.
It wouldn't?
Then why did he?
Then why did he—WHAT?
Saton the ground and moaned and howled like an old
Hebrew. And poured dust and ashes over his head.
You're crazy. He really did that?
.
.
241
PAST MASTER
He really did that.
Thomas More had been World President, King, for
nine days. And now he would die.
The early-moming rain had stopped, and now there
was a rush to complete the act. The men from Cathead,
so rumor went, had received word of the sudden change
of time. They were mobbing toward the center of Cos-
mopolis, but they might well be too late.
Smooth and swift and calculated, the execution, and
there was nothing could stop it.
There was one wave of fury, a minute thing as to the
bulk of it, but incomparably savage. There is always
one such small mad wave, rising to foaming and furious
height all out of proportion to its bulk, that rises and
strikes a very few moments before a true tidal wave or
world-wave strikes. It is called the forerunner wave.
Buff Shanty and Paul with the crooked face were in
it, each driving in with an impetus equal to that of many
men. Walter Copperhead was in it—though, being a
necromancer, he must have known that it was futile,
that he would die in it, that they would all die in it. The
boy Adam was in it; and possibly thirty other persons,
fine people of Cosmopolis and not rowdy outlanders,
were in on the rush and died in it.
Its suddenness almost gave it success. The impetu-
ous men bowled over the mechanical guards and gained
the scaffold steps. Then the fighting was close, and
they gave one life for every step they ascended. The
boy Adam was really the crest of the wave, for he got all
the way up the scaffold and touched Thomas. And he
was flung all the way down with crushing force by the
guards with their grapples. And yet he was up again,
242
PAST MASTER
2
9)
brokenly going after them. Shanty and Paul and Cop-
perhead and Adam, and the thirty or more other per-
sons, died around the foot of the scaffold and on the
steps, making them slippery with their blood. The boy
Adam, in particular, died magnificently as he always
did.
But the wave had no real bulk, and the guards were
too many and strong. The thrust crested and shattered,
and then it was over with, ebbing out in its blood.
But Evita, knowing that it would fail, knowing in-
stantly that it would all fail, had surged not towards
Thomas on the high platform, but towards Fabian
Foreman, who stood on the edge of Centrality Square.
“Zehheeroot, Is-Kerioth," she howled at him, for
they were both of the old people: “'Beware, Iscariot."
Then she had him like a lioness taking a frightened ass,
swiping half his face red with her claws and biting into
his throat to set up a throbbing red fountain.
“'Let go me, you witch!'' Foreman screamed in
sudden terror.
'a
“I be a cold fury and not a witch," she emitted with a
purring rumble. “Woe to him by whom it comes. You
told a History to the Thomas, and I tell one to you as
you die." And she was killing him as she growled the
words. “Certain primitives were wont to kill a dog to
be company to the hero on his death journey. I am such
a primitive. You are such a dog."
And she was practically dismembering him. She had
broken his shoulder and possibly his back. She was
tearing him apart.
“No, no, woman!" Foreman gasped as the blood
pulsed out of his torn throat. “I'm the master of it all. It
has to be this way. The furious reaction, the transcen-
)
243
PAST MASTER
a
a
dent yeast will set humanity back into its proper place
again and let a new world be bom.'
“I know it!” Evita sang. “I'm a bunch of that
transcendent yeast. I'm the heart of that furious reac-
tion! I revel in it. And we've had a dog for puppeteer all
this late time. No wonder it's been a time of trouble."
She broke his face completely with a lioness blow. It
was a sad time for Foreman,, who had always rather
withdrawn from violence, he had been a desk general
and not a field general.
Evita threw him over her shoulder, though he was a
shapeless and heavy man, and carried him with that
tawny ease with which a lioness carries her prey, car-
ried him to where George the syrian and Maxwell the
old crone and Rimrock the ansel were grouped to-
gether. She threw him to them, and the four of them
tore him to pieces and killed him.
Evita took the biggest piece of Foreman that was left
and hanged it on an omamental tree on the edge of
Centrality Square. It was a Carob tree from Old Earth,
sometimes called the Judas Tree.
It was unjust. Foreman had done his part well. He
had planned it all, except that special little bit by which
he lost his life. And everything that he had planned was
meant well.
The programmed guards got George and Maxwell
and Rimrock and added their blood to the transcenden-
tal yeast that was beginning to work. They did not get
the Evita. Nobody would get her till the thing was done.
Things went smoothly after those little outbreaks.
The crowds were kept back, for the guards were very
efficient. There was one man who broke through and
nobody was able to stop him. Indeed, the programmed
244
PAST MASTER
guards did not seem able to see him or sense him. This
stranger went right up to Thomas on the scaffold and
spoke to him, though only Thomas appeared able to
hear his words.
They discussed, the condemned man and the
stranger that the guards did not seem able to see.
Thomas seemed both excited and pleased.
“Will it work, do you think?'' he cried loudly with
what was almost delight. "How droll! Can a man have
more heads than two? I'll do it. I'll go with you."
But apparently Thomas didn't go anywhere but to his
death. The stranger disappeared down and back into the
crowd, or some said that he disappeared into the
charged air. There would be guesses as to his identity.
There were those who said that something disappeared
from Thomas at the same moment that he left in his
essence, and that it was a shadow man who put his head
on the block. A weird old woman cried out that she
could see through him; but this was illusion.
The rest of it is legend stuff. All of it, the quips and
the epigrams and the profound and moving things that
Thomas was supposed to have said at the chopping
block: well, some of them were pretty good, some of
them were almost too cute, and most of them are in the
books of quotations. The only thing amiss is that he
didn't say any of them.
He hadn't said them the first time either.
The only last words that he said on the scaffold were
"Pater, in manus taus-" a scrap of an old prayer.
The big blade trembled in the sky. Then it fell. It was
real blood that spurted and a real hand that rolled clear
from the corpus as though it had a life of its own.
245
PAST MASTER
There would be wild stories, the prodigies, the old
wives' tales—such as nine snakes slithering out of the
severed head; such as the most beautiful woman of
Astrobe going up the scaffold and boldly taking the
head in a basket, and being tumed into an old woman
when she came down with it. But no such things really
happened. They could not have.
But one thing did really happen at that moment. At
the moment that life flickered out of the beheaded
corpus, the worlds came to an end.
All life and heat and pulse went out of the world. It
died in every bird and rock and plant and person of it,
in every mountain and sea and cloud. It died in its
gravity and light and heat, in its germ-life and in its
life-code. Everything ceased. And all the stars went
out.
Was it for a moment? Or a billion years? Or forever?
There is no difference in them, when the world is
ended, when there is no time to measure time by.
Remember how it had been at the moment when the
worlds ended? A priest renegade for thirty years had
just become Metropolitan of Astrobe. A programmed
machine had, at the moment of the extinction of the
worlds, succeeded to president of Astrobe: an emotion-
less machine. But he had wailed and poured ashes over
his head.
Battersea and his men were mobbing towards Cen-
trality Square to begin their bloody coup, mobbing in
furiously under their Hand-of-Vengeance banner. On
such notes the worlds ended.
And is a new world born? Is a new world yeasted?
The furious reaction, does it bridge the gap? The mus-
246
PAST MASTER
>
tard seed, does it grow? The Judas tree, what fruit did it
bear?
Lightning, a billion times as bright as that on Electric
Mountain, a billion times as short in duration, does it
lace the things together with its instantaneous fire, or
sunder them forever? Thunder that flattens worlds with
the shock of it, and a tidal wave, a world wave carrying
away the golden fungus from the orb! In much less than
an instant, in much more than forever, it is over with.
But has it sequence? Does a new world follow the old
in that blinding flash? Does it come?
a
Be quiet. We watch.
The Hand-of-Vengeance banner, is its symbol mis-
understood? Northprophet says that that figured hand
coming down like a bird is the Left Hand of God.
Remember (and we remember as in a void of time
between worlds) the turn of the cycle that gave birth to
Rome? The one that gave birth to Europe? The one that
gave birth to the Americas? The one that gave birth to
Astrobe? Remember the cycles whose effect was inter-
nal and electrifying, the one where divinity became
humanity? The one where humanity became divinity?
And remember that special one, the first rebirth of
Astrobe, the appearance of transcendent humanity?
Remember it? Then it happened?
Be quiet. We wait.
The spirit came down once on water and clay. Could
it not come down on gell-cells and flux-fix? The sterile
wood, whether of human or programmed tree, shall it
247
PAST MASTER
fruit after all? The Avid Nothingness, the diabolically
empty Point-Big-0, is it cast away again? Is there then
room for life? Shall there be retum to real life?
Well, does it happen? Does the reaction become the
birthing? What does it look like?
Will we see it now, in face and rump, the new-bom
world?
Be quiet. We hope.
248
About the Author ...
RAPHAELALOYSIUS LAFFERTY was born in
Iowa, moved to Oklahoma when four years old,
and has been there ever since except for travel and
four and one-half years in the army. Now in his
fifties, Lafferty describes himself as “a correspon-
dence school electrical engineer" who has worked
for electrical jobbers most of his life. He has pub-
lished scores of stories both in the science fiction
magazines and such journals as New Mexico Quar-
terly, Literary Review, etc., and has been reprinted
with increasing frequency in best-of-the-year an-
thologies.
