AN ACE SCIENCE FICTION SPECIAL 24590| 754
ace
book
FOURTH MANSIONS by R.A. LAFFERTY
A
THE NEW NOVEL BY
THE AUTHOR OF
PAST MASTER
“R. A. Lafferty has always been uniquely his own man,
but in this book he surpasses himself. It is wild, subtle,
demonic, angelic, hilarious, tragic, poetic, a thundering
melodrama and a quest into the depths of the human
spirit. You'll think about it for a long time and probably
go back to it more than once." -POUL ANDERSON
"Whom the gods would destroy, they should first
have read FOURTH MANSIONS. The closest comparison
I can think of is a psychedelic morality play where the
Virtues and Vices keep sneaking offstage and switching
masks. One comes away from it as one awakens from
a dream."
-ROGER ZELAZNY
"Raphael Aloysius Lafferty is one prodigious liar and
FOURTH MANSIONS is his best and longest lie. It's as
strange and inventive a book as I have ever read, like
some fantastic amalgam of A. E. van Vogt and The
Circus of Dr. Lao, but no one would have written it this
way but Lafferty."
-ALEXEI PANSHIN
COVER ART BY LEO & DIANE DILLON
R. A. Lafferty, a unique and fascinating writer,
combines soaring imagination with matter-of-fact
common sense, an almost lyrical writing style and
strange, biting satire. In FOURTH MANSIONS he
gives us a weird over-view of reality, in a story of:
Seven very special people blending to create a
higher form of humanity;
A laughing man living alone on a mountaintop,
guarding the world;
The returnees, men who live again and again,
century after century;
A dog-ape plappergeist who can be seen only
from the corner of the eye;
-
- And a young man named Foley, very much like
you or me, who begins to find out about these people
and these things, and how they are shaping the
destiny of the world.'...
RAPHAEL ALOYSIUS LAFFERTY was born in lowa, moved
to Oklahoma when four years old, and has been there ever
since except for travel and four and a half years in the
army. Now in his fifties, Lafferty describes himself as "a
correspondence school electrical engineer" who has worked
for electrical jobbers most of his life. He has published scores
of stories in both the science fiction magazines and such
journals as New Mexico Quarterly, Literary Review, etc.
His first published novel was PAST MASTER, an Ace Science
Fiction Special that was nominated for both the Nebula
and Hugo Awards as Best SF Novel of 1968. His other
novels to date are. SPACE CHANTEY (Ace) and THE REEFS
OF EARTH (Berkley). An omnibus volume of Lafferty's short
stories and novelettes will be published next year as an SF
Special.
FOURTH MANSIONS by R.A. LAFFERTY
AN ACE BOOK
Ace Publishing Corporation
1 120 Avenue of the Americas
New York, N.Y. 10036
FOURTH MANSIONS
Copyright ©, 1969, by R. A. Lafferty
An Ace Book. All Rights Reserved.
Printed in U.S.A.
CONTENTS
Chapter
1
I Think I will Dismember the World
with my Hands
7
11 Either Awful Dead or Awful Old
26
III If They Can Kill You, I Can Kill You
Worse
41
IV
Liar on the Mountain
64
V Helical Passion and Saintly Sexpot
82
VI
102
Revenge of Strength Unused
Of Elegant Dogs and Returned Men
VII
117
VIII The Line of Your Throat, the
Mercurial Movement
135
IX
But I Eat Them Up, Federico,
I Eat Them Up
156
X Are You Not of Flimsy Flesh To
Be So Afraid?
173
191
XI "I Did Not Call You," said the Lord
XII Fourth Mansions
XIU And All Tall Monsters Stand
208
231
I: I THINK I WILL DISMEMBER THE WORLD
WITH MY HANDS
“For there are all these obstacles for us to meet and
there is also the danger of serpents."
Interior Castle: Teresa of Avila
THERE IS entwined seven-tentacled lightning. It is fire-
masses, it is sheets, it is arms. It is seven-colored writh-
ing in the darkness, electric and alive. It pulsates, it
sends, it sparkles, it blinds!
It explodes!
It is seven murderous thunder-snakes striking in seven
directions along the ground! Blindingly fastl Under your
feetl Now! At youl
And You! You who glanced in here for but a moment,
you are already snake-bit/
It is too late for you to withdraw. The damage is done
to you. That faintly odd taste in your mouth, that small-
est of tingles which you feel, they signal the snake-death.
Die a little. There is reason for it.
а
There was a young man who had very good eyes but
simple brains. Nobody can have everything. His name
was Freddy Foley and he was arguing with a man
named Tankersley who was his superior.
“Just how often do you have to make a total fool of
yourself, Foley?” Tankersley asked him sharply. Tankers-
ley was a kind man, but he had a voice like a whip.
a
7
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
"An enterprising reporter should do it at least once a
week, sir, or he isn't covering the ground,” Fred Foley
said seriously.
“You do it oftener,” said Tankersley. “Why is your
nose bleeding, Foley?”
“I do it oftener because I'm more enterprising than
your other reporters. Oh, my nose bleeds every time I
get caught a good one there."
As all cats (and especially tigers) are loose in their
skins, this Freddy Foley was loose in his face. There
was room there for far more things than his winking
innocence and his easy grin. There was room for multi-
plex character that Freddy hadn't developed yet, for
expressions he had never used. It was a face unplowed,
though momentarily bloodied.
"This should count for several times,” Tankersley went
on. “This goes beyond being a total fool. Do you know
what position Carmody Overlark holds?”
"Special Assistant to Secretary of State."
“Right, Foley. And you come here with this cock and
bull story-"
“Capon and steer story rather. Surely you know that
much about the Mamelukes.”
"And because his given name is Carmody, and be-
cause there lived more than five hundred years ago a
man named Khar-ibn-Mod- Say, your head is gashed
badly tool Did someone do it to you on purpose?”
“Yeah, they tried to kill me, I think. And this Khar-ibn-
Mod had the exact appearance of Carmody Overlark.
It's a face that could happen only once."
"Some similarity. An old woodcut is hard to compare
with a face that neither of us has seen except on paper
or screen. Who tried to kill you, Foley?!
“I don't know exactly. I could figure it out, but this
Carmody Overlark story is much more important, and I
request permission to follow it out.
"Well, you are most certainly denied that permission,
8
a
>
>
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
Foley. How would a man who died five or six hundred
years ago?”
“But we don't know that he died. History is strangely
silent on that point.”
“History is strangely silent on millions of small details.
History would more likely note it if he didn't die. And
that is all you have?”
“Oh no, Mr. Tankersley. I've come on quite a few
more details and they all confirm my theory. The diffi-
culty is that they sound a little improbable. If you won't
accept the possibility that Carmody Overlark and Khar-
ibn-Mod are the same man, then you sure won't accept
the less conventional details. They make the main state-
ment sound like the time of day."
“And I'm about to bid you the time of day, Foley. I
believe I'll put you on the seismic disturbance case.”
“No sir. I already know all about that. It isn't interest-
ing when you know it.”
“You know what's causing the low-grade seismic dis-
turbances coming from the hills northwest of the city
these last several evenings? Then you know more than
quite a few smart people know. Tell me, Foley.”
“No sir. You'd believe me even less than you believe
the Carmody stuff. They aren't low-grade disturbances,
though. There's a lot of twisted stuff in that bunch but
it isn't low-grade. It isn't even physical. The little earth-
quake jolts are mental, but they fool the people who
feel them.
“I don't believe you know what low-grade means in
this sense, Foley. But they certainly are physical. Men-
tal jolts will not fool or affect instruments.
“Yes, Mr. Tankersley, I believe they will. But I want
to stay on the Carmody story. Mr. Tankersley, did you
ever feel that someone is sucking out your blood or ichor,
draining you of the fluid that might let you become a
little more than a man? Or did you ever feel that there
9
FOURTH MANSIONS
was a net cast over us and we were all held in this
net by a hegemony of spiders as yet unidentified?”
“Those spiders are my reporters, Foley, and they do
spin some pretty thin stuff. Now I will tell you one
thing: there are stories that reappear with the same
faces when they should have been dead for more than
five hundred years. And there's a special aspect to re-
appearing stories about reappearing men: follow one
out and you will be killed for it every time. I don't
know why this is so but I tell you that it is. They may
have attempted you already and you too dumb to
know it.
“No sir, I'm not too dumb to know it. I know they're
trying to kill me cr scare me to death.”
“Ah, why don't you take off the rest of the day and
get drunk, Foley?”
“I did that Monday on your advice. I'd still rather have
followed up that case.
"Well, it was better than having you go off quarter-
cocked on the Knoll story. That would really have got-
ten us laughed out of town. And this thing now, drop it!
No more Carmody stuff. No more stuff of men who
live for centuries or who live more than once. Try one
more bender for my sake now, and I hope to see you
tomorrow morning, red-eyed and trembling, with your,
ah, sanity restored, and ready for work. Get out of here
>
>
now.
“Yes sir,” Freddy Foley said, and he got out.
Good eyes but simple brains, that was Foley. He really
could see at levels where many folks cannot, where Tank-
ersley could not; where even Jim Bauer sometimes
could not.
The Harvesters had begun to meet in the evenings at
10
FOURTH MANSIONS
the home of James Bauer. It was a nice place on a hill-
side above a lake and Bauer had named it Morada,
the mansion.
(“Morada," an ashen voice conveyed, “besides mean-
ing a dwelling place, means a sojourn; but morada also
means mulberry-colored, or violet, or purple: the color
of the sky at dusk in mid-winter, the color of snakes in
shade.”)
There were seven of the Harvesters. It takes at least
seven to make up a set at brain-weaving, and this was
their favorite game. They met in the evenings especially,
and often in the daytimes, for they all had a sort of
entanglement going about each other. Apart from each
other they were powerful in their persons. Together
they became critical mass.
Morada was the home of Jim Bauer and his wife Leti-
tia. The Manions and the Silverios lived quite close
by, and this made six-just short of the critical mass.
Bedelia Bencher was free to be anywhere at any
time. Now she came to Morada every evening. She com-
pleted the weave. Thereupon there were low-grade
seismic disturbances, earthquake jolts which were men-
tal but which fooled instruments and men.
The weave was a most peculiar perfect circle-it had
two discrete ends. One was the airy Bedelia Bencher.
The other was the massive Jim Bauer.
This Jim Bauer was in oils, in the splotchy sort of
oil-painting that Eakins did do well, that should have
been sketchy in result, and wasn't.
(Wait-a bird just fell to earth not eighty feet from
this Bauer; fell to earth with every bone in its body
broken. It was a large dusk-flying bird of the kind that is
called Night-Hawk, and it fell with resounding concus-
sion. Only a bird that is already dead will fall heavily
like that. Nothing to be done about a dead bird. Con-
tinue.)
Even when in motion, James Bauer seemed always to
11
FOURTH MANSIONS
be posed for such a portrait. He was a big, young-looking
man, and it was all choice beef that hung on him. He
had a rich voice and he had been a rich boy. This still
made a difference to the two other men present (or
coming into presence), though they all were passing
rich now. These three had been to grade school together
at St. Michaels, and they still adhered together for all
the differences and years. It made a difference that
Jim Bauer had been the rich kid, that he had been to
Europe and to Rio while he was still a boy, that he had
been off to rich-kid boarding schools some of the years.
It made a difference that he had known the names of
operas and things like that, that he had had French cig-
arettes in French packs when the other ten-year-old kids
could hardly come by one cigarette a week.
And this rich-kid air still clung to Jim. A large part of
his aura, of his psychic power, was built out of the group
remembrance of such things. Well, what is any person's
influence built out of if not of trivial but clinging things?
Bauer means farmer or peasant, which Jim certainly
was not. It means a knave too. It also means a pawn at
chess, but Jim Bauer believed that he was no one's pawn.
He was a biologist at Bio-Lab of America. He was a
New-Left Actionist; so had his father been, so had his
grandfather been. He called himself a Centrist, but he
belonged to the eccentric. He was intelligent, or at least
of very tough brains, startling mental stamina and well-
bottomed memory. He was a pan-math, a catchword
artist. He was the Bishop's left-hand man. Jim said that
he himself was a privileged. mutation, that the whole
world was mutating, that it could only be saved by such
privileged mutations as were the Harvesters.
Bauer had invented the seven-handed game of brain-
weaving. Do not try it! It is a seven-bladed sword; it
is no joke. It really can be done, and that is the fearful
part of it. Bauer said that it was a patio game; he also
said that the health and balance of the world depended
12
FOURTH MANSIONS
on the seven of them playing it well. Bauer spoke with
a colorful and intricate rumble. He had copied that rum-
ble from someone; he had practiced it and developed
it. It was a part of his psychic power now. It was a per-
sonage rumble.
Bedelia Bencher came onto the patio at Morada, and
certain flowers in a bowl lifted their heads and followed
her.
"I thought those were artificial flowers,” Bedelia
piqued.
"They are,” said Letitia Bauer, “but they've learned to
raise their heads when you come just as natural flowers
do.”
“Has your little Freddy busted on this one yet, Be-
delia?” Bauer gave out with his clattering rumble, he
also lifting his head at Bedelia's coming. “Have you
heard any echos that he's busted on Carmody Overlark?
Oh, Freddy is our patsy and our proof! Let us no longer
doubt that we can influence minds distantly when we
put minds together here. We can sift Freddy Foley like
wheat. Soon we'll be able to sift the whole world. It
comes the harvest, Harvesters! We can brain-weave,
we can influence. 'Bust grandly over the man Carmody
Overlark,' we wove to Freddy, and he caught it across
town. 'Goof gloriously, Freddy!' we wove, and I felt him
take it up. How could anyone touch a man like Carmody
Overlark? But your little Freddy has busted on him,
I know it, I feel it! It was about mid-afternoon today.
Have you heard echoes of it, Bedelia?”
“Echoes? Earth-rumbles!" Biddy Bencher crinkled.
“Tankersley called my father; my father called me.
You'll have to find another boyfriend to play with,'
my father said. “You find me one who's so much fun,' I
told my father. Tankersley called me. 'If your father
didn't own such a piece of this paper this kid would
have to go,' Tankersley told me. 'Why do you fool with
the fool anyhow, Biddy? he asked me. 'He's out of his
2
>
13
FOURTH MANSIONS
mind, that Foley kid. He's clear crazy, and he hardly
seems to realize that he is. You can't hang a story like
that on a dog. “But what was it, Mr. Tankersley, what
was it?' I asked in my innocent way. 'Wild fillies couldn't
tear that story out of me, Biddy,' he said. You couldn't
hang a story like that on a dog; how could you hang it
on a man as untouchable as Carmody Overlark?' But I
don't know what it is yet.”
This Bedelia (Biddy) Bencher was a drawing in red
chalk by Matisse. She was red-haired and lightly freck-
led and beautifully bony (the last her own description).
She had a lustful mouth and innocent eyes, and was full
,
of green passion. She was nineteen years old and had
been nineteen for quite a while.
"How can anyone as stupid as you are have a near-
genius rating?” her father once ranted. “Those mind-
raters must be out of their minds."
“But I've always been near genius, dear Father," Biddy
had answered. “We have always been close.”
Biddy had no mother. She had been born, she said,
near-grown and nubile from her father's forehead. “You
can see the scar yet,” she'd say, and the father Richard
Bencher did have a livid scar across his forehead, but he
had a different explanation for it. Biddy did have a
brain, however, and the seven-minded game of brain-
weaving would have been impossible without her.
“Find out, Biddy, what little Freddy has pulled!” Sal-
zy (Ensalzamienta) Silverio cried as she materialized
there on the patio. This Salzy was a bit by Degas, yet
he would never have guessed the twisted passion of this
dark, gay, unsmiling young woman. “Not twisted,"
Salzy once said of her own passion, “it is helical. That
sounds better.”
(A mouse in mimosa roots nine feet from Salzy was
blinded with blood and died quietly with its brains ex-
ploded. Odd, though: that mouse died with a smile.
14
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Salzy, in the aura of her, was a gentle and unknowing
murderess of many small bits of the ambient.)
“We will not do another thing that involves Cannody
Overlark directly,” Arouet Manion said dimly. It did not
seem that these persons arrived at Morada or entered
the patio there. It seemed that they were already there
in potential and now became realized, one by one.
"We went for Carmody by name and face; we wanted
him to play a hilarious joke on himself at a diplomatic
function. And he exploded back at us, almost blew our
brains out. Yet there is a vacuum there also. He isn't
real, you know. We aren't the only ones who have stum-
bled onto brain-weaving. I can hear that Cannody laugh-
ing in my mind yet, and him more than a thousand miles
away all the time. And when we linked him with the
Foley caper I felt him flow through our minds again.
‘Goof gloriously, Freddy,' we wove, but Overlark him-
self added something to that weaving. I'm almost afraid
to find what idiocy Freddy has busted this time.
This Arouet Manion was a Reynolds piece. Having
a Reynolds face, he appeared more profound than he
was. But that maker touched many of his characters
with his irony. (One hundred yards away a good man
fell from grace in an instant, sinning silently to himself,
and then reaching for the telephone to actualize that
sin; it was the sin of calumny. It was not an ordinary sin
to this man. It came to him in a wave of sticky evil, as
an outside influence.) Manion had a size and strength
of both mind and body. It might be of poor quality, but
there was a lot of it, enlivened by boundless energy.
Manion was a doctor, a psychiatrist. He was a semi-
pro psychologist and an amateur philosopher. He was
also a Teilhardian and a concordist. Being so, he was a
man completely without humor, but also there was
nothing serious in him. Turgid, yes, but not serious. But
he was one of those who were beginning to move the
world, literally.
>
15
FOURTH MANSIONS
"We need a new target," sparked Wing Manion, who
crackled in the air every time she moved. (Was Wing
Manion as sparky a woman as that?) “I say,
let our new
target be Michael Fountain. He's the most informed man
we know. He is also, I believe, the best man we know.
It's simply that he's a man of no energy at all. A low-
pressure fountain is our Michael. Let's weave power for
him, then, so he can move the world. He's the one we
need to be Lord of the Harvest.'
Wing Manion reminded one of a fish done by Paul
Klee: not in her actual appearance, of course, but in
her style. Yet she was good-looking, and Klee never
painted a good-looking fish in his life. Those Klee fishes,
though, they have passion.
(Instruments at a seismograph lab in the city picked
up low-grade seismic disturbance as Wing Manion solidi-
fied into the group, bringing it nearer to critical mass.
These curious little jolting earthquakes had been re-
corded for several evenings and there were distracting
elements to them. Really, they were not real. “Impul-
sion without content,” was the interpreted reading of the
seismometers. Without content? Wing Manion? Those
machines are feebleminded.)
Wing Manion was devoted, she was kind. She loved
kids, she even loved rocks. Biddy Bencher said that
Wing Manion was a sexpot who happened to be a saint
and so was complicated back on herself. Being married
to an incompetent psychologist didn't help.
“Don't you think we're being a little too godly in all
this?” Hondo Silverio asked the bunch of them. Hondo
startled them all anew every time he came into pres-
ence, struck them with shivers of fear or at least strange-
ness. Yet there was no better man anywhere. "Has God
called us to be Harvesters? Jim Bauer says that God
has called him. Arouet Manion says that God-in-process
has called him. Well, nobody has called me except my
own depths, and those caverns aren't to be trusted.
>
16
22
FOURTH MANSIONS
We've stumbled onto a trick that frightens me. We really
can move men and mountains. We really can deter-
mine, to an extent, what the world will be. Shouldn't
we be giving rather than taking?”
“No, we should take always,” Jim Bauer said. “We are
Harvesters and we harvest.
“We have come onto the trick of amplifying and pro-
jecting psychic energy,” Hondo continued. “Look outi By
a trick or coincidence, we are all of us people of power-
ful passion carelessly channeled. By another trick we
could turn into rutting animals. We are a bunch of
psychic athletes, but we are neither very good nor
very wise people. What right have we to pour fire into
Michael Fountain or into anybody? We came onto an
easy and harmless vehicle in Freddy Foley. He doesn't
know what hit him, but I think he enjoys being the half-
cocked fool. But we ran into stark and laughing mys-
tery when we tackled Camody Overlark himself. It's
almost as if he were mind without real body. I have
the feeling he could have annihilated us if he wished.
Let's be careful.”
This Hondo Silverio could have been by Ingres. (Out
at St. John's a five-year-old boy had been dying, but he
didn't die. His temperature fell six degrees in six sec-
onds. He was well. “It was the big snake, my friend the
big snake," the boy said, "he made me well right away.
Why don't they let the big snake be a doctor, and
make the little doctor be a snakep") Hondo was a
petroleum geologist and a driller. But he was also his-
torical geologist and archeologist. He said that he had
found his wife Salzy in Mexico City. But she said that
he had blasted her out of a Mexican shale-formation
where she had been in an old and evil stratum with
serpents and saurians. There was sometimes a frighten-
ing gaiety about this couple, something of serpentine
mottled green humor, wholly uncontrollable under-stra-
ta of recklessness bursting up in artesian fountains of
>
17
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
water that was frosty with forbidden minerals. Oh,
Hondo meant it when he said that they should be
careful. He meant especially that he had to be careful.
“We hope that there will be danger in releasing these
things,” Letitia Bauer said with great seriousness. “We
call ourselves the Harvesters and we talk of harvesting
a better world. What I want is a livelier life and a
deeper one, a life worth living and a death worth dying.
I'd see the whole white froth of accommodation and
present ease swept away in a moment if it would give
us anything deeper.” (Over a hill, and not at all far
away, a middle-aged couple jumped to their feet in
trembling and horror. It was that damnable harp again!
The sudden sounding of it was not pretty harp music.
It was unworldly, atonal, now muted, now thunderous,
horrifying and charming harp music. For three evenings
it had played like that, enough to affright the dead. The
harp, a newly acquired antique, was in a room by itself.
It harped, but there was no harper, and it had no strings.)
"Ah well, be it that widow and orphan and the weak
and deficient are delivered from their poverty, then,”
Letitia Bauer continued (herself sounding very much
like a harp without strings ), “but let the strong never
be delivered from their strugglel If we have not this
hope of danger, then all is lost in a swamp. Each one of
us has a dangerous power in his own person. We have it
very much more than seven times over when we set up
a weave. Dangerous powers are not really dangerous
unless they are used. Let us use them! Tonight we will
pour what fire and what danger we can into Michael
Fountain. There is no man needs them more.
Letitia Bauer was the pale or moon-colored, slim
woman whom Burne-Jones had painted several times:
as Beggar Main, as Norse Goddess, variously.
>
>
The world jerked. Seismometers recorded high-grade
seismic disturbance as the brain-weave now came rak-
18
FOURTH MANSIONS
ishly and dangerously into action while the seven bur-
geoning persons of it seemed sometimes at ease, some-
times in passion, sometimes doing other things or noth-
ing at all. But they reached critical psychic mass now,
and every act of theirs would give a wobble to the
world.
The brain-weaving was something that the Harvesters
themselves did not understand, though they had de-
veloped it deliberately. Now they gathered the power
and the goal to themselves, and they projected it. They
did not, any of them, understand it completely in their
own persons, but they understood it more completely
when the seven of them were linked together. Surely
they would understand it in near totality when they had
linked more and more strong persons to themselves.
These seven were all projecting persons and they could
feel their own effect welling through.
Jim Bauer, mixing drinks at the little patio wheeled
bar, had broken into rumbling and powerful song. Bauer
had to have a big belly to support his big chest to sup-
port his big rough song. And he had to have a powerful
neck to support the powerful and massive head in
which so much of his activity was carried out. There
was reason for everything in the spreading construction
of him.
Bauer projected with big hands, almost with holy
hands; he mixed drinks with hands that were like the
hands of God-over-the-world. He was the Harvester in his
hands, and it meant something. He came at the mind
of Michael Fountain then, came with massive head and
barrel chest and great hands and rumbling spirit, and
slipped off. Came again, slipped again badly, swore
with a joyous rumble, came again as he mixed Michael's
name with his powerful song, encountered strangeness
that he had not known to be in that Michael Fountain,
welled in and wrestled with that strangeness.
Bauer was doing things with lime and sugar and tin-
19
FOURTH MANSIONS
kling glass rods, and at the same time he was burglar-
izing a mind eight hundred miles away. But was not
Michael Fountain right here in the city?
Somewhere and not right here in the city, a bewil-
dered young man sat upon a battered bed, clasped his
hands to his head, groaned deeply, and at the same
time grinned a prodigious grin. The young man liked
the encounter that stunned him, he liked the new violent
pain in his head; he liked all new violent things whatso-
ever. "I have a new horned-bull in my head,” the young
man said. He swayed with the pain of it and grinned
more goblinishly
Wing Manion had peeled off a robe and gone down
the crumbling steep concrete and iron stairway from
the patio to the lake. She was into the chilly December
water, and then down deep under the water and crouch-
ing in the secret mud. She encanted the name of the
quizzical man who was her friend, as much as he knew
how to be a friend to anyone. She would give a fiery
sword to this Michael and he could turn it which way
he would. She would teach this Fountain how to flow!
She came to the man in his rumpled house and room.
Michael Fountain knew her mind instantly. He liked
Wing Manion, perhaps, more than the others of the group.
But he slipped off from her instantly and almost un-
touched. He had always been an avoiding man. But Wing
was puzzled in her surge. James Bauer was not there
at work, and James had given the strong feeling that
he had entered the mind. Wing broke water and re-
viewed and memorized the entire world in one intaking
flash. Then she descended shimmering under a shelf of
striated rock into a catfish castle. She came again at
the mind of Michael Fountain with fire and metal and
water, and again she slipped badly from him. She came
again, slipped, and then struck the mind-trail of James
Bauer and followed it seeking entrance. And the en-
trance she found was the most unexpected sort.
20
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Here was a new area, weird even to Wing Manion,
and she added her own weirdness and excitement to it.
Who would have imagined that there were such en-
chanted and crooked groves in dry Michael Fountain?
Jim Bauer was there also, and the network had made
its first linkage.
“I had no idea there was such a man as this inside
Michael Fountain,” Wing thought, like a catfish bub-
bling. “Why, that makes him everything we need. I
will give this man inside the sword, I'll teach him to
flow. Oh, how I could teach him, how he could teach
me! What flow! What a flesh-fountain he is!”
"Now I have a new bruja in my head,” a young man
said. “I like the fire-witch. Which of us shall be burned
up
first? A bull and a witch, and I rise and go some-
where. There is something that this lout is called to do."
>
a
>
>
Michael Fountain, the dry man, paced the floor of
his cluttered living room with the beginning of worry.
Two of the young people had come at him, venturing,
and he had sloughed them off. But they had fastened
onto something, either inside him or outside him, they
were fastening onto something that might already be
wild enough without their mind-meddling. And they
had accidentally brushed a third something: this was
not the powerful, awakening, grotesquely grinning young
man with a new bull and a new witch in his head
(Michael knew this young man somehow, either inside
or outside of himself): this was another and weaker
man, a man who had somehow been caught in the cross-
blast of it and had died of it. “They've killed a man,
unwittingly,” Michael Fountain said. “Somehow I will
find out who it is tomorrow. In any case I will have to
force the wild ones to give up directing their gadget.”
>
Salzy Silverio had gone around the shoulder of the
little lake to an overhung natural rock-garden under the
21
FOURTH MANSIONS
cliff. She coiled herself there in the mossy rocks of
serpentine shale and water trickled down on her. She
was full of her own helical and otherwise twisted pas-
sion. Her husband Hondo went around to her, carrving
drinks. There were green mottled sparks when the auras
of the two of them came into contact. Oh, these were
both gracious and benign and urbane persons, full of
all graces and grace! Theirs was intelligence and vi-
tality and kindness, and amid their strong coiling pas-
sions was a great center of compassion. They were the
great and intelligent and superior and noble snakes
such as rule one of the distant worlds of which one
reads. Salzy had once stated, when in one of her double-
helical moods, that her husband Hondo had two pizzles,
as have certain snakes. “Oh, is that true?” Letitia Bauer
had demanded at the time. “I'll have to find out whether
you're joking or whether it's true. It could be true, you
know.” “It could be true.” Salzy had said snakishly.
Hondo and Salzy had entered the brain-weave, and
now there were five additional linkages added to the
one that had been before. “That there be fire in the
Fountain and new snakes for old!” they wove. They
brushed the conventional Michael Fountain but lightly,
slipping off and shivering him, and entered at once into
the weird young man who was possibly interior to that
Michael, who was possibly far distant from him and yet
known to him. And that young man was now on his
feet, he was running, loping in that ungainly but rapid
and tireless way that big men of his race have. He
was loping down drisky but warm December streets to-
ward the river. Inside his gloriously bursting head was a
she-snake of his own high people, one who had been
blasted out of old sleeping shale-strata; and with her
was a noble creature as male as himself, deep with
artesian welling-up.
Arouet Manion entered the brain-weave with cool pan-
1
22
FOURTH MANSIONS
theistic elegance. He would bring ancient ice and not
fire to the Fountain. His spiritual fathers had taught him
that the highest goal was to put out the lights of heaven,
but the next highest was to exalt the earth. He really
had this mystic attachment to the earth and he could
communicate it. He had a real place in the brain-weave;
it could not have worked fully without him; it may be
that his place was to pervert it, but place it was. He
touched the surface Michael not at all, he was imme-
diately into the young man.
Arouet did not inhibit the fire-force and violent surge
of the mind and network he entered. He sent a rale and
tremor through it all, and then a giant reaction. He was
like explosion and shattering of ice followed by a steeli-
ness and outre precipitation. The wrongness of the man
set up roaring tensions and angry despondencies but it
strengthened the intrusion. Its false mystique would in-
fluence and move this new dynamic mass for the stark
life of its surge. It added its diabolical gaping nothing-
ness, and the reaction to that was white fury. The mind
of Arouet Manion had great natural energy wrapped
around a void, and it contributed a new angular veloc-
ity and a mad rain of strange particles. The brain-
weave would not work fully without Arouet; it would
not work fully if any one of the seven were missing.
“Pray that it may not work, pray that it may not work
at all,” Michael Fountain gasped, white and trembling
from near brushes with it.
The linkages multiplied, and then multiplied again as
Letitia Bauer came with her own ashen and angular
passion and swift hope of danger. The brain-weave was
fabricating a new and uncontrollable personage in the
name of Michael Fountain, but did he know it? He knew
it in fright and agony, and he slipped away from it
again and again. He had felt the death of one man
caught in it accidentally; he felt the total penetration
23
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
of another. But were not both of these himself in some
way?
The brain-weave had entered, deeply and forever,
into a mind under that of Michael Fountain, and yet it
was a mind associated with his. Had the brain-weave
made a new mind and a new man and named it Michael
Fountain?
A ghost in red chalk completed the brain-weave, a
red wraith of disarming simplicity and shattering pro-
fundity: so young an anima that she still had not shook
off the poltergeistic manifestations of her own adoles-
cence; a numinous pink spook, lazy with summer light-
ning and instantaneous with blood-gaiety, shyly mur-
derous, with a laugh like breaking crystal, eldritch and
ethereal: Biddy Bencher the young red witch.
They had completed the heptameles, the seven-per-
son weave. It was full to overflowing, and it overflowed
with a lightning-line of power.
a
>
A loping lumpkin of a young man had fallen in half
faint and full pain against the guard-rail of the bridge,
bleeding and glassv-eved. He was struck by the line
of power so that the thin soles of his shoes smoked.
Such strikes had killed others, but this one would trans-
fix and animate him.
Now he burst into a real carcajada, a guffaw, an ele-
phant laugh. He came onto his feet again. He still reeled,
but now he reeled with a swagger. He was Miguel
Fuentes and he had just become a main person in the
world.
“Now I have a canelón, a cinnamon cookie in my
head,” the young man joked with a thick tongue: for
canelón means gargoyle as well as cinnamon cookie,
and Biddy Bencher was both.
“Get out with you all now!” the germinating man or-
dered. “You have done me! You have changed me the
man, and I will remember what I must do. I think I will
>
24
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
dismember the world with my hands as though it were
a cabrito, a kid to be barbecued. I will remember the
big thing and I will do it."
This timeless man (who had lately been a young man)
lurched across International Bridge and set about effect-
ing certain things in the world.
25
II: EITHER AWFUL DEAD OR AWFUL OLD
Simplicity into the world all bare,
Unweaponed, careless, witless, artless clown,
Lays hands on curly anacondas there
And drags the very dragons through their town.
Simplicitas: Orthcutt
BmDDY BENCHER came into the Scatterbrain Lounge later
that night. She was fevered and spent, but quite alert
and full of monkeyness.
In the floor of the Scatter brain there was a bronze
disc countersunk, and on it was the inscription THIS IS
THE EXACT CENTER OF THE UNIVCRSE. Whether it was
the exact center is an unsettled question. Hugh Ham-
tree, who owned and operated the Scatter brain, said
that the disc was already there when he took over the
place. The previous owner, Birdie Mounteagle, was re-
membered as a whimsical man.
"Freddy, little left eye of an owl,” Biddy cried when
she saw young Foley there, "did you not have a startling
idea today? I had heard, no, I had felt, that you had
something going. Had you not a one-in-a-million idea?”
Lustful mouth and innocent eyes, this Biddy was a cin-
namon cookie full of arsenic.
“Biddy, I still have the idea, but how do you know?
How are you people monkeying with me?”
“We don't monkey. We infuse with real live pop-skull
and green lightning. I have to know. What was the rare
idea, little frog-foot, and how did it go?”
<
26
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"The same as all my one-in-a-million ideas. I'm not
allowed to follow it out. I'm not even allowed to think
about it.” That unplowed face of Foley was getting
faint plow-marks now.
“Did old Tankersley order you to get drunk and for-
get about it?”
"He did. And it isn't as much fun when you take it
for medicine.”
“How can men retain positions of authority and remain
unreceptive to such striking ideas as yours? Ah, what
was the idea?”
"I don't want to talk about it, Biddy,” Freddy said
stubbornly.
"That's a black lie. You do want to talk about it. At
least I want to talk about it. And are we not one, my
own mouse-ear?”
“We are one if you say we are, Biddy. Well, I had the
notion that perhaps Carmody Overlark (everyone has
heard of him these last several years) was the same
man as Khar-ibn-Mod, a Mameluke diplomat who served
an Egyptian Caliph some years back.”
“How many years back, Freddy?” (Those are inno-
cent eyes?)
“About five hundred years, Biddy. It seems sillier
when I say it out loud.”
“Why, it doesn't sound silly at all, little blueberry
bush.”
“Why are you about to bust then, Biddy?" (How can
he be a man yet, when this she-kid treats him like a
kid?)
“It's my new diet, Freddy; I eat nothing but bubbles
now. But I can see how Mr. Tankersley might not dive
right into a story like that without being pushed. Why
do
you
think they're the same man, bendy pretzel?”
“Ah, they look a lot alike and their names are kind
of alike,” Freddy said sadly.
“Theories have been built on slighter bases. They
27
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
didn't stand up very well, though. How would Carinody
still be around after five hundred years, little honey-
locust? Wouldn't he be either awful dead or awful old?”
“There's an alternative, Biddy, but I shiver at men-
tioning it. Laughter of a loved one can be very cruel.
Not that you would laugh at me till I'm gone."
“And not that you love me when I'm not here. Will
you tell it to me all at once or a little at a time?”
“A little at a time, Biddy. I love you but I don't trust
you. I can hear Bauer and Manion hooting now when
they find out what you've made me do. But there's
something to it, Biddy! I know now that there is. You've
put me onto something real with your meddling. Biddy,
find out all that you can about Carmody Overlark. I'm
going to find out what he does and how he does it.”
“The guy might have gotten froze in a block of ice in
that Egyptian river," the proprietor Hugh Hamtree in-
terrupted. “Then they might have just found him and
thawed him out a couple of years ago. They deep-freeze
a lot of things now. I can't see where they lose any flavor
at all. If he was froze solid quick enough,
“Leave us, Hamtree," said Biddy. “Our private con-
versation is not meant for outside or outsized ears.
There's a man at the front bar who wants a drink and
is too shy to ask for it. Your new cashier is being
talked into cashing the hottest check in town, and your
check-in boy is robbing you blind at this very minute.
Be off, or I'll push you into your own ice-maker machine
and freeze you solid quick.
"Freddy, little corn-ball, I'm with you to the end,
which may not be very long. It's possible that you're using
someone's old kidney for a brain, but you're still my
boy. I remember several times you've been right when
you hadn't any business to be. I was always for the
underdog, and, doggy, you're way way under. How can
I help you?”
"Find out everything you can about Carmody Overlark,
>
28
FOURTH MANSIONS
Biddy. Your father and your friends know people who
know details about government people. Find out any
odd stories that attach to Carmody Overlark, particu-
larly any new ones that have attached to him in the
last year or two.'
“All right, Freddy, little oyster, I'll find out what I
can. Now I have to leave you and go to find another
man in his chambers. Don't be jealous. He's only one
of those fascinating older men.
“I have to go see a man too, Biddy. He may already
be in bed. He may be provoked with me for waking
him
up. He gets provoked with me quite a bit. Can I call
you a taxi?"
“No, my man is within close walking distance. Will
you walk out with me? My man gets provoked with me
a lot too. Which one of us are those fellows whistling
at, my own woolly-worm? Oh, do you turn this way
too? We'll walk together a while, then. I'm very worried
about this man. It's been several hours and I haven't
heard any news or sirens about him.”
“Why would there be? What is it? Should there be
news? Shall I call my paper?”
“No, I'll call by his place first. By the amount of pow-
der we poured into him, there should be an explosion
by now, Freddy. I tum in here. Oh, is your man in
this apartment building too? I tell
you,
little
green canta-
loupe, we should have made a tiger out of that man by
now. He should have started to pull the world down
around our ears already. You take a man as smart and
great-minded as he is and build a fire inside him. Oh,
how did you know to punch seven? That's my floor.
Hey, that's got to be yours too, that's the top floor in
the building. Here. Thank you, Freddy; you go on to
your own man now."
"You go on to your own, Biddy. Oh, were you coming
to see Michael Fountain too? He doesn't know I'm com-
ing. Does he know you're coming?”
29
FOURTH MANSIONS
“No, I don't think he does. He'll be doubly surprised.
Knock and step back, Freddy. He may really have
turned into a tiger. He might blast us.
“He's left the door ajar, Biddy. I think he's expecting
us, or someone.
“Probably world personages already flocking to—"
They went in.
>
.
a
Michael Fountain had only a night-light on. He was
wrapped in an old bathrobe and sitting deep in an
easy chair. He was sixty years old, lean and lined, only
a fringe of pinkish hair around his pate, craggy fea-
tured, with a hook to his nose like that of a Plains In-
dian or an Armenian, but he was perhaps too pale to
be either.
“I want to talk to Bedelia, and Freddy wants to talk
to me,” Fountain said kindly. “Where shall we begin?”
“Oh, begin with Freddy, old earmuff. It will be bloody
enough when you start on me," Biddy said, “and you
may soften a little in the meantime.”
"You think you may have a great silent laugh at Fred-
dy and his caper, Bedelia, and that I will be laughing
too. I believe, though, that the several capers of your
group have gone past the laughing stage. Just what is it
that you want to know about Overlark, Freddy?”
“First I want to know how you knew I wanted to
know about Overlark, Mr. Fountain.”
“I monitor a few of the antics when I suspect that they
are becoming dangerous. The scavengers, who call
themselves the Harvesters, instructed you to goof glori-
ously about Carmody Overlark. What is it, Freddy?”
“I think there's something odd about him. I want to
know if you have anything odd. In particular I want
to know if there's been any significant change in him
in the last year or so, since the beginning of his meteoric
rise.”
“If he's risen like a meteor then it's quite a dim one,
30
22
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
for he isn't generally known at all. Oh, reporters and
dilettantes will have heard of him, of course, but he
isn't a big name. There has been one change in him in
the last several years, though. He changed his name.
“Oh. From what and to what? And when?”
“From Charles to Carmody, and just about two years
ago.
“So the Carmody from the beginning has been Car-
mody only about two years. Why did he change it?"
“He gave numerology as the reason. And you're about
to say that an intelligent man does not believe in nu-
merology? But a man doesn't have to give a reason to
change his name legally.”
“Did he have anything to hide, Mr. Fountain?"
“As Charles Overlark? No, I don't think so, Freddy.
He was obscure, but not much more so than he still is.
He was and is wealthy. He's always been a heavy
contributor to the party. He's a man of natural status.
Beyond that he's known simply as a brilliant amateur.
“At what?"
"Ah, an intellectual, a legend, an amateur of all the
arts, and a patron.
“Was he actually an artist in any field?
"I don't think so. I believe he only collected.”
"And as an intellectual, has, he actually produced
anything?"
"Not that I know of. I believe that here he also col-
lected: intellectuals. It was always assumed, however,
that he was incredibly brilliant.”
“Always, Mr. Fountain? Or only as an afterthought?
Would it be possible that his reputation was inserted
back in time a little, and that actually he had no reputa-
tion at all before his rise?"
“Yes, that would be possible, Freddy. This sort of
thing has happened before. The facts that one has al-
ways known were sometimes not really known as late
as yesterday. Actually, if I should examine my con-
31
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
science, I'd have to admit that I had scarcely heard of
him at all till he was suddenly prominent in his small
niche. But there is a retrospect given to him in some
manner so that it seems he was always known.
“He isn't a new appearance, though. There have been
several well-documented pieces done on him. We can
take him back, always in the best circles, to his birth;
and we can take his family back as far as we want to
go."
>
“But until his modified meteoric rise he really had
nothing but his money to recommend him? He could
have been a dolt for all we know?”
“He could have been, Freddy, but he isn't a dolt now.
My experience is that dolts are always or ever. ... I
believe that's all you can think of to ask me at this
time. But you also wish to ask me questions about an-
other man?"
“No. About the same man, Mr. Fountain. What do you
know about Khar-ibn-Mod?”
"Hardly anything, Freddy, but I know all that is known
about him. I'm surprised that you should even know
the name. I didn't know you were a student of the
Mohammedan Middle Ages."
"Do you know how he died?”
“No. I don't recall any mention of his death anyplace.
How did he die, Freddy?”
“I don't think he did. Have you ever seen the old
woodcut of his face that's in the Cambridge History of
the Middle Ages?
“Yes. Let me flash it into my mind a moment. I see
what you mean, Freddy. He does look a little like Car-
mody Overlark, doesn't he? It's always handy to have
good recall as I have. Does the glorious goof consist of
this similarity, Freddy?”
“Partly. Recall it again. Does. Khar-ibn-Mod have
what you would call an Arabian or Egyptian face?”
“Not what you would call one, Freddy. But particular
32
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
faces don't really follow racial rules. Besides, the Mame-
lukes were mostly of Christian European slave origin,
taken very young and raised with great selection for
their particular duties. I'd say that that face is probably
Moravian. So is Overlark's. And the names do chime a
common tone, don't they, Freddy? No. I don't laugh at
you; I've met such coincidental ghosts before. Anything
else about your man or men?”
“Do you know whether Khar-ibn-Mod suffered from
asthma?"
“Not that I know of. He didn't live in an asthma cli-
mate. But he could well have suffered, and we would
still be ignorant of it.”
“Carmody Overlark suffers from asthma-these last
two years. I found out that much about him myself.
Thank you, Mr. Fountain. It's your turn, Biddy.”
“Oh. Yes, Freddy, leave us now. Mr. Fountain has some
harsh things to say to me and they are not for callow
ears. Out, little crackerjack-prize, out.
"I will not. You've witnessed my own bleeding of
words, my own great goofing. I'll hear what comes
to you. Besides, I'm still a reporter, and you two be-
come momentous people in a very peculiar business
that's going on.
"Your little group has killed my favorite nephew and
namesake, Bedelia,” Michael Fountain said.
“Mikey? Has he died? But he wasn't expected to live.
We didn't kill him, he was dying anyhow. Not that
I'm callous. Did they call you that he was dead?”
“No. I called them first, to be sure. I had the feeling.
He had just died, and I'm not quite sure that he would
have otherwise. You and your group are playing a dan-
gerous game, Bedelia, a dangerous and ignorant game."
“Of course we're ignorant. We're pioneers as well as
Harvesters and we go into unknown regions. But we're
going to set fires in very select persons; we're going to
mutate them with a great psychic wave sweeping over
>
33
FOURTH MANSIONS
them in the evening time when certain rays are most
likely for it. And we've done it to you, Michael, we've
done it to you. We've made change in you, and now
you'll use your great talents in ways you refused to use
them before.
"No, you have not done it to me, Bedelia.”
"But we havel I was in your mind, we all were. You
slipped us, and then we took you from under. We got
you, we exploded in you."
“No, you did not. I slipped you, and then I slipped
you again, clumsy kids that you are. But you killed
Mikey, invoking the same name, and you may have en-
tered another somehow.”
"No. You. We were in your under-mind. We reveled
there. You don't know it now, but
you
will know it. We've
planted you and it grows in you."
"No, Biddy, I slipped you almost completely. I'll
have to find out who you did revel in. I will have to see
about undoing the harın you've done to somebody. It
was not myself, it was not Mikey except glancingly, but
it was somebody somehow attached to me, for I felt it
strongly. I cannot at the moment imagine who it was.
I have no other namesakes that I recall. But it was some-
body whose mind has touched mine, who was in a cer-
tain accord with me, a young man's mind, and I do not
know whose. You're sure you don't know who you bit
into, Bedelia?”
“Yes, it was you, youl"
“Not at all. You assault strangers, and at a distance,
and perhaps to their deaths. It has to stop.”
"It will not stop, Michael, old moss-rock. We break
new roads. We induce the new human evolution. And
you can't even guess what we will do next.”
"Of course I have guessed it. You will attempt muta-
tion on yourselves, or perhaps it will be mutilation. It
will not work.
"It will work! We've seen the castle on top of the hill.
34
FOURTH MANSIONS
We'll climb that hill, we'll be the first people ever to
climb it. We'll be the first super-people, the first people
able to grasp the vision. And we'll lead the rest of hu-
manity up to it. We wanted you to be our first leader,
but you've failed us."
"Don't do it, Bedelia. It is likely to kill one or all of
you."
"What of it? Surely the chance is worth taking. Despise
us, loathe us! We'll show you. We'll redeem you all.
We'll make the breakthrough to intellectualized, celes-
tialized, chthonized, socialized, paranaturalized, cos-
mosized, one-other-word-that-I-forgot."
“Oh shut up, Biddyl” Fountain snapped angrily.
"
,
"Freddy, drag her and her drivel out of here."
And Freddy Foley dragged Bedelia Bencher out of
Michael Fountain's apartment.
'Twas thus they stoned the prophets!” Biddy sang
defiantly as the door slammed intolerantly behind them.
"You're all of you stoned, Biddy,” Freddy told her,
"and not on honest hooch either. Get off it, Biddy;
that's a crazy bunch you're running with.”
“You will notice, Freddy, that my feet do not touch
the sidewalk,” Biddy said a little later. “I am walking on
air two inches above the sidewalk. I would walk higher
but then I'd be too high to walk with you.”
"You're too high to be walking with anyone anyhow.
But why'd you just stumble if you're walking on air?”
"Air-pocket. Oh, I am etherealized, Freddy, I'm a new
person entirely. I'll go to my own place now and be-
come cosmic. I don't blink anymore, I haven't blinked
for hours; I believe that blinking is a trait of mankind in
the transitional stage. I will never blink again. I will not
close my eyes again ever, not in life nor in death. I am
mistress of all worlds and visions. I will go and paint
weird pictures on my eyeballs now. Why not? I don't
need them for seeing. I can see with every part of me.
35
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Why are you turning into the alley, Freddy? That's the
back door of City Museum down there.'
"I know it. The night watchman is a friend of mine.
I
go talk to him sometimes when I can't sleep at night;
and, Biddy, I sure can't sleep at night lately. Not since
you snakes spit snake juice in my eye. And now my
own girl has turned into one of the snakes. I wish I hadn't
seen it happen, Biddy.”
“But I am glorious now, Freddy, glorious and glori-
fied. I've already learned a lot of the patter that we
Harvesters use. Now if I can figure out what it means
I'll be two steps up. I haven't really turned into a snake,
Freddy. Good night.”
"And find out what you can about Carmody Over-
lark, Biddy."
"All right, little back-end of a glowworm, I will."
>
Freddy rapped on an old bronze panel of the back
door of City Museum. “One hundred and nineteen long
knocks and one short” was the code between the friends,
but Freddy never had to knock that many times. The
door whispered open. The friend was a young man
named Selim Elia, a young Syrian man who loved the
museum and faithfully watched over it by night.
"Freddy cannot sleep at night.” Selim smiled as he
closed the outer door again and led Fred Foley through
the dim entry-room. “He sleeps well in the daytime
but he sure can't sleep at night. Are the flaming ducks
after you again, Freddy?”
"Something like that. Dead ducks keep flopping up
in live people, yes, dead snakes and toads. Did you
ever look at your girl and suddenly discover that she
had toad's eyes, Selim?”
,
"Mine has basilisk's eyes, Freddy, much more sophis-
ticated. Is it the live things or the dead things that are
bothering you tonight, Freddy?”
“It's those that won't make up their mind which they
36
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
are. See, there are these brain folks that Biddy runs
around with, three Shes out of Haggard and three Borgia
types out of Baron Corvo. They mix up this brain stuff
and put it out in psychic jolts. It knocked me to my
knees the first time they used it on me. Tonight they
tried it on Mike Fountain. He slipped them, but it killed
his nephew and bit into someone else. Now they're
raising up something that would be better dead, and
they've put me onto a man who ought to be dead. I
want to wander around the museum a while. I know
the things here are dead.”
“No, Freddy, they are not. There is not one dead
thing here. You don't understand, Freddy. It is not nat-
ural for things to stay dead; it sure is not natural for
people to stay dead. You can hear them still, all over
this place at night, rocks, bones, skulls, whole people.
They get tired waiting for time to get up.
"Selim, your mother was a wanton dromedary. Let's
go through the dead rooms. Which is the Aztec room,
this? Yes. But it's never too peaceful here. Even the
stone faces don't seem dead enough.”
“Oh, they are not, Freddy. Look at the mean eyes on
that one, and his head no bigger than an apple. Don't
put a finger near him, you might lose it. That one got
crossways with a rock witch over a girl. The rock witch
shrunk him first and then turned him into stone but he
sure didn't kill him. Do his eyes look dead?”
“No. But they're only mica or rock-crystal set in ob-
sidian stone. There's nothing alive in here except the
imagination."
“All right, then put your finger near it, Freddy, try
it.”
“I will not. Let's find something deader than these
rocks.”
Freddy Foley looked at dolls, at stuffed wolverines
and kit-foxes, at Indian artifacts, at suits of Spanish
armor curiously boys'-sized. But he had a new lead
37
22
FOURTH MANSIONS
growing in his mind. He avoided a room on three sides
of it, going around and looking at other things. Then he
went into the Egyptian room and Selim Elia followed
him.
“Now, this is dead," Freddy said. “These are things
you can have confidence in. The same dead things here
forever. Pta bless Egypt!"
"Ah, but we have one new piece, Freddy. It is a life-
mask and that is unusual. We have many Egyptian death-
masks, but this is specifically called a life-mask. It
is a molded portrait made on a man then living, and
it is the finest thing we have.”
"Whose is it? I don't want to see it. Where is it?''
"Behind you, Freddy. We've had it for only two days.
It has been verified and authenticated before we got it.
The life-mask is that of a civil servant who served un-
der Akhnaton, the heretic king of Egypt. We don't know
the man's exact station.'
"Special Assistant to Secretary of State," Fred Foley
said.
"Really? You have toad's eyes yourself when you
try to be mysterious. It's behind you, Freddy. You can't
see it the way you are standing."
"Oh, I can see a little without eyeballs myself. How
old is the life-mask?”
"Oh, King Akhnaton lived around 1350 B.C., or around
900 B.C., if you follow the timetable of Velikovsky.”
“Well, what's the name of the mask?”
"Kir-Ha-Mod is the translation, but we are not sure
of the vowels. I myself believe that it should be translit-
terated as Kar-Ha-Mod.”
“I think so too,” Fred Foley said, and he turned sul-
lenly to look at the mask. "Ah, it's yourself!” he jibed
at the thing. “And it's my belief that you are only the
mask of a mask, sir. Tell me, Car-whatever, do you
know who is wearing the mask itself today? Selim, did
you just slip a piece of paper into my pocket?”
-
38
a
)
>
a
>
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
“No, Freddy. I'm standing ten feet from you. Tell me
what this is, Freddy. Mystery doesn't become you."
“It's the same face three times, it's the same name
three times. Selim, how would you say Overlark in old
Egyptian?”
“Ka-Ra, which means both the food of Ra and the
soul of Ra, is also the word for a lark. I don't know what
Overlark means, though, other than a name.
“Neither do I. This piece of paper, Selim, which you
didn't slip into my pocket, gives a certain address, and
it tells me to go there right now.”
“You are a reporter. Go there. It may have been in
your pocket for hours, though, and you just noticed it
now. You may have put it there yourself and forgotten
it. You know how you are. But go there, tonight or in
the morning. Remember, you're the boy who never
passes up a tip on anything. You told me so yourself.”
“I'll go right now. It says right now. It says to come
alone. I'm scared of it but I'll go. Say, those guys are
talking Mexican-Spanish and they're cooking up some-
thing big. They might really jolt the world, that guy
and those he's gathered.”
“What guys, Freddy? Those of the address where
you're going?”
“Oh no, other guys entirely. Selim, I bet I know some-
thing that they don't know about their own brain-
weave, and they invented it.”
"Who, the Mexican-Spanish plotters?”
“No, the Shes and the Borgias, Biddy's group. You
get plugged into their brain-weave and you stay plugged
in. They plug into someone else, and you're connected
too. And sometimes now I'm connected with him and
they're not. Well, one snake-pit at a time; I'll go to
the address. It's a spooky part of town, especially this
late at night, but I knew it when I was a kid and I still
know it. Good night, Selim.”
"Good night, Freddy. And, Freddy, you aren't the
39
FOURTH MANSIONS
only one who's noticed the resemblance of the life-
mask to Carmocly Overlark. It's been a joke around the
museum for these two days.”
>
40
III: IF THEY CAN KILL YOU, I CAN KILL YOU
WORSE
We have gone higher and deeper than anyone
has gone before. We have solved problems that
were always regarded as impossible of solution.
We have reached a certain firm height in mate-
rial and physical and spiritual being. We have
come up in powerful, loose, integrated move-
ment, and with profound freshness and creativ-
ity in our group soul; and we have seen the high
pastures beyond. We come to the verge, to the
mansions of the fourth height, in a moving mo-
ment of dizzy expectation and extreme danger,
up under a new Heaven with a new Earth in our
hands. Don't drop it!
Second Trefoil Lectures: Michael Fountain
FRED FOLEY swung along with a jauntiness of expecta-
tion. This was a section of town that he had always
been a little frightened of, but the frightening elements
were from his childhood.
There had been a brick factory here once. The
offices of the company were still here, but the hive-
shaped baking kilns were now at another location. It
had been from he intense fires of those kilns that
Freddy Foley, walking in the evenings with his father
and not yet four years old, had got his idea of Hell.
Should he be probed even today it would be found that
41
FOURTH MANSIONS
he had a concrete idea of Hell, that it is hive-shaped
like a brick baking kiln and of an eye-burning fire in-
side.
And with this idea was an early story told him by
Sylvester Larker, that they had put a little boy into one
of the kilns and bumed him up. No reason was given for
this. In small boys' stories no reason is ever given for
any act, nor is it asked. They burned the little boy all
up except his eyes, which turned into agates. These
were the same two agates that Sylvester Larker used
for taws. They would seek out the marbles for them-
selves, they never missed; Sylvester Larker had been
marble champion. And he had given these two agates
to Freddy.
All his life, people would be giving valuable things
to Fred Foley unasked: gifts, powers, lives, worlds,
secrets.
Also, in this part of town, there had been the brick
pit itself, likely the deepest hole on earth. It had a
narrow-gauge railway track down in it, and the little
cars that shuttled back and forth were wound up from
it by cables. There had always been water in the bot-
tom of the pit, however much they pumped it out. And
once a little boy had drowned there. He was of Freddy's
age, four then, and he was the first dead person that
Freddy was ever permitted to see.
There were other elements in that old section which
had abiding effect on Freddy Foley. The people of
that neighborhood had kept both cows and hogs long
after it was forbidden by ordinance to keep them in
town. And pigeons-all the families had kept pigeons.
There is no accounting for the manner in which pigeons
had become sinister to Freddy; it was surely in con-
nection with some story which he no longer remembered.
In the early days of that neighborhood, many of the
houses still had barns; the barns had lofts, and lofts
always have pigeons.
42
FOURTH MANSIONS
Hound dogs too. The Stamfords had hounds, the Du-
gans had hounds, the Collyers had both bird-dogs and
hang-dog hounds; and kids who have strings of hounds
are just naturally tough. This is fact, whatever the ex-
planation of it.
There were the railroads, very strong in the complex
of memories. The district was in the V of two lines
which joined forces there before they went downtown,
and it was there that they always hit their whistles.
There had been sidings to the cottonseed-oil plant,
to the brickyard, to a fire-belching foundry, to a boiler-
maker's. There was the waste land that is always about
rail junctions, bogs, weed patches, small pastures, large
vacant lots, genuine woods with streams, clay cliffs
honeycombed with boys' and hobos' caves, and the Old
Show Grounds. The Show Grounds held the carnivals,
all the circuses except Ringling's, which was too big for
it; and in times between it was always occupied by
families of Indians, Gypsies or Mexicans.
Among these was the Larker family. The Larkers
could have been any of the three, or could have been
something else. Toney, who was Freddy's age, said that
they were Indians, that they really owned the whole
town-site, that they were going to take it back and make
the people pull down all the buildings, and then they
would kill them all by putting green rawhide around
their necks and setting them out in the sun. This shrank
the rawhide and strangled the people to death.
Sylvester, who was two years older than Freddy, said
that they were Mexicans, and for proof of this he had
a Mexican knife that had killed sixteen men. But Leo
Joe Larker, who was the oldest of the Larkers and four
years older than Freddy, said that they were Gypsies.
He said that they could tell who was going to be mur-
dered and who was going to die that year. He said,
moreover, that they could work magic, and that he him-
self had raised a man from the dead.
>
43
"
FOURTH MANSIONS
But Freddy's father had said that the Larkers were a
black-necked bunch of Irish tinkers, the last of them,
and that the world would be better when they were
gone. The Larkers had a shack that was clapboards on
the bottom and canvas on top.
This was the first time in a dozen years that Freddy
had been back to that district where he had been raised.
He knew about where the address would be. He was
going to a meeting with a person whose name he did
not know, answering a summons which he had received
in an unknown way. "Walk there, and talk to no one,
.
and do it at once," the note said. “You will barely have
time.”
The face of this district had changed somewhat,
but the feeling of it had not. Freddy knew that it was
still occupied by the toughest boys in town and that
they were no longer small boys. As reporter he knew
that the bars here were dingier and rougher than bars
elsewhere, that most of the burglars in town lived here,
that crimes of violence in the district had a shamefully
high index, that there were stories going around more
macabre than those Freddy had heard in childhood.
The quarter had always been built up in tight knots
of buildings separated by empty spreads. There was
something oriental about the crowdedness of the build-
ings, something medieval about the high-gabled look
of them. There were still the vacant lots, still the
woods that threatened to take over the whole place
with a sudden rush, still the street lights broken out as
often as they were replaced.
The house of the address (it had to be the address,
though it could not be read in the dark) was a tipsy
four-storied frame building with no light at all except a
cigarette in the open door. It was a squat earth-giant
winking with a small red eye. But what gave Fred
Foley the creeps was that he knew what. man was stand-
ing there, and he couldn't have. Ah well, a fellow who
а
44
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
raised a man from the dead when he was no more
than nine years old will always have a certain pres-
ence about him.
"Hello, Leo Joe,” Freddy said boldly. "Is it yourself
I am to meet?” It was Leo Joe Larker standing there still
unseen, either as blood-curdling boy or as man.
“You know my name? I underestimated you. I'll have
to find out how you know my name, since it wasn't
told to you,” said the black gap behind the cigarette.
"You haven't changed, Leo Joe, except in your voice. I
used to know you when we were boys. I can't see you
in that dark doorway, though.” Nothing was changed
in Leo Joe except his voice. But the voice was all that
could be encountered of him. If the boy's voice could not
be recognized in the man, and if the man himself was
invisible in the dark, then what was it that identified
him?
“You haven't changed from before?" Freddy added.
“Not changed from what before? But yes, you were
the fearful little boy. You had a dog named Popcorn,"
the voice said.
“And now I am Fearless Freddy,” Fred Foley said.
"I ask
you again. Is it with you that I have this informal
appointment?”
“No, Foley, I'm an interloper."
“I'd rather deal direct, Leo Joe.”
"I'm putting in first claim on you."
"What for?”
"If you're threatened in any way tonight, and you will
be, just consider that I have an override on all threats
to you.
“But if my meeting isn't with you, how do you have
any part of it?”
“Never mind my part. Upstairs you're going to be
threatened by a couple of rough-talking gentlemen. They
overdo their threats. But then they also overdo their
execution of them. They can kill you, and there's a fair
,
45
FOURTH MANSIONS
likelihood that they will. It's one thing to be threatened
in a very heavy and outmoded style; it's another thing
to be killed in that same outmoded style.”
“What will they want me to do?”
“They'll want you to lay off the line of inquiry you're
>
>
on.”
"Well, what do you want me to do?”
"I want you to stay on it, Foley. Be dumb, blind,
blundering, and silly, but stay on it. You may be dumb
enough to get to the core of it.”
"Well, will you help me with it, Leo Joe? I'm totally
in the dark.”
"No, I won't help you. And you seem able to see in
the dark tonight. No, you have to go on your own all
the way with it. I'm just telling you not to lay off. If
they can kill you, Foley, I can kill you worse. If they
can scare you, I can outdo them at that too. Now go
up to your appointment. You better not be late.
“What will I do?"
“Whatever they tell you to do, don't. Whatever they
tell you not to do, do it. But say what you have to, to
get out of there alive. And don't keep any more ap-
pointments in dark rooms with people you don't know.”
"If the appointments are in the line of my inquiries,
I will keep them. Ah, do you ever see any of the old
kids, Leo Joe?"
"I don't know anything about old kids. I'm probably
not who you think I am.” The man came out of the door-
way still wrapped in dark, passed by Freddy Foley
silently and disappeared. He didn't look much like Leo
Joe Larker should have grown up to look like; he
hadn't sounded like him at all. The dark glimpse had
shown a man who might be a Negro. The voice, remem-
had something of that tone. Nevertheless,
Fred Foley believed that this interloper man had been
Leo Joe Larker when he was a boy.
Foley entered the dark doorway of the building. He
bered now,
46
FOURTH MANSIONS
felt his way up the stairway. It wasn't too difficult. Al
these old wooden apartments were built alike. This one,
Freddy now suspected, was empty and condemned;
and he knew that the only light he would see would
be one coming from under the door of a room on the
top floor. He knew his appointinent would be in such
a room, though the note hadn't told him of that.
Freddy saw the slit of light as he shuffled to the top
step. He opened the door and went in. He pulled up a
chair and sat down at the table with the three men.
"It's your move,” Fred Foley said.
"You've been asking questions about a man who has
been replaced," the first man said heavily. It was pretty
dim in there. The light that Foley had seen slitted
under the door was from some sort of carbide lantem
such as hunters use. The lantern was sitting on the floor
and did not illuminate the faces of the men well. Ap-
parently the utilities were off in this building. “Don't
you know that you can be replaced as easily?” that first
man asked.
“No. If I thought I could be replaced, I wouldn't worry
so much about myself. How can I be replaced?”
"By another man named Fred Foley who would be
identical to you in appearance. But he won't be going
around asking questions,” that first man said.
“Actually I wasn't asking questions about a man who
has been replaced,” Freddy said. "I think I've been
asking questions about a man who replaced another.
That's where my interest lies.”
"Then you're asking questions about the wrong man,
Foley. Your own situation is like that of the man who
was replaced. You should wonder what happened to
him.”
“I hadn't given him a thought. All right, I wonder what
did happen to him?”
“He ended, Foley, and without a trace. It can happen
to you, tomorrow, even tonight. You would not be at
>
47
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
all. You would be worse than dead. And not only would
there be no trace of you, but there would be no one
wondering where you went. Another Fred Foley would
be walking around in your clothes, wearing your face
and your body, living in your rooms, holding your job.
But he wouldn't be you. And you wouldn't be anything,
anywhere.
"So I should stop asking questions?”
"You should stop even thinking questions,” the sec-
ond man at the table said.
“The replaced man may not be in complete oblivion,”
Freddy hazarded. “I may follow that line of inquiry by
being a replaced man and seeing where it leads."
"We won't be mysterious about it,” said the third man
at the table. “It leads to physical death. Some of the
victims die in pretty heavy agony. Some of the dis-
patchers get a lot of fun out of it. It's my own kind of
fun. You can follow that line of inquiry if you want to,
Foley, but it will be hard to get your story back from
the other side.”
Foley passed his hand before his eyes. There wasn't
anything there. It had been as though a strand of gossa-
mer or spider-silk had touched him. Those things aren't
very thick. It would take a lot of them to entangle a
man. It was an old spider-silk, though, and it dangled
out of a web of old.memories.
This room, this old rooming house, was on the edge
of the Old Show Grounds where the carnivals used to
set up. Foley remembered one show where a man
sawed a lady in half. What happened, someone had
told him, was that the man didn't saw her in two at
all; it was a trick. But what really happened, Leo Joe
Larker had told him (Leo Joe the boy who seemed to
have grown into an altogether different man), was that
the man sawed her in two all right and she died. Then
they got a different lady to show the people out in
front. They used up about five ladies a day with the
a
48
FOURTH MANSIONS act. Freddy had always believed Leo Joe's explanation of how it was done, rather than the weak silly stories that others had given him. "But what do they do with all the dead ladies?'' he had asked Leo Joe at the time. That had brought on another story, for there was an unusual dispostion of the bodies of the sawed-in-half women. It wasn't very practical, though, and he doubted if these three men here would use the same method. What he had asked then and what he almost asked now was "Why would anybody want to kill all the ladies?" But what he really asked out loud now was "Why would anyone want to killFred Foley?" "Why we might want to kill you is that you have asked too many questions," that third man said. "You asked them of quite a few people. You even asked them of one person who belongs to our group." "You should wear badges." "Bravado doesn't become you very well, Foley," said the second man at the table. He was leaner and sharper and more silent than the other two men. "You have little nervous tricks that indicate that you aren't brave at all." "I know that, men. But I also have sudden impulses that make me so brave that I scare myself. Don't count on me being either way. I don't." "I doubt that we'll have any more trouble with you, Foley," said the first man. "One way or another, we will see to it that we don't." "Remember, it could happen to you tomorrow," the third man said. "It could happen to you yet tonight." That was dismissal. Fred Foley left them. The slash of light was under the foor for a moment after he closed it on them. Then it was extinguished. They had put out even the lantern. Fred Foley felt his way down the stairs, bumped into a wall at one of the lower land­ ings (those old apartments were not built absolutely alike, and besides Freddy had now lost the illusion that
49
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
he could see in the dark), came finally out of the shanty
doorway and into the dark street.
The effect that the men had had on him was sub-
merged somewhat in the effect that the district had
always had on him. He discounted the encounter much
as he used to discount the stories of the Larker boys.
But he was not quite sure that those three men might
not kill him that very night, just as he had never been
quite sure that Leo Joe Larker had not raised a man
from the dead.
He walked rapidly the mile toward downtown and
his own rooms. He talked to himself, and then to an-
other.
"Take it easy, Miguel,” he said. “You can't get it all
rolling in one night. Hey, you're gathering a pretty salty
bunch already, though. How could I find you if I wanted
to join you?”
He was getting a sort of contact with someone who
had also been assaulted by the brain-weave. He called
him Miguel and not Michael, but he knew there had
been a link between the two.
He wasn't through for the night. He needed to ask
more questions of someone. He wouldn't go back to
Michael Fountain tonight. That man would surely be
short with him on a second visit. Fred Foley needed
to talk with someone who knew more things than did
Michael Fountain.
But there was no such person, not in his acquaintance.
Well then, he needed to talk to someone who knew
sorts of things that even Michael Fountain didn't know.
And there was only one such person, a blockish ungainly
fraud, but he did know things outside the lines.
And here was his very broken and unkempt street
here on the edges of shanty-town. Fred Foley turned
down it toward the diggings of Bertigrew Bagley.
а
The authors of the brain-weave believe that they have
50
FOURTH MANSIONS
transmitted somehow through polarized one-way glass;
but it is two-way. The return way is open even when
the senders are unaware, and all those who have been
touched by the weave are themselves somehow in
touch, even when the weavers or Harvesters are asleep.
Thus Freddy Foley now sometimes impinged on the
entity for whom he had found the name of Miguel. (He
still believed it to be a separated fragment of Michael
Fountain. But Miguel, raising an army to take over the
world, had already enlisted eight men, three of whom
knew where they could get rifles, and this all in one
night. Fred Foley knew of this part but he didn't know
how to appraise it.) Freddy also impinged on the de-
vious mind of Carmody Overlark, but this always lost
him in a laughing swamp.
However, one portion of the brain-weave itself was
not now completely asleep. She was wandering in a fit-
ful delirium, not frightful (for it was one of the Shes
out of Haggard and nothing could frighten them), but
puzzling (even to her of the initiation and the strong
psychic powers), frustrating, a rambling-in-waste-places
delirium. “I have bome a child out of my body," she
said, “I expected him to be beautiful and full of light.
Instead of that, he is a deformed monkey.” (She had
not actually bome any child out of her body except
Iracema, a girl who was now eleven years old; but this
was another sort of image.) “I wonder if anyone else
will notice that he is a deformed monkey,” she said.
“Many babies look like deformed monkeys, and people
are polite about it. I could be loud and confident and
carry it off, I know; but perhaps it would be better to
destroy the child and bear another one tomorrow. A
great thing will happen to me before that, and the child
I bear tomorrow night may really be beautiful and full
of light.”
(This She was the ashen-haired, pale or moon-colored
slim woman who had been painted by Burne-Jones sev-
51
FOURTH MANSIONS
eral times. She was Letitia Bauer, the danger-loving one
of the Harvesters; but even she was not sure in her
surety.)
Then the slob came into Freddy's mind. This may
have been because he now neared the slob's diggings; or
the slob himself may have been a target of the brain-
weave. The slob was the sort of man that the Harvesters
might try to have fun with, just as they had had fun
with Freddy himself.
Two crammed and ponderous minds in two such dif-
ferent containers. Michael Fountain was the very im-
age of distinction, urbane, mannered, of regal appear-
ance and voice, respected in the several communities:
an elegant decanter. Bertigrew Bagley was fat and un-
gainly, grown old ungracefully, balded and shaggy at
the same time, rheumy of eyes and with his mouth
full of rotten teeth, discredited, violent and vulgar: an
earthen pot, and a cracked one at that. But he knew
some things that even Michael Fountain didn't know.
Fred Foley had been there once before, as a reporter,
trying to pin some ugly rumors on the flush-faced old
mountebank. He hadn't been able to pin them on him,
and he had been treated better than he deserved.
Freddy went down the three steps to the heavy door
and pounded on it. He knew (he shivered at the memory
of it) that there was another flight of steps leading down
inside. He pounded harder and had the feeling that his
pounding could not be heard. He remembered that all
doors into Bagley's den were iron-sheeted and muf-
fled, and could be barred with series of long steel bars.
He remembered something else. He struck a match to
see, and it was so. There was still the plaque there:
DAMNED DOOR NOT LOCKED. COME IN.
Freddy went in fearfully. Fearless Freddy was afraid
of certain small things that had bitten him before. He
stepped carefully, knowing it would be no good. He
52
FOURTH MANSIONS
avoided one rolling thing and slipped on another. Fred
Foley fell down the flight of stairs.
He cursed, but not unhappily. It was always adven-
ture to visit Bagley. The place was dark and empty.
Then it leaped to half light, and the big man came in
and filled it, laughing with a hooting like hippopotami,
slipping into a big chair made of a barrel cut down,
ensconcing himself behind a big table built out of freight
skids.
“You do it best of anyone who comes to visit me,
Foleyl” Bagley boomed. “Anyone who falls down stairs
like that can't be all bad.”
“That was a trap!” Freddy snapped, somewhat ela-
ted however and knowing that nothing was broken.
“Stairs should be kept clear.”
“No, they should not,” Bagley told him. “Steps are
made to put things on. A man is entitled to store what
he wants to on his own steps; there's no better place
for sorting things out. A man has to use his eyes, Foley,
even in the dark. What's the idea of coming here with-
out an appointment?” Bagley was a crackpot, but it
was not an ordinary pot that had cracked. It was a giant
grotesque Gothic garboon.
And always at Bagley's just around the corner of eye-
sight, was the dog-ape, the plappergeist that served
Bagley. Freddy could not see the thing directly, but
he could see its friendly wink. The thing liked Fred
Foley. This spook-animal-person went through walls
easily and could be inside or outside.
“You ought to have a light so a man could see where
he's going, Bagley," Fred said.
“I have one light in the place; that's enough. I said
what's the idea of coming here without an appoint-
ment?”
"Would you have given me an appointment if I'd
asked?”
“Of course not. Damnation, manl I didn't know you
2
53
FOURTH MANSIONS
had a bottlel You should have hollered that you had it
before you started down. You could have broke it when
you fell.”
This Bagley had a fantastic erudition (though much
of what he knew happened not to be so), a fertile mind,
a gift for invective that had left scar tissue on the great
and near great for a generation and a half, a wanton
contempt for all mankind except a few always tem-
porary favorites, and a deep love for a red-necked
brawl. You will remember him writing under the by-
line of B.B.B. (he was known as Beetle-Browed Bag-
ley) before he was totally discredited.
“Well, what are you after, Foley?? Bagley asked him
after Foley had opened the bottle, pulled up a sort of
a
cobbler's bench, and joined Bagley at the big table built
of freight skids. “You came as a slippery reporter be-
fore and tried to hang me with a raffish rope. And now
I believe that you are involved with a group that has
tried to burglarize my mind. They cannot do it. I've a
series of long steel bars that I can set into the doors
of my mind also. What are you after? I ask you. You
don't love me enough to visit without a motive.
"I have a motive, Bagley,” Freddy said. “You rode
an old horse that got you laughed off the public scene:
the old Hidden-Hand running through History and Af-
fairs. It's quite a nag. Now I find myself riding the same
horse.”
“You're sure you know which end of the horse to get
on, Foley?"
"No."
“Because I didn't either. It's a double-rumped cayuse.
I never did find the head.'
“Did you ever really have anything, Bagley?”
"I thought I did. Now I'm not sure. I believe I was
close to something, but I may have been mistaken as to
its shape, size, color, and motive.”
"Did you ever have anything on Carmody Overlark?”
22
a
>
>
a
54
FOURTH MANSIONS
“Him? No. He rose after I had set. He has all the
earmarks of one of them, though. I do not use the phrase
as cliché. You have heard of the archaic smile and such.
Let me assure you that there is such a thing as the
archaic ear. He has it, and most of them have it. The
ear is the only appendage of man that has evolved at
all during the recorded' or pictorial history period. This
would be clearer, of course, if the ear left skeletal or
bone remains. But the archaic ear has a touch of Pan,
and all these repeaters have it.
"When I say this, Foley, I see a look in your eye that is
familiar to me; it has been turned on me often enough.
When I threw it all over and retired, Foley, I went
to a doctor, the least quackish I could find. I asked
him to go over me from stem to stern (I told him I
didn't know which end my brains were in) and tell me
frankly whether I was crazy. He did a thorough job
on me, probing both mind and body. When he was fin-
ished I asked him for his decision. Am I crazy?' I
asked him. ‘One of us is, Bagley, one of us is,' he told
me. That's about as fair a verdict as any man has ever
given me.
“I was wondering if there's also an archaic look in the
eye.”
"Yes. There is, and you have just used it. The ancient
skepticism. Which part of the horse are you working to,
Foley?"
"The nether ribs, I think. You hinted once that there
were certain types of contrary men who occurred so
persistently in history that you were double-damned
if you didn't suspect that there were certain individuals
recurring in history."
“Yes, I did hint that, and for that I was crucified up-
side-down like St. Peter. It's a good thing I didn't say it
right out loud. What is your question, Foley?”
“Did you have any theory or idea at all to go with
your harebrained hint?”
>
55
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
"There are several theories. Reincarnation seemed to
me to be the most likely. I have about a thousand
pages
of tables worked out, but they don't really jibe unless I
cheat on them. I have even applied what I call my
epicyclic adjustment to them. In Ptolemaic astronomy,
when it was found that the planets did not act as if
the Earth were the center, then it was necessary to
plot their courses as smaller circles about points on
larger circles. The theory had to be propped up.
"When I found that chronological reincarnation was
not the answer to the reappearance of perverse men,
then I had to add a grotesque appendage to my theory.
An evil man dies; and he is followed by another evil
man of startling similarity. But the death dates and the
birth dates do not coincide. In my thousand pages of
tables, I have only six cases that may possibly fit, and
even with these I have to juggle a handful of days,
or assume minor errors. So I have posed the possibility
to myself that the dead man does not necessarily come
to inhabit the boy at his birth, or at his conception (for
I also tried to make that fit), but may appear in
him in early childhood, or with the coming of the years
of reason, or even later.”
“At the merging of latest youth with middle age?”
“You mean Carmody Overlark? I don't know. That
seems a late entry, but there are others even later. My
theory remains a very rickety one, however much I
prop it up. Can't you afford better whisky than this,
Foley?”
"No. But you're convinced there is something in your
theory?”
“I am convinced that certain evil men reappear in
history in their own personalities. I am still looking for
the explanation of it. I believe you have begun to nibble
at the same bait.”
"You're convinced that they're evil? All of them evil?”
“Certainly. What need has a good man to return?
56
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
They are crawling evil. This Overlark whom you are
tracking down, you surely see that he is of evil effect.”
“Not at all. I was hoping that the returning genii were
a benign influence. I've been looking for something to
hope in for a long while.”
“Foley, man, he's of the old crippling persuasion.”
"You know, Bagley, that your views were never popu-
lar, even at your peak. And now you've been reduced
to a party of one.”
“Oh no, there's many of us around, and each of us
is worth a thousand of the others.”
“Overlark is a brilliant man in the Humanist Tradi-
tion."
"At the name of which even buzzards gag.”
“I can understand the reason for your unpopularity,
Bagley. But now I'm only interested in the reappearances
themselves. I haven't attempted to analyze the effect of
them."
“My old dog is restless outside, Foley. Someone is
laying for either you or myself. I have been beaten up
once already this week, and that's par; so I suppose
someone is after you. Don't get yourself killed too easily.
Foley, you are a slack-eared pup and a disgrace to the
Irish. I'd throw you down the stairs if we weren't al-
ready at the lowest level. Now sit quietly and finish
the bottle, and then you'll have to go. You may not be
completely hopeless, however. Once you get your hands
onto the thing you will learn a little of its nature. You'll
feel the rot of it, the leprosy that will not be stamped
out. And you'll see that its face is always respectability.
But if you follow it up to the end you will not be re-
spectable yourself. You'll be branded as I have been;
you'll find what a tight setup they really have. And
you'll see how it is almost impossible that their leaders
could have become so astute in a single life. And as you
look back you'll come on a man, and you'll come on
57
FOURTH MANSIONS
him again and again, and you'll lmow that he is the same
man just as well as you know anything at all.
“Then you'll wonder (Lord how you'll wonder!) how
many of them there really are. How wide is that pre-
ternatural brotherhood? There've been a hundred points
where mankind was frustrated from real clarification
and grace. At each of those points you will find one
of those evil men. Who directs them? And why do
they obstruct while they mouth progress and enlighten-
ment?”
"You believe in preternatural brotherhoods, do you,
Bagley?"
“Belonging to one myself, certainly I do."
"Well, I don't agree that they're evil, or that they're
plural. I know one man who has lived too long or too
often. But you, Bagley, see everything in black and
white.”
“Say, that's a pretty good phrase, Foley. Wait a minute
till I write it down. Oh, I have some men in my col-
lection who've lived a dozen times. I do not see every-
thing in black or white. I see most things in the four or
five central colors or forces. In the middle, of course,
is that malodorous worm whom we call common man.
He is mud-colored. And around him are the four sorts
of creatures who assail him while they claim to love
him, but mine is the only sort that actually loves him.
Foley, did someone tell you tonight to stop asking ques-
tions?”
“They did, and I won't. I'll ask questions till my larynx
falls out.”
“Boy, you're in danger. Myself, I've always been able
to counter them or evade them, but you're not that
smart.”
“I'm as smart as I need to be, Bagley. What are the
four sorts of creatures?"
“Oh, it is all allegory and beyond the comprehension
of flatlanders. Foley, a supreme word of contempt is
58
FOURTH MANSIONS
'flatlander. Somehow there is the belief that people in
the Dark Ages believed that the world was flat. They
didn't. But it is the contemptuous ones of today who
have made a really flat world that is the sad answer to
everything. What is wrong with the world and why is it
not worth living in? It's flat, that's what. Foley, I have
a little room under this rough floor. It's black and full
of water but it has a cot. Go down there, they are after
you tonight. I know these things. If they come here they
will only work me over and I've been worked over often.
But they'll kill you if they find you here. It'd mean that
you were still asking questions."
“Dammit, fat man, I will ask questions and I won't
hide. Now tell me what the four sorts of creatures are.
I'm not stupid. That's only the permanent impression
I leave.”
"Oh, the four sorts of creatures that surround the
Castle are the Pythons, the Toads, the Badgers and
the Unfledged Falcons.'
“Oh what botching! Unbotch it, Bagley. Where do
you get your drivel?”
“I have it anciently from my own ancient person
and position. And beyond that, there are hints of it in
the unguarded passages of Anacharsis Clootz, who was
one of us. Some of it's from the beautiful things of a
lady named Teresa Cepeda, bom a little after Colum-
bus died. He only discovered continents; she discovered
the Castle itself. Hers also was a Spanish venture and
it will be weighed in the final balance. Did you know
that nations as well as persons will be judged at the
final judgment? She will be judged for Spain.”
"If I didn't know that you sometimes have a kernel
inside the rotten shell I'd give up on you, Bagley. Get
specific. What sort of creature am I? Which are you?”
"You are one of the malodorous worms, Foley, the
commonality of mankind, the simplicity. Me, I'm a bad-
ger.
59
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Damn if you're not, you snap-jawed fool. Well, what
are the otherspor
“Your meddling friends, the mind burglars, what do
you call them? the brain-weavers, the Harvesters, they
belong to the pythons, Foley. But always remember that
pythons are prophetic. I don't know why this should be.
It seems unfair; prophecy should be given to worthier
creatures. These pythons sometimes call themselves the
intelligentsia, sometimes the gnostics. They are not
knowing, though, they are fools. But they are the pro-
verbial fools who rush in; and, rushing in, they take by
storm. Remember first that they are snakes; and second
that they are prophetic snakes."
“You may be both parts right about them, Bagley.
But I'm still interested in a man or men who live more
than once, or seem to. Do they classify among your
creatures?”
"Cetainly. The revenants are the toads. They sleep or
they die under stones for years or centuries, and then
they come out from under the stones. But there is
either a legend or fairy tale of the toad with a jewel
set in his head. These returners really have the jewel,
and it may be the jewel of knowledge. They have this
bright thing, just as the pythons have their prophecy;
and I wish we had it ourselves.”
"All right. What are the badgers? Tell me about them.
You are one."
"Foley, it would take many hours to tell about us. We
entrench in the earth and we retain an old empire. I
don't joke. Ours is the real; but even if I should tell you
all about it you would regard us as a network of lodges
or curious societies or comical conventions. Can you not
see that it is your apparent government and world that
is these things? Foley, there are alternate worlds going
on all the time, depending only on the vision. There is
a double reflection. I do not accept yours, and you sure
would not accept mine. But I say that mine is alive
60
FOURTH MANSIONS
ground. His name comes to me as Miguel. Is that right?"
“I think so. I was about to walk out on you. Now I'll
wait a minute. You lifted that out of my mind neatly,
though I don't know who dropped it in there. Yes, I
believe he's trying to raise an army, from the very bot-
tom, but I don't know who he is or where. Do you?”
“No. But I know that the time is due for the reaction,
the fledging. There are probably a hundred such move-
ments starting right now in the world. One of them will
take hold and shake the world, in months, even in days.
It is no help to us, though. Foley, the whisky's gone.
You'll have to go too. I only tolerated you for it.'
“I'm going. Tell me, though, fat man, what does
Patrick mean, as a title, not a name?”
"It means patrician, both as a title and a name.
"Bagley, you're not normal."
“Not always, but more than most. I try to live by
certain norms, squarely as a square. One meaning of
norma, a norm, in Latin is a carpenter's square.”
"I tell you, Bagley, that you vary from that square,
Isn't the word for that abnormal?”
“Not the only word. Me, I'm enormous.
“Yes you are. Bagley- Oh, nothing."
Foley went up the cluttered stairs and out the heavy
door, leaving the impossible or enormous Bertigrew
Bagley who was Patrick of Tulsa in an alternate. He
caught again a corner-of-the-eye glimpse of the dog-ape-
plappergeist that served Bagley. The thing thumbed its
nose at Freddy happily, then made the Levantine ges-
ture, then the African. Plappergeists are vulgar spirits.
Only a trick of the light or a trick of the imagination,
of course, yet a thing was there and it was in accord
with Fred Foley. Less simple fellows would be unable
to see the thing, even out of the corner of the eye.
>
22
The quick fox leaped through dark streets, superb in
his sensing now. Foley was lately a member of a brain-
62
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
and that its more favorable time-track may still be se-
lected. X-ray eyes, Foley, ghost eyes, fish eyes, shadow
flesh, and white golden air. Halo. Aura. Corona.'
"As
your
doctor said, Bagley, one of us is crazy.”
“You cannot see my world at all, Foley. You see and
hear about current states, but have you heard about
Greater Armenia and Greater Ireland as political en-
tities? Have you heard of Christendom still living? Do
you know who still governs by entrenched right?”
“Tell me, Bagley, tell me. I'll be able to do the
piece on you that I was going to do a year ago, and
Tankersley won't fire me for the Carmody caper after
all. Who rules, Bagley?”
"I do locally. I'm the Patrick of Tulsa. The Congre-
gation of Patricks is a complex network, with Exarchs,
Crolls, Autocrats, Larkers, Aloysii, Patriarchs, and so on
up to the Emperor himself.”
“This is rich stuff, Bagley. Well, who is the Emperor?"
"I regret that the office has been vacant for more
than a thousand years. But the authority still remains,
though it is held in abeyance.”
“Oh brotherl All right, I'll eat the whole animal
down to the gamey rump! What are the unfledged fal-
cons?”
"Foley, you should know these things without asking.
You are a rare combination, with the simple mind and
the complex eyes that see on the primary five levels.
The unfledged falcon appears more reptilian than the
reptiles. But sometimes it grows, it is fledged, it flies.
At its best, to me, it is only mediocre: it was the
Crusades; it was the Ottonian Empire (an interloper);
it is firm but doltish authority. At its worst it is the
fascist thing. But it is fledged only as a reaction: I see
a present example of it. Oddly, I am getting this from
your mind. A young man has been torched with this
fever only this past evening. Already he has raised
twenty-five men. He may even get the falcon off the
61
FOURTH MANSIONS
weave and he had eyes all over him. He had better
havel An unlighted car roared out of the street and up
on the sidewalk after him, and men boiled out of it
when it missed him and half crashed. Through a gap
then, down a half-alley, over a fence, up an old outside
stairway, across onto a lower roof, on and on. Freddy
might be a simpleton but he was an agile simpleton.
They did not have him that night.
He lost them, and continued to lurk and sprint for
the fun of it. Easy into a trap (they were waiting for
him outside his own door), coming so close they could
taste him; then into a darkness that he knew, down a
quick back block and into the night door of his own
newspaper building. Into the night company of his peers,
too many of the sleepy loungers and early boys for him
to be followed there.
But somebody was after Fred Foley and they weren't
kidding.
>
63
IV: LIAR ON THE MOUNTAIN
The python is a gentleman,
No common snake uncouth.
He prophesies from a lush divan
In a fortune-teller-booth.
a
The little naked falcon biff
Bound with intengent tethers!
Beware the dreamy falcon if
He ever grows some feathers.
Till new day come, the toad plays dead,
Down in deep earth unlawful.
He has a jewel in his head
That sets it aching awful.
The badger faces down the dogs
And with the powers wrastles,
A steadfast rock in squishy bogs,
A patrick in his castles.
New Bestiary: Audifax O'Hanlon
TANKERSLEY DISCOVERED Freddy Foley about noon, tilted
back in a chair in open-mouthed sleep. The Tank woke
him by kicking the chair out from under him.
"Are you still on the Overlark jag, Foleypus he rum-
bled with kindly thunder.
“Yes. Yes. Still on it.” Freddy was a little startled. It
64
FOURTH MANSIONS
though, if he isn't too far out. He's some kind of wilder-
ness baron”
“No, he's a patrick, Mr. Tankersley, not a baron. I'm
not sure they have barons in their system. Anything else,
Mr. Tankersley?"
"That's it, Foley. Ah, you'd better get up off the floor
first thing. Somehow I don't have complete confidence
in a man who's lying on the floor.”
“Yes sir,” Fred Foley said. He got off the floor and
caught the plane to San Antonio. From San Antonio he
flew in a private plane with a young man named Donald
R. Clark to Pumpville. Donald R. sold computers and
there was a rich rancher near Pumpville who might buy
one. In Pumpville, Foley got on an army copter and
flew the fifteen miles to Vinegaroon. All of this, from
the time of the floor takeoff, was about two hours.
a
Vinegaroon was full of soldiers. “Hey, boys, why do
you not come till they have already leaved?” the Mexi-
cans in Vinegaroon gibed at the soldiers. The Mexicans
had liked the invasion of their town. It set them up a
little. The Texans of Vinegaroon were merely puzzled.
“We can't figure what they wanted at all. They came in,
a double handful of them, with old rifles. They said
they were going to occupy city hall. We don't have
any city hall. They said they were going to occupy the
radio station. We don't have a radio station either. 'Hell,
this is as bad as Mexico,' they said. They said they were
going to occupy the telephone exchange and the post
office both. 'I myself am the telephone exchange and
the post office both,' Miss Villareal told them. “They
are my front two rooms. Come in and occupy.' She
talked Mexican with them then and they went in. When
they came out again they shot a few shots into the air
and sang some songs. What happened in there?' we
asked Miss Villareal. “The leader, Miguel, bought a six
cent stamp,' she said, “and he made me Alcalde. Now
66
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
was a sudden but not unpleasant awakening. “I request
permission to continue"
“Let it go for a day, Foley. It'll keep. Get on the plane
to San Antonio right now. You should be able to catch
some sort of hedgehopper or nonsked to Del Rio from
there. Then get to Vinegaroon any quick way you can.
Something is happening there that's so simple-minded
that I have hopes you may be able to understand it. I
sure can't.”
“Oh, that's only Miguel trying things out a little,” Fred-
dy said. “I think he just wants to take a United States
town for an hour or two to proclaim himself, to get his
name in the papers. He has only twenty-seven men. He
can't do much with them yet.”
"Foley, who in peyote-pickers' heaven is Miguel?”
“I don't know exactly; not to tell, anyhow."
"You've been sitting in that chair for eight hours, they
say. How could you know what's been going on down
in Vinegaroon, Texas in the last hour? Do you know?”
?
“Yes. I told you: Miguel has taken the town with
twenty-seven men from Mexico. It isn't serious. He did
it just to get people hearing about him, and because
it will do him good in Mexico that he was able to cap-
ture a United States town. He'll be back in Mexico by
the time I get there, though, and I did want to see him.”
"Foley, how could you learn such howling nonsense
when you were asleep? It just happened, whatever it is,
or it's still happening. How do you know about it?”
“I work all the time, Mr. Tankersley, even when I'm
asleep. I'll bet I'm the most under-appreciated reporter
on this paper."
"Get down there and find out what happened, Foley,
right now! I sure can't believe the funny stuff that
came over the wire. And while you're down in that bend
of the river, see if you can find out anything about that
recluse, O’Claire. I'm not sure how close he is to Vine-
garoon. Nobody is quite sure where he lives. Find him,
65
>
>
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
I am Alcalde, Mayor of Vinegaroon.' She can be mayor if
she wants to. I'm the elected mayor and I'm supposed to
get a hundred dollars a year for it, but there's never any
money in the treasury. We don't have any treasury.”
The Texan who told this to Freddy Foley didn't
seem very much concerned. “It may be some sort of
Mexican holiday we don't know about,” he said. “It may
have been a sort of pageant or reenactment of some-
thing, but our own Mexicans don't know anything about
it being a special day. Hey, write it up real big, will
you? Make it an invasion! Don't make it sound like a
joke. We'll get a couple of tourists if you make it sound
like a real invasion.”
An army colonel was trying to find out what this
leader had looked like. Various of the inhabitants had
drawn pictures of him. “I can draw better than any of
those,” Freddy Foley said. He drew a picture of what
Miguel really looked like. “Yes, that's him,” the people
said. Freddy went in with Miss Villareal to her two
front rooms. She was the telegraph office too. He filed
his story with her.
"Come on out to my place for a while," a big tawny
man told Freddy. “I bet you never saw a place like
mine.”
“You don't know where I could find a recluse named
O'Claire, do you?” Foley asked him.
"I'm O'Claire,” the man said, and Freddy got in his
pickup truck with him. Things were falling right for
Freddy today. They always did when he was out for
stories. Freddy Foley was a simpleton, but he was a
simpleton that things fell right for.
They were riding through buffalo-grass and sagebrush
and mesquite country. This O'Claire was a jolly man
who talked away as endlessly as the country without
seeming to say any more than it did. He was big, and
sandy-colored in both hair and skin. He was either of
late middle age or else ageless. The pickup truck moved
2
67
FOURTH MANSIONS
like a little boat, covering wide, rolling distances easily;
then there came a change in the motion, a roughness,
as though the little boat were in a nipping cross-tide.
Freddy noticed that they were no longer on a road, but
it was not really rough. The unevenness was cushioned
by the tussocks of buffalo-grass. The mesquite grew
closer and bigger, the grass grew ranker, it became a
thicket country; and the boat was going uphill, weaving
and picking its way. The jolly O'Claire suddenly be-
came musky and weird, without ceasing to be jolly.
"I am completely self-sufficient,” said the O'Claire.
"I don't need the world at all, and the world doesn't
believe it needs me. I am everything. I am all I need.
I can get along without the world better than the world
can get along without me.”
“Nobody can get along without the world,” Freddy
said. This was getting to be heady country. That was
probably the first generalized statement Freddy had
ever made in his life.
“For my time of waiting, for my time of exile, I am
completely self-sufficient,” O'Claire said. “I really have
to be, to set a model for the rest of the world.”
“Just how long is your time of exile, Mr. O'Claire?”
“Oh, all my life so far, and probably all my life for
as long as it extends. There is the world huddled there.
And here am I camped before its front gate. The world
is afraid to look out its front gate. It knows that I am
here."
“It's possible that you don't understand the world,”
Freddy said. That was the second such statement he
had ever made in his life.
“No I don't, don't understand it at all. All I know is
that I am appointed to camp at its front gate and be
self-sufficient. I believe that I am to guard it that no-
body enters that front gate. Nobody ever does, though.
The world is a closed thing, Foley. See the little pec-
cary pigs, Foley. They're running in bigger flocks here
68
>
a
FOURTH MANSIONS than they do inside the world. We will take one. You will take one. I insist that you have that pleasure." The little pigs were running in bigger bunches, the country had become more thicketed and forbidden, and they were rising much higher. "How do I do it? I never took a peccary, O'Claire. I'll do it, though, if it's done." "Here's a little leather lashing. Hold it in your teeth, Foley. Now I'll race up alongside one. Dog, it, Freddy. Throw it and tie it. That's all." "You're kidding." "No, I am not kidding. I want you to have this pleas- " ure. O'Claire raced the pickup alongside a little skittering peccary. Freddy dove out and dogged it, just as the darting little boar had given up and broken speed. Fred­ dy landed on it, and boar and boy rolled over and over a dozen times : the pickup had been going at a great rate of speed. The slippery little squawker dou­ bled back on itself and doubled again, like a greased snake, and tusked Freddy horribly. But Fred got it on its back with its four feet together and lashed them tight. O'Claire backed the pickup alongside. Was it possible that that sandy man was a little white about the edges? Had he expected Foley to do it? Freddy threw the little trussed boar into the back of the pickup. It was about fifty pounds and it sure was mean. "Do you eat them?" Freddy asked. He was bleeding pretty badly about hand and forearm and cheek. That little pig had known how to use its tusks. "Oh sure, that's my main meat. I eat it fresh, and I also preserve it. I have over a thousand pounds of it set back in one of my caves. I hole up a while in the winter months." "It gets winterish down here?'' 69
FOURTH MANSIONS "It does when you're high enough, and I live high. Who wants to live below the frost?'' "You really dog the peccaries from your pickup, O'Claire?" "Sure. It's easy. You did it well the first time, outside of getting tusked." "Who handles your pickup when you dive out on one of the things?" "Oh, I have it under voice control. It backs and stands like. a real dogging pony. I'm serious. A self-sufficient man has to be good on gadgets. I just flip that green toggle on the dash and I have it under voice control. Say, you don't see a house around here anywhere, do you?" They had come to pretty high country by now. They hadn't ridden twenty-five miles, and Foley hadn't no­ ticed any country this high when he flew into Pull)p­ ville with Clark. There was a big stream of water boom­ ing down the thicketed hills, and it had been a smaller stream lower down. That could not be. The place was unnatural. The earth sounded hollow below them. They were near the crest. How could there be so much water flowing down? "No, I sure don't see any house around here," Foley said. "And I didn't expect to see such high mountains around here." "Ah, those-! make them myself. I told you I was self­ sufficient. I was hoping you'd say you couldn't see any that's house. why Nobody's �} 1ey call ever me been a recluse able and to find my house: a legend. Well, here we are. "It's like everything was doubled here, O'Ciaire," Fred­ dy said. "Everything that has substance will cast shadow, Foley. My things have substance. Don't get the things mixed up. Most people's things are shadow only." O'Claire parked the pickup where it stalled, with its 70
FOURTH MANSIONS nose pointing up at forty-five. Foley got out with him but he sure could not see any house there. "We'll string the little pig first and let him bleed," O'Claire said. He pulled three oak poles out; they were already chained together. He hooked on a little snatch block and set it up. He set a little clamp around the hocks of the animal and swung it into the air. He hooked it on. He stabbed it into the throat and it gushed a fountain there. Where had O'Claire pulled this sudden equipment from? It was a little shed there where the mesquite grew close to the mountain. You wouldn't have noticed that it was a shed if there hadn't been a little equipment in it. It was just a little cove of moun­ tain-colored rocks. O'Claire led the way up staired rocks either through the shed or behind it. They were up on a rock ledge that was either ceiling or deck or portico. They went through rooms of a sort that held furniture of a sort, but you would badly have guessed that they were either rooms or furniture if O'Claire hadn't been with you. There was water running and fall­ ing, and the sound of bigger water above. "What's up there?" Freddy asked. He was losing di­ rection in the several quasi-rooms and could hardly de­ cide which was inside and outside. "Oh, the fountain," O'Claire said, "one of the primary fountains of the world." "There can't be a fountain on a mountaintop," Freddy protested. "A while ago you were thinking there couldn't be a mountaintop," O'Claire told him. "You didn't see it when you flew in. Hardly anyone comes onto one of these foun­ tains unless it's shmvn to him, but every river in the world begins with one. The cartographers don't know about them and the geologists don't know, but they are , so. "It can't be artesian," Freddy insisted. "Attesian water
7 1
a
-
FOURTH MANSIONS
must come from higher ground somewhere and there
isn't any. There can't be a fountain here.”
“Behold it, though,” O'Claire said, and there was
quite a fountain there. “This is right at the front gate
of the world and the world doesn't lnow it's here. None
of it's as large as it looks. The lake-it's nearly cir-
cular-is only nincty feet across, and the fountain in
the center gushes up only thirty feet. Even the roaring
isn't as loud as it seems. A decible recorder gives a
low level of noise. There is quite a bit of illusion on my
mountain.”
Musical thunder of the fountain. Climbing churning
water that was golden or white or green or blue or
thunder-color. Height above height of it, fountains burst-
ing out of fountains, castles of water piled on top of
castles. Whole nations of spirits living in the towering
columns of foam. The living airy shocking sudden smell
of fountain water, salt and sulphur and iron, and fresh.
And the vast bottomless lake of which the incredible
fountain was center.
“O’Claire, how deep is that thing?”
“Don't know, Foley, I've always been afraid to sound
it. There's things here I'm not supposed to understand.
I'm a patrick and my job is to guard this door of the
world. But there are caves below the lake, dry caves.
This whole height is like a sponge, full of caves and
passages. I know that if I sounded the lake it would
sound far deeper than the caves below it and it'd scare
me. It's full of fish, though; full of shellies, full of grand-
pappy frogs and big turtles. I could live on its produce
forever.”
"It's full of big blacksnakes too,” Freddy growled, “big
ones, five or six there."
“Sometimes they are seven, sometimes eight, some-
times nine,” O'Claire said, “but they aren't snakes. They
are all the tentacles of one amorphous creature. I be-
lieve that every primary fountain has one. This one
72
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
tries to escape, and if he ever escaped into the world
there would be disaster beyond telling. He leaves the
center sometimes and tries to climb out onto the shores.
Then I beat him back. That's the main reason I am
here."
"Oh snake hokey, O'Claire! Who beats him back when
you're off in town?”
“There is an oyster that whistles. I hear, and I come
back at preternatural speed from wherever I happen to
be. Foley, do not look blank at me! You should light
up to the magic of the oyster that whistles! And the ten-
tacled fountain-devil has never slipped me once. I be-
lieve that a few of them (from other fountains, not
from mine) do slip into the world from time to time,
though. They are what does the damage to the world.
You would not know of any such new seven- or eight-
or nine-armed creature wreaking havoc recently, do you?”
“Maybe I do. O’Claire, you're a liar as high as your
mountain.”
“That I am, little Fred Foley, that I am.”
“Miss Villareal warned me of you, I think. She gave
I
me a sort of blessing: 'That you be safe from cascabels
and their brothers, and toads, and unboin things, and
the mountaintop liar.' You are the mountaintop liar,
O'Claire.
"Certainly. How about pancakes for supper? Feed
a few sticks into the horno there and get it hotted up."
Then O'Claire whistled sharply, a whistle cutting
through the roaring of the fountain.
“Hey, Peggy, bring the milk!” he called loudly.
"I didn't see that little clay furnace when I came up
here first,” Foley said. "It looks like it'd heat up quick,
though. O'Claire, what are cascabels."
“Rattlesnakes, Foley, but don't pay any attention to
Miss Villareal's blessing other than to be protected by
it. She is an intuitive person but weak on her zoology.
The black creature is not the cascabel, but the polipo
73
2
)
2)
FOURTH MANSIONS
maldito, the misnamed serpent from the beginning. The
toads are toads indeed, but they have servitors who
will kill to protect their reputations. And by unborn
things she really means unfinished or unfledged things.
She hasn't quite the words for the four creatures. And
neither she nor you need fear the mountaintop liars nor
any patricks. We patricks stand ready to serve and to
save. I believe that God must be out of his wits that he
does not call on us yet. We await that call forever.
Yeah, just mix the buckwheat flour and the honey and
crush in a little of the rocksalt; it's from the fountain
too. A little butter then, and afterward the milk.”
“I knew a liar on a mountain," Freddy sang softly to
the tune of High Noon.
"He had a pancake for a house. Where's the milk,
O’Claire? Everything else is here.
"He keeps a polyp in a fountain. What will I use in-
stead of milk, fountain water?
"He gets’um milk without no cowse. Hey, is that
Peggy?”
That was Peggy, a little she-goat who came up to the
lake. O'Claire milked her into a wooden bucket, enough
for the pancakes, and gave it to Foley. Freddy mixed
and poured into a pan and set that into the horno. He
mixed some more in another pan and O'Claire gave
him a very cold sausage to cook with it.
“Is that from the pig we just killed?” Freddy asked.
"How so quick?”
“No, no, it takes four days to get the high taste out of
one of those animals even if you know what you're doing.
This is last week's pig. Use a lot of it, Foley, I love
sausage. Now then, I have white wine and red wine,
beer, sagebrush tea, com whisky, peach brandy, tequila,
mead (which is honey-whisky), milk and buttermilk,
but no coffee. Can't grow it here and I grow everything
that I use. What will it be, Foley?”
“Honey-mead," Foley said. “I've read about it, but
74
>
go down.”
FOURTH MANSIONS
I've never seen it or tasted it. Were those stone benches
there when we first came up? Was the stone-slab
table? We're all ready, then. O'Claire, I am the best
mountaintop pancake and sausage cooker in the world.
What's that fruit and where did you get it when I wasn't
looking?"
"It is brother to the chokecherry and half-brother to
the sandplum. I grow them, Foley; I grow everything
I need. I am the self-sufficient man.
“The whole supper is a mountaintop lie, O'Claire, but
it's good. My own touch, you know.”
It was really too early to be a supper. It was, as a mat-
ter of fact, the first meal that Freddy had had that
day. It was very bright sunlight yet, none of the twilight
stuff. Whatever Freddy saw on the mountaintop was
there. “But where did you get the cheese, O'Claire?”
he demanded. “You didn't
“Oh, I get the cheese from goats' milk and cows' milk.
I keep three of each. I have a thousand pounds of cheese
ripe, and more ripening. I have much more honey than
that, whole caves full of it. I run about a hundred hives.
I have granaries full of buckwheat and barley and corn
and Mexican beans. I have amphoras full of blackberries;
they go so good with turtle. I have a mushroom cellar
that is directly under the fountain. I have peanuts-you
wouldn't believe the quantity of peanuts I have. I have
whole vats of cactus syrup. See this shirt? I spun and
wove it myself out of yucca fiber. I grow my own flax,
I shear my own sheep, I make my own shoes and
jackets from my own leather. I grow my own tobacco
and make my own pipes. The basin below the fountain
lake is my power pool. I close the dam for an hour when
I want power, then I let my donkey generator churn
and run my power tools. I cut my own timber, I make
my own charcoal, I fire my own clay pots, I stave my
own barrels. I have a house of twenty rooms, but they
are scattered, no two together, the furthest a mile apart.
75
FOURTH MANSIONS
This is my fountain room. I have a fortress, I have an
arsenal, I have a library and observatory. I know the
caves under me better than does any other living person,
but there are many others who know parts of them, and
there were almost always a few people living in them.
These caves are very deep, and they go lower than
the bottom of the great river itself. I can duck into a
cave entrance five feet from me (you do not see it)
)
and go through eighteen miles of passage dry-shod and
come up in Mexico. I could hide armies in my caves.
“I think about a little army now, of one Miguel. Could
it hide in your caves?”
“Miguel knows me. Mine is one of the several great
minds that had influenced him before he was recently
struck by that gaggle-brained lightning. He has visited
me before. I expect him to come again. He may be
able to line up a dozen such havens. How are you in
accord with him, Foley? I don't catch that part.”
"I don't know how I am but I read him somehow. I
don't even know his last name."
“Fuentes. That is 'Fountains.' You are about to ask
whether there is some connection between him and the
savant Michael Fountain in your own town? I believe the
boy wrote to the man several times, relying on the
name coincidence for introduction. I believe the man
answered, giving some good advice which is now being
ignored. And I believe the boy is presently right in ig-
noring this good advice.”
“He can't get anywhere with his games, of course.
Like taking over Vinegaroon.”
“No, he can't get anywhere, Foley, not for more than
the long hour. He will take over the world, of course,
but that will be for hardly more than a decade. Even
so, he may decide to throw his power to another. For
a little while the world has become a vacuum crying to
be filled. Miguel is a compassionate boy and cannot stand
to hear it cry. That's the way they all start, but they
76
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
all become a little coarsened as they move along that
way. It's possible that he will simply back the world
into a corner and then give it over to ... to I don't
know whom ... before either he or the world is too
much damaged by it.”
“I hadn't noticed the world being a vacuum, O'Claire.”
“Yes, it is bankrupt, just when it believes itself doing
famously.”
“Exactly what are you, O'Claire? You talk so much
and you don't say anything.”
“You were with another one of us last night, Foley.
I believe, though, that you had figured that out. His dog
was restless, but nobody has ever seen his dog. You had
a story there, a poltergeist or plappergeist story, and
you muffed it.”
“Bagley? Are you and he really of the same species,
O’Claire? Yes, I know the jokes about Bagley's invisible
dog, but it was written up years ago. Besides, it isn't
exactly a dog and it isn't exactly invisible. I saw it
myself. Well, no, I didn't really see it, but I saw it wink
and flash happy obscenities, and I know what it looks
like if I ever do see it. You are a patrick like old fat
man Bagley?”
“I am Patrick of Pecos, Foley, and you guessed it
before you started down here. My realm goes from
the Glass Mountains and the Santiagos on eastward as
far as the Sutton Plains and Eagle Pass, and it includes
all the Serranias del Burro south of the great arc of the
river. Foley, there are three hunting men below, and
they are masquerading as conventional hunters. They
will pretend to see a buck deer and they will shoot,
but they will be shooting at us. We withdraw now.”
And they did withdraw, away from the fountain on
the hilltop and into the maze of rock castles, and then
into a furnished room. “But they'll find the remnants of
our supper, O'Claire,” said Freddy. “They'll find every-
thing we left scattered around.
1
77
a
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“No, they won't find a thing. I also have an invisible
creature, a plappergeist who serves me, and he'll clean
it all up. They won't even find the fountain or the lake.
They'll be led astray. They won't even discover that it's
a mountaintop. They'll find that it's quite a low hill, as
you saw that it was from your plane.”
"
“Well, which one of us do they want to kill, O'Claire?”
“You in particular today, Foley. And myself every
day. They have fixed your interest on the reappear-
ing men again, though, since they're warning you away
from them. And the reappearing men aren't really very
interesting, Foley; not nearly as interesting as I am.
“Do all patricks read minds, O'Claire?”
“Naw. None of us do. We're just smart. You've got a
story on Miguel, Foley, if you know what to do with it.
And you've got a story on me if you know how to handle
it. These are both better stories than anything on Over-
lark. Myself, I doubt that men reappear. It is only a
shape of mind that reappears. Theirs is a Fountain In-
side-Out, the Vortex. It sucks you down. Forget it. You'll
be a long time getting the story on Overlark. It won't
be very good when you get it. Nobody will believe it.
And you will be either confined or killed in getting it.
I resent him and his. I consider us patricks to be much
more important."
"Well, the Overlark story is the one I will have to get,
O’Claire. You talk like a friendly. oracle, so be one to
me. Is there a conspiracy against the world by certain
men who seem to live again and again?”
"Oh, a few of those things must have got together a
long time ago, Foley. I guess they try to run the world.
So do we patricks.
“Do they try to run it for good or for evil?”
“If there are such things as good and evil, then their
effect is evil.”
“In that case, what can I do about it?”
" “In that case, there is nothing you can do about it. I
,
>
78
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
insist that they aren't that important; but they think that
they are, and they kill partly from vanity. I believe that
they do not like to be annoyed by the callow."
“How exactly do they effect their evil, O'Claire?”
“In no one way exactly. They do it in such manner
that it can hardly be traced to them. There are a few
narrow passes where a group can ambush the world,
and some of them are always there. They themselves be-
lieve that they are the gyroscope to prevent the world
from jumping its tracks, from progressing to the next
Mansion, as the Lady called it. There was one period,
only a few centuries ago, when the civilized core of
the world had reached a certain peak-not the highest
peak that it was meant to reach, but it had reached a
reasonably sound balance at a good level. There was
even hope then that the world could make the transi-
tion to a still loftier level without disaster. There was
present, however, a group of these men or these things
which we are talking about. They decided the direction
of the world was not to their liking; they believed the
world was a bone misset. They broke it, to set it again
in their own way. Millions died, and the new setting
was in a slightly different direction."
“Was it a great war, O'Claire?”
“No. Not a war at all. It is sometimes called the
Plague or the Black Death."
“And they actually loosed that on the world?”
"Indignation does not belong to the historical per-
spective, Foley. The plague did surprise them by its
violence, but be careful that you do not slander the
nature of a thing, even a disease. It had a gentle nature.
It killed within three days and with no great pain. Its
characteristic was a rather happy sort of delirium. There
was, besides, a compassionate element to it which I have
seldom mentioned. It struck down adults only, seldom
children.”
“You will not make me love it, O'Claire. What were
9
>
79
FOURTH MANSIONS
some of the other narrow passages where the Overlark
sort interfered?”
“Oh, once there was a country and generation of un-
usual oppression. The people were ground down by
the monarchy, the nobility, and the newly-monied. It
seemed that there was no way out of it except a cleans-
ing revolution. And indeed the revolution was begun,
and with high hope. Then the members of the group
interfered, evilly, as you would say.”
"And it failed?”
“No, it succeeded. That's the point, Foley, you will
never be able to trace anything to that group. But
the revolution succeeded in such a way that it might
have been better if it had failed. It was not clear gain
at any rate, not a clean turning. And it could have been.
“And there was a later time when sincere men tried
to build an organization as wide as the world to secure
the peace of the world. It had been tried before and it
had failed before. Perhaps if it failed this time it would
not be tried again for a very long while. The idea of
the thing was attacked by good and bad men, in good
faith and bad. The final realization of it was so close
that it could be touched with the fingertips. A gambler
wouldn't have given odds on it either way. It teetered,
and it almost seemed as though it would succeed. Then
members of that group interfered.” ”
“And it failed, O’Claire?”
“No. It succeeded, Foley, as in the other case. It
succeeded in so twisted a fashion that the Devil him-
self was puzzled as to whether he had gained or lost
ground by it. And he isn't easily puzzled.
"There have been any number of like cases. There
was one in particular that is the most interesting of them
all. You will be especially interested in it, Foley, for it
concerns your prey Overlark in one of his earlier mani-
festations, one that you haven't stumbled onto yet.
Thunder, Foley, thunder, it's late! I must hurry. I'll fly
80
>
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
you to San Antonio instantly so you can catch the Tulsa
plane and be home tonight. Come.”
“No, wait, O'Claire. I don't need to be home tonight.
Tell me this instance.”
“No, Foley. I've got to get you out of here right now.
Get in the plane."
How was there a plane there? How had O'Claire fired
it up already? How were they airborne so swiftly? How
was the mountaintop no more than a low hill when
they looked back at it? Why couldn't Foley see the
fountain and the lake now? What had happened to
the fountain? If we are out of fountains then all is lost.
“O’Claire,” Freddy said, “I feel that all the fountains
in the world are dried up."
“Naw, they don't dry up, Foley,” O'Claire said, “but
sometimes their waters must run underground for a
while. That's been the case for a few centuries. This
does impoverish the surface world. Wit becomes wit-
less and the daily bread goes stale. Both wealth and
poverty lose something of their special enjoyment. And
I'm told by people of the flesh that even the generative
act isn't as much fun as it used to be.”
How were they in San Antonio already?
“Wait, O'Claire," Foley begged. “It's thirty minutes till
my plane time. You can tell me about Carmody Overlark
in that earlier manifestation.”
"Foley, the oyster just whistled,” O'Claire said, look-
ing a little mad. “The monster is trying to get out of
the fountain: I've got to get back there with unnatural
speed.”
And O’Claire was gone from there with unnatural
speed, back into the air too quickly for any clearance
or regulation. Gone. Gone.
“I knew a liar on a mountain,” Freddy sang softly
and grinned. But he wished that he had gotten that
last lie out of O'Claire.
>
81
V: HELICAL PASSION AND SAINTLY SEXPOT
So they get it into their heads that it is arrobami-
ento, or rapture. But I call it abobamiento, fool-
ishness.
Interior Castle: Teresa of Avila
THE HARVESTERS were met again that evening in Mora-
da, the home of the Bauers.
Bedelia Bencher brought a red rose to Letitia Bauer
-“for your death”—but neither of them understood it.
-
“We come to the problem again and again,” Big Jim
Bauer rumbled, beginning on the big thing rapidly, and
there was an overpowering medical smell in the room,
compounded with the usual odor of mysticity that the
Harvesters exuded. “As to the world and the people
of it, we have come to a too early perfection more
quickly than we imagined, for all that it's taken these
thousands of years to bring us here. If there is not to be
another cycle of rise and bust we must make a break-
through right now. The limit isn't set so high as we
imagined. The ancients were correct that the limit, the
sky, could almost be reached by thrown rocks and shot
arrows and catapults. We're pressing against that sky
now. Soon we'll be crushed flat between the unyielding
sky and the upraised earth. In all our amplitude we
now come to the new narrowness. I believe that humans
have been at this crisis-plateau many times before and
have always failed. This time we will not fail. We will
82
>
-
FOURTH MANSIONS
break through. We will shatter the sky. We will be free
to complete our growth.”
“I've always hated that sky and all it stands for,” Arou-
et Manion whined sharply, like a saw cutting through
elm-wood. “One of my spiritual fathers swore always
that we must first put out the lights of heaven. I agree
that we must shatter this heaven-sky completely and
forever. It's no more than a filthy membrane that pre-
vents us from being born. Let's use words correctly for
a while. The love business is gone and over with. We
can now speak of the higher love or the cosmic love,
but we all know that it must be a grcat surge of hatred
that will break through the sky. We've climbed up
through our puling infancy; we've come into our awk-
ward and disgusting adolescence; and we all know that
we've been two utterly different creatures in those two
states. Tadpole does not differ nearly as much from the
frog as we do from our earlier and later state, except
in appearance. But now we'll break through to the third
state, to full adulthood. There hasn't been even one
fully adult human being from the beginning of the world
until now. We'll correct that tonight. We'll finally, the
seven of us, become creatures of the third state, adults.”
,
“I feel there's something hellish about it,” Wing Manion
protested. “Who are we to shatter the sky, even by
metaphor? There's a framework and a timetable some-
where for us to follow, I'm sure of that. Isn't it arrogance
and dishonesty for us to break that up?"
“Certainly, certainly, arrogance and dishonesty," Big
Jim Bauer agreed heartily. “Arrogance and dishonesty
are exactly what we need. We'll find likelier words
for these virtues in due time, but they're the exact
names in the present context. We can clean it up,
we can clean it all up when we have the time for it.
Oh, it's the easiest thing in the world to move and bend
the limits on the local level. I've already done so. I'm
not called the bishop's left-hand man for nothing. I
83
FOURTH MANSIONS
knead him like a lump of sour dough. I had but to use
a few phrases which Aroliet lifted from Teilhard, and
he made them his own. We become now the Overpeo-
ple of the Third Testament, I explained it to the bishop.
The father was the type-figure of the First or Old
Testament, the ancestral, chthonic, black-earth beast
figure, our origin and our animality. The son was the
type-figure of the Second or New Testament: that
momentary puling thing that was called Love, that mo-
mentary puling thing that was called God, the awkward
adolescence of ourselves. Now we come to the holy
spirit who is the type-figure of the Third Testament.
This is ourselves when we shatter the sky and become
full and free people.” Jim Bauer rubbed his big hands
in complete pleasure with himself.
“I explained it to him and I explain it to you," he
went on, “that God was the missing link, a weak cate-
,
gorical imperative for a weak interval, but necessary.
May that dismal interlude quickly be excised from our
unconsciousness when we've become adult. God stood
between the beasts and man in the evolutionary se-
quence: lower than full man, of course. And now we'll
be done with that figure forever. God could never be
spoken of as holy without laughing, but man may be
spoken of as holy after tonight.”
“How did the bishop take it?” Bedelia Bencher asked
Bauer. “Doesn't he ever get chock-full of you? I do
sometimes.'
“He took it completely and trustingly as a backward
child would, Bedelia. He's even going on television with
a presentation of it when I've cleaned it up a little
for him. The camera-eye, for him, is the pearl beyond
price. For this he's given up and traded all that he
owns. ‘But what will a man receive in exchange for
his soul, or his intellect?' I taunted him a little; but
he only grinned vacantly. Both of us know that he never
had any soul, or intellect. But we are untouchable
92
84
FOURTH MANSIONS
from that quarter, and also from the legal sector.
We've played with our power over others, having good
game with it. Now we'll turn back our powers on our-
selves, and we won't be playing. Tonight the seven of
us will make the big jump. We'll become the first of
the privileged mutation. We'll shatter the sky like the
dirty glass it is, the unauthorized membrane that has
shut us off from life. We'll become the first of the new
people, the Third Testament of the world.”
“Well, will we be the end of it then?” Letitia Bauer
asked. “What if we receive everything ever and I still
want to say 'No, no, that is not near enough? I will
say it. I hate to be the end of anything. If we break into
the last land, I'll hate it, even if it is infinitude. There
has to be something beyond even infinity for me. Is
there no hope of danger beyond?”
“Of course there is!” Jim Bauer boomed. “We'll be
the beginning and not the end. Even the little murky
half-brained theologians, grubbing into a thing long dead,
have speculated that Three as the number of persons
in the Godhead was never more than a contingent num-
ber. They speculate that there may be as many as five,
or seven, or even nine persons in what used to be called
the Trinity. Even such little pigs'-eyes as they may look
a little ways forward. I tell you that there may be
many thousands of stages or person-types in the human-
ity thing, and we now break intrepidly to only the
third. There' is hope of danger for millions of years,
Letitia, forever.”
“We're clear on the medical aspect," Arouet Manion
said. “I'm an M.D. I was a general practitioner and
surgeon before I became a psychiatrist. And James Bauer
was a medical doctor on his way to becoming an emi-
nent biologist. We'll set the stage for the induced muta-
tions now, and each of the seven must give every aspect
of himself.”
“Will it hurt?” Bedelia Bencher asked cheerfully.
85
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“ “Certainly, certainly,” Jim Bauer said. “It doesn't
have to, as far as the surgery goes, but we want it to.
We want to bring out the agonizing awareness of every
one of us in every possible way. Begin the inward-
turned brain-weave, all of you, while we get ready for
the rest of it. Weave it to the ultimatel It is ourselves
we are mutating now.”
The helical passion of Salzy Silverio stung them all
with the strength of it, for all that she was gobbling
little cheese snacks and chattering inanities with Be-
delia Bencher. The weave needed the passion of Salzy
more than any other thing. It was possibly the strongest
element in the whole weave.
A strong smell of ammonia had been released into
the air. There were two large brass-colored spheres
there and they sent lavender lightning dancing between
them across the room. They raised a lot of acrid ozone
with their eerie sparking, and also raised all their spirits
unaccountably. The pink hair of Bedelia rose up from her
head into quivering extremities from the charge in
the air and there was a garish corona about her.
"It's all hokus, of course,” said Hondo Silverio in an
easy voice that seemed to come out of a nest in the
rocks. “It's my own arranging. It sets up something of
the primitive conditions of the world when life sparked
for the first time; or at least something of the laboratory
myth of those probable conditions. It was a hoax that
first time too, but a primitive glob did allow itself to
be hoaxed by it and was conned into coming to life.
The hoax has been a condition ever since then, and will
be forever. And the first glob, you know, was itself a
mutation, and against stiff statistical odds. The normal
didn't slip in till later, sideways and ashamed of itself,
and the normal has never been of any use to anything:
not then, not now, not ever. We're tampering with the
double-helix centrality of our own body cells, and the
helical passion of my own serpentine wife has already
86
FOURTH MANSIONS
set it to going. Come with it, all of youl We need show-
boats tonight, we need outlandish showoffs! Outdo your-
selves! Scatter the ectoplasmic confetti. This is carnival!”
“Throw serpentine, you old serpent,” Wing Manion
called out, like a laughing fish. “Throw streams of it.
It's a water carnival, but we're the seven-headed dog
at the bottom of the water. What's the dog doing down
there anyhow? Does anyone remember the name of the
seven-headed dog?”
James Bauer and Arouet Manion were arranging for
the surgery, but they had everything draped in plush
purple instead of antiseptic white.
"We disregard all infecting!” Bauer boomed. “We
welcome it. How can infection hurt us? We are ourselves
setting about the infecting of the world. How can we
fear what we'll get from each other? We wish to get
everything possible from each other. What can environ-
mental germs do to us? We ourselves are evolutionizing
all environments tonight.”
“Mighty sloppy medical practice," said Bedelia Bench-
er, but who can take seriously a girl with her pink
hair standing on end? The contribution of Bedelia to
the weave had always been a sort of cosmic hilarity.
And she was into the weave now, pink and pungent,
the numinous spook, the cinnamon cookie, the mad ani-
ma who had never left off being a kid. Plappergeistic
and poltergeistic, the lavender lightning was about her
especially, the witch who was no more than a sketch in
red chalk. She had really never had a body, that Bede-
lia, only a chalk sketch of one. This gave her a certain
lightness, and there was enough heaviness in some of
the others. Summer lightning, lavender lightning inside
the walls, and hazel-colored sparks out of her eyes. She
had been, perhaps, the primordial mutation-light enough
to come to life—and the heavier normal things had not
arrived till later.
Hondo Silverio was now into the weave with his mot-
87
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
tled-green humor and his ancient nobility. “You forget
sometimes," he had said once, “that the first motley,
the first mottled-green clown suit, was a snake suit. We
were the original humorists. Our sudden scaring of peo-
ple, that's the best practical joke of all, and it never
wears out.
And what he said now was “We need even the very
first types for this induced mutation and don't forget
that the original person-type was a double one, and that
the nobler and more humorous half of that original father
image was the snake.”
A noble snake was Hondo, but he seemed to crawl
less than the others.
Once more Jim Bauer was projecting his person with
big hands as he arranged instruments and vials and
needles. He was a joyous rumble, the arrogance and
dishonesty that was needed to break the stifling sky-
limit on them. He was power, do not doubt that. He
was rumbling spirits. He was smashed fountains. He was
lightning
He struck like lightning.
Bauer, with blinding speed and incredible force,
smashed his wife Letitia in the face with a stunning
chopping knife-blow, felling her. She screamed but once
as she fell. He had gashed her suddenly and deeply
with the ghastly Harvester mark. She bled deep red as
she went chalk-white. Perhaps she was killed by that
one blow; her head lolled as though her neck was broken.
Danger!
But was it such a dirty danger she had wanted?
She came strongly into the weave at the instant of her
fall, in with the whimper of death but still with that
same crying for danger. All the ashen and angular pas-
sion that this moon-colored slim woman could give she
gave
them. But she had broken and died at that mo-
ment of first bloodshed, and they all acquired pieces of
her. The gouging of the sector out of her head, the long
88
FOURTH MANSIONS needle into her side under her arm where the lymph is closest, the deep rasping and inoculation of the round, were all bloody and botched with her. They were meant to be. Arouet Manion slid into the brain-weave with his own cool elegance, his chilly passion for these hot things. Arouet loved the blade; he loved the needle; he was a sadist in these things. He slashed and gouged. He had the cold passion for blood. "The old barber-surgeons were right," he whined dreamily. "Bleed the patients, bleed them all, bleed them for everything! It weakened and killed the patients , of course, but it brought such soul-filling satisfaction to the barber-surgeons. I love it, I love it!" There was something almost inelegant in the Arm1et elegance carried so far. Wing Manion, the speckled Klee-fish, the saintly sex­ pot, swam into the weave with a billow of underwater excitement. She belonged to the waters that are under the world, and she bled pale but ancient fish-serum instead of blood when she was gashed in head and side and round. Oh, she bled a small bucket of it, though. There was a lot of it in her. "The mechanism of this is quite simple," Jim Bauer rumbled as he struck Salzy Silverio such a bloody, deep, blinding gash on the head that she fell to the floor stunned. The power was in the rumbling sound of Bauer's words, not in their meaning. "We extracted serum and specimen from each of you some time back," Bauer growled out like a throaty lion, "and little glots of flesh, nerve stringers, samples of every sort of cell. We made living broths of these, and we mixed in the tissues of mutating worms and newts. We shot the broths through with high voltages and frequencies, we bathed them in every sort of ray, we bombarded them with strange particles, we encanted them: 'Mutate, damn you, mu­ tate,' we encanted. We took one half of each broth and distributed it among the other six. Now each one of us 89
FOURTH MANSIONS
will receive back most of his own, but a little of all
the others. There are a dozen triggers inside the broths,
the serums. They reenter us. They should produce cellu-
lar explosions inside of us. We'll mutate in our smallest
cells and in our total symbiosis. Each of us has now re-
ceived three violent wounds and has received the serums
into them. Ah, isn't the pain exquisite? Fainting again,
Arouet, and you love it so much? There is an additive
to the serums, the most painful known. It harms nothing,
but it tortures. We want us all to feel it to the utmost.
“What, two others of you are still conscious? Are there
two others here as strong as myself? The men are gone
under, and two Shes remain unbroken. Bedelia, you sur-
prise me! I didn't know that you were one of the strong
ones.
Bedelia Bencher was not particularly strong now. She
was retching violently, and her pinkishness had turned
to purple. She had probably lost a quart of blood, and
she was blinded by the ammonia fumes and the lavender
lightning from the brass spheres. But she was still
conscious.
And Salzy Silverio was most certainly conscious. Her
mouth was in motion without words; her lips were
moving with the illusion of a double-helix motion, a
snake-mouth motion; her frame was shaking, her eyes
sparked with hate and green laughter at the same time.
This Salzy had not collapsed for long when she was
struck down with the gaping head wound. She would
be the last to give up, always. She was conscious and
snapping with color. She even flicked her tongue out
from broken moving lips. She was the twisted passion
itself.
Jim Bauer, swaying and falling all over himself, al-
ready far over the threshold of pain, opened wall jets
to let measured amounts of noxious gas into the room.
This would bring unconsciousness to all of them for a
half hour.
90
FOURTH MANSIONS
But Bauer stayed on his feet by blind last effort, until
the blackness or the purpleness should overwhelm him.
He wanted to savor the pain and arrogance and hate
as long as possible. He deliberately walked on the bodies
of all six of his companions as they lay on the floor,
heeling lavishly into vital sectors. He trod last on the
sinewy, lithe, snake-strong body of Salzy Silverio, on
stomach, on breast, on throat, while she watched him
with defiant snake's eyes bright with hatred. Then
Bauer collapsed in a final spasm, falling heavily atop
the firm fish-body of Wing Manion.
Salzy Silverio closed her inner eyelids, her snakes'
eyelids, but she could still see as though through mist
and she would not give up her consciousness. And the
brain-weave itself remained fully conscious.
They all came around about the same time. Hondo
Silverio opened windows to clear the room. It had just
come on deep twilight while they had been out. They
were all new people now, of course; they had mutated.
There was truly a stronger linkage among them, a
stronger mastery of the world. They had shattered the
sky, and now there was no limit at all upon them.
They would have looked disheveled and disreputable
to other eyes, but to their own new seven-faceted eye
they did not.
“Are we all all right?” Salzy Silverio asked with a cer-
tain huskiness in her voice. After all, big Jim Bauer had
stood on her throat and ground a heel into it; but it
could have been a very elephant and it wouldn't really
have hurt her. And, of course, nothing could ever hurt
her again, now that she had mutated.
“Yes, all are all right,” said James Bauer. “Except
Letitia, that is. Ah-she's dead. I somehow expected
that, though.”
“Isn't that a little bit awful?” Bedelia asked sharply.
“We are all of us consummately awful now," Bauer
a
91
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
rumbled, “in the real meaning of the word. We are
filled with awe of ourselves, and we are completely
awe-inspiring,”
"Oh shut up that stuff!” Bedelia flared angrily. “Your
wife is dead. This should bring you out of your silly
daze. For one thing, there's the legal thing. I think you
murdered her. You must have broken her skull, you
struck her so terribly."
"Oh, possibly, possibly; yes, I'm sure I did. But it's
no great matter.
“No great matter?”
“Of course not, Bedelia. You have some carryover,
I'm afraid. It's almost as if you hadn't mutated com-
pletely. Oh, I can get a new wife easily enough, and
I will, within the present hour. As for my legal aspects,
don't you realize that we're now the masters of the law
and of everything?”
“No, I sure don't realize that,” Bedelia protested. “I
think it's horrifying.”
“A little horror makes the soup taste better, Biddy,"
Salzy Silverio consoled her. “Don't you just love to come
onto threshing monsters in a bowl of soup? I think the
new way will be fun. I've taken a liking to the arrogance
and hatred bit already.”
“I'd marry you, Biddy, on the spot,” Bauer said, “but
"
that wouldn't expand the brain-weave, and I believe
it should be expanded by one more now.
“You sure as hell would not marry me, you final pig!”
Biddy swore.
“Of course I would, Bedelia. We're not ourselves now,
we all belong to each other. But I believe we should
expand the weave by one. Letitia is still in the weave,
you know. We can still feel her. We can still talk to her.”
That was true. Letitia Bauer was still in the brain-
weave. They could hear her ashen weeping in waste
places somewhere, they could still feel the moon-color
and slimness of her.
2
92
FOURTH MANSIONS
“I believe it might be well to have several dead people
in the weave,” Bauer mused, but even his musing had
the sound of muted thunder. “It will give us better
perspective to have several dead people in our com-
munication. Which one would be best? Oh well, I'd better
get to the marrying part first and then return to the
murder. There's a girl going by on the sidewalk."
Jim Bauer went out and took the girl by the hand.
He pulled her into the house, and she came along in
dazed fashion. “We're married now," he said. “Your
name is Letitia Bauer now. See her dead body there.
Look like her. Look like her! I tell you. You cannot set
up a will against any of us. We are the will of the world
now. Look like her. More. That's close, but more. I can
compel you, you know. Yes, that's about right.”
It wasn't about right. It was perfect. The new girl
was Letitia Bauer now. She had had to age about twelve
years. She had to become moon-colored of skin and
ashen of hair. She had to slough twenty pounds and be-
come slim. But when one of the new mutated masters
compels a thing, it must be done.
“Strip the old one, Wing,” Bauer ordered. “Strip them
both. Then clothe the new one after she's been properly
bloodied and inoculated and introduced into the weave.
She'll mutate easily enough now, I believe, and the
old Letitia will help her. Hondo, get rid of the body.
Go bury it almost anywhere. Nobody will see you. If
they do, it won't occur to them to prevent you. We
,
are new people now and no one will interfere with us.
Arouet!”
“What of me, Bauer? You can't order me. I'm as mu-
tated and masterful as you are. No one can stand first
here."
"Of course not, Arouet. We've all become the same
person. But that person is speaking through my mouth
.
now. Arouet, don't you believe it would give our brain-
,
weave more balance if one more of us would be rid of
93
FOURTH MANSIONS
the body? In some ways, death brings even closer com-
munion; notice how close the dead Letitia is now,
closer than the living. One more, do you think?"
?”
“Yes. Here, give me the .45, James, I'll do it. You mean
Hondo when he comes back from disposing of the body?”
“No, I mean you, now, Arouet. And I'll use the 45.
No man can shoot himself without being a little clumsy
about it. I'll do it.”
“No, Jim, no, nol” Arouet Manion ran out of the room,
he leaped a hedge, he disappeared.
“He'll come around in a little while,” said James
Bauer, “or I'll go find him and kill him. We have to
expect these spotty starts. We've been mutated only
a few minutes, after all. I suggest that we all take our
rest this night as did the first chthonic father-image on
the seventh day. Our accomplishment, after all, is much
higher. Now I have a new wife, or an old wife in new
appearance, to bloody and then to bed. Begone, fellow
Harvesters. We're in constant contact anyhow. We're
all one person now.
"I'll give you a ride into town, Biddy,” Wing Manion
said. “I'll let Arouet run a while before I look for him.
Of coạirse, he'll be easy enough for any of us to find
any time, now that we're all the same person. He always
was yellow. Now that he's mutated, he becomes ocher.
Didn't he turn positively ocher when Jim Bauer was
about to kill him, Biddy? Oh, it will be exciting, being
mutated and all, don't you
think
so, Biddy?"
“It may be exciting. It won't be as much fun as I
"
thought it would.”
“Oh it is goofy, Biddy,” Wing Manion said, “being new
and powerful and all that. I'll bet that's what the first
primitive glob said when he was hoaxed into coming
to life with all that ammonia in the atmosphere and all
those high-powered rays barking around. 'Oh it is goofy,'
‘
I bet he said."
2
>
n
94
FOURTH MANSIONS
Freddy Foley was with his boss Tankersley. He had
been getting kind words for a change.
“Those were two very good stories you got today,”
Tankersley said. “I wonder sometimes why I keep you
on, but I guess it's because you often get good stories.
You show real empathy with this Miguel. You get right
inside him. And you really believe that his movement
may pick up momentum, that it will be dangerous, that
he'll be unable or unwilling to stop it, and that he'll
still be a nice kid when he topples the world? I don't
believe he'll really endanger the world, but some of
the movements may. Every crooked-neck plum tree in
the world may be bearing bloody fruit by next season.
And the other story, you did a fine job on that, even if
you violated the first item of the reporter's canon.
“How, Mr. Tankersley? I got all my information from
O’Claire directly, and I discounted it just as I thought
it should be done. What canon did I violate?”
"Spelled his name wrong.
“I couldn't have. There isn't any wrong way to spell
it.”
"It is A-u-c-l-a-i-r-e. French, not Irish. Sorry, Foley, in
a more perfect world everybody would be Irish, but in
our own imperfect world they are not. Auclaire."
“Really muffed that one. Mr. Tankersley, do you
know anything about the patricks?”
"Hardly anything. Some sort of lodge or society. Pre-
tend to take themselves seriously, like the Baker Street
Irregulars. I believe they also use a little esoterism such
as may be picked up from the Los Angeles quackeries.
They have titles and things. Pretend to divide the
world into realms ruled by themselves. Do a piece on
them if you want to, anything to keep you off the Over-
lark lark.'
“I'm not off the Overlark bit for good.”
“Get off it for good then, Freddy, or your head will
roll.”
22
2
95
FOURTH MANSIONS
Freddy went and borrowed some pictures from the
morgue. He had collected others here and there. Some
he had been forced to steal. He went with them to the
lodgings of Michael Fountain. And Michael was dis-
traught.
“I thought there was ritual murder a while ago, Foley.
I was sure of it. It came from our mutual acquaintances
who have become vile. I read them back, as they tried
to read me. They murdered Letitia Bauer. I know that
they did. But then a little later the happening was ex-
punged.”
“I got a little of that too, Mr. Fountain. And then a
little later I got it that she was all right after all. I put
it out of my mind then. I have some things on Carmody
Overlark I want to show to you and talk to you about.”
“I just talked to Letitia Bauer on the telephone,'
Michael Fountain said. “No, she certainly was not all
right, she said. She had a blinding headache. Yes, she
said, there had been insane experiments going on at
their place and she had had about enough of them. So
nice of me to imagine that she had been murdered,
she said, but she hadn't been really. Everything is all
right now, Mr. Fountain, she said, and you come to
visit us again when we are once more sane which I
hope will be soon. Well, there's something there that I
don't understand, Foley. Probably it was a very strong
mental projection of ritual murder. They do play black
games, your friends. Yes, I'll gladly look at anything you
have on Carmody Overlark. Anything to get the Harves-
ters out of my mind.”
“Pictures, pictures,” said Freddy, and he laid them
out on the table. “I have two piles of pictures here, all
of them of Carmody Overlark. This stack here has pic-
tures of Carmody that are more than two years old. This
second stack has pictures of him that were taken within
the last two years. Look at them closely and tell me if
they're all of the same man.
>
96
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Michael Fountain studied the pictures closely for some
time,
“Yes. I'm familiar with all of them except two," Foun-
tain said, “and they're among the less clear. Yes, Fred-
dy, all those are pictures of Carmody Overlark.”
“I know they are. But are they all of the same man?”
"Is there a difference? I'd say immediately that they
were all of the same man, except that you're the second
person who's asked me such a question. How can they
all be of Carmody Overlark and not all be of the same
man?
"I can't explain.”
“Neither could my other questioner. I can be cryptic
myself but usually I avoid it. You stretch it a little far,
Foley."
At the side of Foley's face, just out of vision,
drifted a strand finer than silk. He resisted the temp-
tation to brush it off, but he felt that a spider had cast
on him a second time.
“Who was the other man who asked about Carmody,
Mr. Fountain?”
"I won't tell you. You don't know him, I'm sure.
“But I want to know him.”
"I won't tell you who he is. He questioned me in confi-
dence.”
“So do I. I ask his name in confidence.”
“No. You don't have enough of my confidence for
that.”
"Is it true, Mr. Fountain, that the patricks have in.
visible servitors, plappergeists, who protect them?”
“Oh, I suppose so. Bagley's invisible dog can be
seen, though. I've seen it. It only takes sharp looking.
But it's more like an ape than a dog."
“And do the returning men also have servitors who
protect them, and are they furtive but not invisible?”
“Yes, that's true. You'll be confined or killed if you
97
FOURTH MANSIONS
keep asking questions about Carmody Overlark. I don't
know why. He doesn't seem that important to me.
"Mr. Fountain, who would be most likely to know
whether the earlier and the later Carmody Overlark
are the same man?”
“You might ask his wife.”
"I hadn't thought of that. Thank you. I will."
.
"
Freddy Foley went to the Scatterbrain Lounge to see
if Biddy would show up that evening. The problem re-
mained. There is a truism that things equal to the same
thing are equal to each other, but this truism may not
be true. The pictures of the later Overlark were also
the pictures of Khar-ibn-Mod and of Kir-ha-Mod. And
the pictures of the later Overlark were also pictures of
the earlier Overlark. Why then were not the pictures
of the earlier Overlark also the pictures of Khar-ibn-
Mod and of Kir-ha-Mod? They should have been, but
they weren't.
When logic breaks down something else should take
over. But it wouldn't come to Freddy, it just wouldn't
come. Whatever it is that makes a man what he is and
not another man, it seemed to break down here.
Then there exploded into the Scatterbrain Lounge the
man that Freddy least expected to see of all the men
in the world. It was O'Claire, no, no, Auclaire.
"Foley!” the tawny man cried and gripped Freddy
and was frantic. “It escaped! It escaped from the foun-
tain! Now it is loose in the world! It is loose in this
very cityl Where is it? Do you know? It has some af-
finity to you. Answer me, Foley! Come alivel It's im-
portant! The thing is a world-eater!”
“Man, I don't know what you're talking about," Foley
sputtered in amazement. “What are you doing here,
Auclaire? A mountaintop lie doesn't come to roost here.
You're off your head. What are you looking for?”
"The creature from my fountain, the seven-armed
a
98
FOURTH MANSIONS
creature that has snakes for tentacles. It's loose in the
world, I tell youl It's loose in your own cityl”
“You're insane, man. You were only pleasantly crazy
this afternoon. Now you're clear gone.'
"Foleyl Listen to me. There it is! It's coming to us
now! There is a walking tentacle of the damnable
world-eater itself, and nobody rises to kill it or confine
it! She's one creature of it, one snake of itl Get back
in your place, creature, or I'll beat you back!”
“I will not get back in my placeſ Biddy Bencher
sparked, for she was the walking tentacle of the world-
eater. “The whole world is my place now. Why yes,
I am one snake of it. What of that? I'm a mutated per-
son now. I'm part of the being that grows and inherits
the world."
“Aaagh, then I'm too late," Auclaire moaned, and all
the fire went out of him.
"I'm wounded, Freddy,” Bedelia grimaced, “and the
turban on my head isn't the style; but in a day or so
I'll unveil the Harvester mark on my forehead in all its
brilliance. And your friend here, Freddy? You do have
.
?
the most interesting friends."
“So do you, Biddy. Biddy, this is Mr. Auclaire, the
Patrick of Pecos.”
“Oh, I've met patricks before. I love them all, don't I,
Freddy? Why don't you go see Mr. Bagley? He's Patrick
of Tulsa.
“You refuse to go back to your prison, creature?” Au-
claire asked, trembling.
“I refuse to go back to my prison," Biddy said. “I
don't even have a prison to go back to. And don't call
me creature, little snake-hunter. I am now the essence
of uncreated ecstasy."
“I was hoping I'd be able to drive you back to your
place," Auclaire moaned, “but I see that I'm too late
and you've already fragmented. Yes, I'll go see the local
patrick and we will attempt tactics. Oh, God help us
»
»
99
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
all! Why didn't you stay in your fountain as God in-
tended you to do, creature?”
“No, no, I didn't leave the fountain,” Bedelia protested.
“The fountain left me. Oh, I'd forgotten all about when
I lived in a fountain. It's like in another life. But now
we build new fountains, new upwellings.”
Auclaire left them there. He was defeated. All the
fire had gone out of him.
“Did you kill Letitia at your gangeroo tonight, Biddy?”
Fred Foley asked.
“Yes. How did you know, Freddy? But it was only for
a little while. We fixed it up later. I forget just how,
but she's all right now. And now I can communicate
both with Letitia dead and Letitia alive, so we've added
one to our number. But I shouldn't be talking of such
things to a sample of non-mutated humanity. Change
the subject, Freddy.”
“All right. Have you picked up any stories on Car-
mody Overlark, Biddy?"
“Oh, I'd forgotten about him. Why is he important?
I myself am much more important than he is, now
that I'm mutated and super. But it seems that I did
hear a couple comical things on him. What do you really
want?”
“Is there any new oddity that has attached to him in
the last year or two?”
“Oh yes. He keeps rats. And he soaks his head in a
bucket. He didn't used to do either.
“Soaks his head in a bucket? Biddy, this is me, Freddy.
We're friends. Now what was it that you meant to say
when you said that he soaks his head in a bucket?”
“I meant to say that he soaks his head in a bucket.
He keeps one in his office always, and there's one for
him wherever he goes. I don't know why.”
.
“Anything else?”
"On Carmody, no. On you, yes. I have this informa-
tion of myself, being now transcendent and super and
100
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
traveling through so many minds at will. You have de-
cided to leave town this evening. Well, there's a man
waiting to kill you at the airport, and another at the
bus station. There's a third one waiting to kill you
if
you stay in town.”
"Oh well, dead if you do and dead if you don't. Where
did they wound you tonight, Biddy, other than the fore-
head gash?”
"The side, under the arm, close to the lymph.”
"And where else?”
“The left round.”
“Yes, I thought you sat a little gingerly.”
101
VI: REVENGE OF STRENGTH UNUSED
There is what seems like a regular pattern of ex-
cavated cities. From the bottom, three cities, each
more advanced in artifact and building, one atop
another; then a city of total destruction: following
above will be three more cities showing advance
and again a fourth showing total destruction.
It is possible, however, that this most common cy-
cle is actually the failed or broken cycle. Much more
rarely do we come on the cycle of the full seven
cities: at Leros, at Lough Dorg, at Angkor. Kong, at
Chichen-Ticul. In these cases we find the first three
cities of ascending worth, then the fourth or “con-
fusion” plateau which reveals contradictory and ex-
citing values, fragmentary but contained destruction,
and grandiose foundations: above this in each case
are the fifth and sixth cities, which can only be called
marvelous both in their attainments and in their
balance and their prophecy: above these are the
truncated bases of the seventh cities, which are abso-
lutely unique even in their low remnants.
In each case, the local legend is that the final cities
(having become perfect) were taken up to heaven
in every stone and
person.
The Back Door of History: Arpad Arutinov
“THERE AIN'T no way, Charley, there ain't no way we
can blow it,” one drinking young man was saying to
102
»
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
another. This seemed to be a catch-phrase born that
very day. “There ain't no way, Charley," one woman
was saying to another there.
“Boy, I sure can blow it,” Freddy Foley said. “There's
lots of ways I can blow it yet. Sit here like I'm coming
right back, Biddy. I'll see you some other day, some
other where."
“Be careful, Freddy, little acorn; you're going to take
the airport limousine, and there's a man going to kill
you
if
you show up at the airport. -But why should I
wam you? You both belong to unmutated humanity and
I'm above such things now.
"You're walleyed and beautiful, Biddy, and you have
a fever and you will die in a few weeks. Hey, I can
prophesy too.
Fred Foley went around the comer and caught the
airport limousine just as it was pulling out. The driver
was a friend of Freddy's and Freddy sat in back in
the baggage place. But if anyone had wondered, Fred
Foley had been on the airport limousine.
There is one dark crossway down under old viaducts,
and Fred Foley rolled out of the limousine there. There
a small station of a prehistoric carter service
there, and Fred Foley was in and out of it quickly.
Who remembers when they still had passenger trains
in this part of the country? Who was the last person
ever to ride on one? Now there is a deep secret about
this. This prehistoric monster is not dead. Though pas-
senger trains no longer run, yet there is one coach-car
hooked onto a Kansas City run at night. Foley got on it.
No one, not a fossil, would look for him there. It was
one in the morning. There were only five other persons
in the coach and four of them were fossils. The fifth
one was of that fearsome breed who might want to
talk.
Freddy took a book from his bag. It was a rather
serious book with which he intended to put himself to
was
103
>
>
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
sleep, Painting and Reality by Gilson, but it had one of
those false jackets slipped over it. You know the kind,
Safe-cracking for Pleasure and Profit, Arson Can Be Fun,
Care and Feeding of the Polecat, Seduction for the
Anxious Amateur. The jacket of this book was Brain-
Surgery Self-Taught. Freddy read it and dozed till there
was a tug on his ann. It was the fifth man.
“I beg your pardon, Doctor," that fifth man said,
"but that's a title with which I am not familiar. I am
Doctor Jurgens, a general practitioner, not at all a brain
specialist. I am interested, however, in anything at all
that pertains to our profession.”
"O'Claire, Doctor O’Claire, with an O, not an A-u,"
said Freddy. “It is a real pleasure, sir.”
“I sometimes believe, Doctor O'Claire, that we gen-
eral practitioners get a larger picture of the world than
do you more talented specialists.”
“Yes, I'm sure that you do, Doctor Jurgens.”
"Yet I must make a confession before I proceed fur-
ther. I am lately disbarted. I am appealing the action.
I have done nothing wrong. But there is a penalty for
doing things differently. You need not continue to talk
to me if you do not wish to.”
"I'm quite willing to talk to you,” said Foley-O'Claire.
“Thank you. It was for an unorthodox paper of mine
that I have been disbarred. “The Precursors.' You may
have read it.'
"I'm a little behind in that department, Doctor Jur-
gens. There's so much literature in our profession that,
as they say, it's very difficult for a man to remain a-
breast. I'm sure there's a copy of it at my home office;
I'll make a point to read it. What is the main thesis of
it?”
“That there is a Precursor, a forerunner to every great
disaster, to every great epidemic, to every high happen-
ing of every sort. You will recall that there was a
failure of the apple crop the year before the great
a
104
2
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Gothic assault on Rome, a partial but quite serious
failure of the grape the year before the battle of Tours,
and the pomegranate harvest was far below average
the season before the great Persian attack on Attica.
We might even couple the crop failures with the great
militancy happenings: cabbages and Crecy, millet and
Malplaquet, turnips and Tourcoing.”
"Watermelons and Waterloo?”
"OʻClaire, I'm thunderstruckl That was right under my
nose all the time and I never guessed it. Yet it's a fact
that 1814 was a poor watermelon year in the United
States, in Africa, and in Russia. I had always equated
the quince crop with Waterloo, but you have opened
my eyes.
“But isn't this a rather odd field of interest for a doc-
tor?”
"Oh, this isn't my field. I only cite these historical
commonplaces by way of analogy. You can find Pre-
cursors in the field of minerology, in literature, in
politics, in weather. My field, of course, is Precursors
in the field of medicine.”
“Ah, now you fascinate me, Doctor Jurgens.”
"To every great epidemic, O'Claire, there is a Pre-
cursor, apparently unrelated, impossible of connection,
yet infallible as to prediction. When the Precursor ap-
pears, then the more serious epidemic will follow as
surely as season follows season. I maintain that if these
were correctly analyzed, then the great epidemics might
be prevented. These run in advance, sometimes a year
or more in advance, and this gives time for worldwide
precaution.
“For an instance, a full year before an outbreak of
meningitis in an area, there will be a minor, barely re-
ported, outbreak of cotton-mouth accompanied by quite
small irruptions on the inner gums. I cannot prove the
connection. Medically there would seem to be none.
>
105
>
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
But the coincidence is so uniform as to be more than
coincidence.”
“Yes, I had noted it myself,” said Foley-O'Claire, “but
perhaps I hadn't assigned to it the significance it de-
served.'
There are people who do not like to talk to crack-
pots, who are bored with boors, who shy off from fools.
Foley had none of their reluctance. His profession was
gathering information. He knew that fools talk on
while wise men hold their tongues, that he could get
more information from one fool than from seven sages,
that if any man talks long enough he will say something. .
Besides, he had nothing else to do.
“There is another striking example or coincidence,"
Doctor Jurgens continued. “Two years before every out-
break of influenza (which always varies as to type)
there is a heavy outbreak of erythema, or rash, which
also varies as to type. Again there can be no medical
connection, but there is some connection.”
“It would seem that the Precursors, the predictors,
could be crossed up,” Foley-O'Claire said. “An epidemic
depends on contagion and contagion depends on many
tenuous threads easily broken. The Precursor could
be made a liar.”
"I hope so, O'Claire, for that is my mission. I cannot,
however, find where it has ever been a liar. I'm trying
to make a liar out of it now in one of its most horrible
predictions. I'm going to the capital with my appeal.
If I cannot make a liar out of it, then there is som
omething
unnatural about the Precursors. It will mean that they
are of another realm, that they are real predictors of
the future, that the future cannot be altered. I have
made a personal adversary out of this Precursor. And
such
very
small blisters they arel
“Between the fingers, O'Claire, right at the base. They
itch a little, and then they are gone. There's not one
106
>
a
22
FOURTH MANSIONS
person in a hundred who really notices them or seeks
medication for them.
"I had such just last week,” said Foley-OʻClaire. It
was true. He had.
“Half the nation had such just last week, O'Claire,
and now they've forgotten them. They've forgotten them
so completely that I wonder how it happened to be
noted the other times. Yet it was noted, and clearly, but
in so random and offhand a manner that it seems a
miracle. Boccaccio mentions it, Defoe mentions it, the
Welshire Chronicles mention it twice. Everywhere do
we find the clear account of this peculiar between-the
finger itching coming about a year before the Thing it-
self.”
"The Thing? What is it, Doctor Jurgens?"
“Oh, the Plague. It'll be here in the present year, you
know, unless of course I can persuade the Federal to
take steps, just what steps I don't know, to stop it. Well,
good night, Doctor. My time is upon me. The natural
cycle, you know."
“Oh? What is that, Doctor Jurgens?”
"The thirty-four hour cycle, the natural cycle. I fall
into it whenever I'm taking long journeys. You have never
noticed why we do not want to go to bed at night? Or
why we do not want to get up in the mornings? How
can we be expected to adjust to the cycle in just a few
thousand years? Wherever mankind originated, we know
it was not on this world. It was on some planet body
with an equivalent thirty-four hour day. This may nar-
row the hunt for our original home on that day after
tomorrow when we really go looking for such things.
Good night.”
“Tut, Doctor Jurgens, tut,” said Foley-O'Claire. "That's
scientific heresy you talk.”
“Doctor O’Claire, it has been said that a heresy is
the revenge of a forgotten truth. I say that every mon-
strous appearance or movement is the revenge of a
107
»
a
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
strength or variety unused, of a vitality untapped in us.
And it looks like a good year for monsters.'
Doctor Jurgens flung himself into a deep seat and
went to snoozing. Then Foley also napped a few of
those quick naps that may be taken only on trains. There
was a special element in them for him now, though.
One who has been touched by a brain-weave will no
longer snooze or dream alone. He will do it out of the
vortex,
What the mind of the brain-weave was doing tonight
(and it was the mutated Jim Bauer mind that was
dominant in it; the rest of them were tired) was killing
people, or causing them to kill themselves. Jim Bauer,
and the brain-weave through him, seemed to have
selective hatreds. He killed a dozen of them. He was
killing the thirteenth. “I wouldn't have killed some of
those,” Fred Foley said to himself, and also said back
through the entire brain-weave, “Some of them are
pretty good people, some of them are a lot better than
Jim Bauer. It's going to be a lopsided world if they
keep killing that sort of people.”
The thirteenth man didn't much want to go. He sat
at a table and scrawled on paper, I do not kill myself.
I have no reason. This is dream-stupid. Even if I wished,
I have no gun. And now I have a gun before me, and
where did it come from? But I don't know how to
shoot it. I never shot a gun in my life. But yes, now I
know how to shoot it. There was a lot of pressure
in that brain-weave, icy elegance, green-mottled humor,
helical passion, cinnamon-colored dying, ashen weep-
ing of dead Letitia, danger-incitement of live Letitia
who wondered in her broken sleep what sort of living
nightmare she had been gobbled up by, Klee-fish and
the comical death-bubbles, O’Claire's octopus escaped
from the fountain and loose in the world, patricks a-
108
FOURTH MANSIONS
lerted, and the third stage of the world perhaps be-
ginning.
Something else through the brain-weave that the
weave itself didn't know how to monitor, two young
men who had become kindred by being touched by
the tentacles. Real blood flowing on the border now in
savage night fighting. Thirteen of Miguel's men killed
in a busted raid, and thirty joining him to replace them.
How is a man going to sleep with that stuff going
through his head?
>
Foley had to change trains in Kansas City. He went
to the telegraph office. No, he didn't want that stuff
to go by wire, though. He phoned Tankersley and got
that man up. He gave the names and stations of thir-
teen prominent men who had just died or suicided.
"You'll vouch for it?” Tankersley asked him.
"I'll vouch for it, Tank.”
Then Freddy gave him an eyewitness account of
bloody doings on the border.
"You're sure this happened, Freddy?”
“Most of it did. The rest of it will happen momen-
tarily. No use waiting for it to happen to print it, not
if it's sure. Rely on me, Mr. Tankersley."
"Where are you, Freddy?”
“Kansas City.”
"How come you sound so funny?”
"I'm half asleep. Print it, Tankersley, just as soon as
>
you can
And Tankersley would print it just as soon as he
could. It had to come right or he was dead. And it did
come right. It all happened.
A mother put an eleven-year-old daughter on the train
at Kansas City. “Don't blow it, kid,” the mother said.
“Ain't no way, Charley,” the daughter answered. So
it had become a byword of the times. Everything was
coming right up to the point of perfection, rich har-
109
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
vests abounding, pearls beyond price to be dug from
every field, all well with the country and the world, no
hurry, we were just about there. Any danger of bust-
ing it or blowing it finally? Not on the popular level
there wasn't. “Ain't no way to blow it, Charley,” the
people said.
Freddy read two pages, then dozed till there was a
tug on his arm, a blue-eyed tug (Freddy, touched by
the weave, could now see in all parts of him).
“I beg your pardon, but I was wondering if you were
One of Us? asked the man with the snapping blue eyes.
“Possibly, just possibly," Foley said.
"I am a rooted man, sir," said Blue-eyes. “There are
those who chop off their own roots in the name of the
old 'new' fashion. They wither from that moment. But
radix-form mock roots burgeon out of the ground and
surround them grotesquely, and these nourish nothing.
I say
that a man should not allow himself to be sur-
rounded by such weightless weirdness. His own weird-
ness (that most necessary thing) he should keep inside
himself where it is a strength. Beware that you not
chop it down or cut it out of yourself. It grows again,
externally and poisonously, unsustaining roots. I noticed
the jacket of the book you were reading. It is a facetious
title, but you do not seem to be a facetious man. Then
I asked myself, Why should a man put such a jacket
on a book other than for a joke? Why, for concealment,
I told myself. What you are actually reading is not
for prying eyes. The book (and it may not be a book)
does not correspond to the title on the jacket. That is
my guess.”
"There is a fascination about guesses which must re-
main unverified,” Freddy Foley said.
“I believe that it is a precis, a resume of your own
project," the blue-eyed man said. “You may not care
to discuss it. I do not care to discuss my own project,
but I can always spot a fellow inventor. Every time I
110
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
go up to Washington with one of my new great inven-
tions, and it is several times a year, I see others who
are quite unmistakably of my kind. We inventors are
a curious breed.”
"Ah, we are that. We are not as other men,” Freddy
said.
"Though I would not reveal the slightest detail of
what I am carrying, yet there is no harm in telling you
that it is basically an Enervator."
"I surmised as much.”
“But perhaps you have surmised that I have only in-
vented one more relaxer? No. If that were the case
my trip would not be of so great moment. If that were
the case I would not be followed and shadowed. There
is one man in this coach who sleeps with his ears and
eyes open and misses nothing. He is a shadow. His job
is to watch and follow someone, and that someone can-
not be other than myself.”
“Or myself,” said Freddy,
"Most inventors have the tendency to overestimate
the value of their own inventions," said the blue-eyed
man, “and perhaps you overestimate yours. The shad-
ow-man looks at you with veiled eyes, it is true, but
that is only so he will not seem to be looking at me.
No, I'm sure that it is me he is following. What I have
is a device that will change humanity completely, that
will erase the decades and centuries, that will enable
one to span-but I cannot tell you more. My life is in
danger as it is."
"Why should your life be in danger for inventing a
relaxing machine?”
“I tell you, it is much more. It will enable man to
remove death to the incredibly distant future."
“It would seem a boon. Who would prevent it?"
“Those who have already achieved my aims without
my machine. There are such men. I have reason to
believe that there is a small jealous group who will kill
111
FOURTH MANSIONS
to prevent their special benefits from going to all hu-
manity.”
“I've more fear that humanity will be killed by special
benefits going to it unasked,” Foley said. “It's a cat
that's going to be killed with too much kindness. I wish
you'd put a relaxer on all over-kind and over-zealous
groups.”
“But I will, sir. So many things appear out of due
season. I'd freeze them a while. Ah-we both under-
stand that I have been talking nonsense. My machine is
not like this at all, but it may be of some aid in inte-
grating the personal and world ego. We both under-
stand that ‘Enervator' is no more than a code descrip-
tion.
“Yes, we both understand that,” said Fred Foley. That
Fred Foley drew some strange ones, but there was
a shadow-man on the coach and he was as likely shad-
owing Fred Foley as the blue-eyed inventor.
The rails were making rhymes to the tune of Kansas
City Star:
Piles of money, piles of barley,
Piles of peace, each man a king.
Ain't no way to blow it, Charley,
Ain't no way to blow the thing.
Really, everything was better than it had ever been
before, if you didn't look too closely behind the screen.
"Bad news, bad news!” Tankersley stormed sometimes.
“What do they make reporters out of nowadays? Can't
anybody find just a little bad news to lead off one more
edition?” There wasn't much bad news any more. In two
more weeks a popular president would be reelected.
People were sharper and kinder and happier than they
had ever been. All molehills had been leveled. The
world was flat and tidy, a perfect takeoff platform for
. something. Ah well, what are a few bat-wings in the
112
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
night, a few pet hydras escaping from fountain prisons,
a few men living too many times? More power to them.
And by dusk of the day that was dawning Fred Foley
would come to the fine place itself, Washington the
Capitol City, where all difficulties are resolved.
"Your creature had not escaped, Auclaire," Berti-
grew Bagley growled. “What's the matter with you?
Have you only one set of eyes? It's back in your foun-
tain now, at any rate. I can see it. I don't believe it
ever escaped into the world at all.
“No, Bagley, no. That's a simulacrum in my fountain
now. It left it there to fool me. The thing itself is loose
in this city and in this world. It has fragmented into
seven or eight people but it still has its unity. The anns
of it are persons. They always have been. We were
wrong to believe that the arms of the polypus were
movements. We saw them as Communism and as Secu-
lar-Liberalism and as such deadly things, but it is only
when they inhabit persons that they are dangerous.
That Foley knows the names of all of them, but he has
slipped me. The sorrel-snake woman is the only one I
know.”
"Go easy on the sorrel-snake girl. I've a great affec-
tion for her. She doesn't laugh at me as viciously as
most of them do. Oh, I know all the members, Auclaire.
I can have my dog kill them easily enough, but I'm not
sure that I should. We lived with dragons in the earlier
days; why are we fastidious now? Every fine castle
used to have its own dragon in the cellar. Every fine
world has always had."
“This one is deadly, Bagley. It is one of those which
has not raised itself, has not broken loose for centuries.
It begins to eat up the children now. It killed thirteen
good and high men this morning and it has hardly come
awake yet.
“Three of those men needed killing, Auclaire. You've
»
113
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
got to admit that, whichever side of the aisle you're on.
“And the worst part of it, Bagley, is that it won't do
any good to have your dog kill the members. They
have already set up a real weave. They have already
mutated. And one of them is already dead and it makes
no difference at all. She comes on even stronger and
weirder after she's dead. And the leader, what is his
name?”
“Jim Bauer. He's the biologist, but he knew all along
that the biology of the thing was only part of the hoax,
only part of the trigger.”
“He is tom between two ideas for strengthening the
weave now. He will either kill himself and go to hell-
he believes that he might do better work from there,
or he will enlist an actual demon of hell and expend
the weave to nine members. He is already playing De-
mon Lover with both his dead and his living wife-what
is their name?”
"Letitia.”
“Letitia-Happiness. I wonder if she really wanted it?
She got on that danger kick instead. Maybe it is her sort
of happiness, but she comes through mighty pale and
drawn. Should we contact the Patriarchs of Greater Ar-
menia and Greater Ireland?"
“Oh, I've already done that, Auclaire. They say that
they have escaping creatures of their own, much more
,
momentous ones than we have here. And the Patriarch
of Greater Armenia reminds me of another thing. God
still regards all four sets of us things as exterior crea-
tures, not to be allowed into the castle or the world,
not good for the castle or the world. To Him, at the
moment, we are not much better than the python-nest
things, than the resurrection toads, than the gnashing
falcons. Even our sometimes alliance with the falcons,
as better than the other two, is not completely pleasing
to Him.'
“What must we do then, Bagley? Oh yes, I remember
>
114
FOURTH MANSIONS
what the Manual says we must do. 'Serve faithfully for
aeon after aeon, that He may be convinced of our good
will. Guard the hydra-pythons that they may not escape
into the world. Unravel the mystery of the resurrection
toads even if it takes us a million days. Mitigate the
menace of the falcons, but use it against any greater
menace that might arise. And after long and faithful
service, He may admit us into the castle.' Bagley, I
keep hoping that every thousand years we serve may
be the last.'
“It would be pretty ironic, Auclaire, wouldn't it, if the
other three sets also believed that they were serving
faithfully? That they might also some day be admitted
to the castle? You know, there's a story that we were
in the castle once, that we set up our own primordial
weave, and that we mutated; and that we got thrown
out then and became exterior creatures; and that we
have to labor like trolls to redeem ourselves. Say, my
dog is one-quarter troll by blood. I'll ask him some-
time how hard they really work. We may be overdoing
it.”
Odd talk, that, is it not? Not very. Not from patricks.
They often talk like that when a couple of them get
together. They are some sort of lodge or society. They
pretend to take themselves seriously, like the Baker
Street Irregulars. And they pick up a little esoterism
such as you get from the Los Angeles quackeries. They
have titles and such, and they pretend to divide the
world into realms such as Greater Ireland and Greater
Armenia.
Jim Bauer, as a matter of fact, did not kill himself
that day. Neither did he kill Arouet Manion. The sickly
fear of death that was on Arouet added a curious and
glittering element to the weave. Imagine a man being
afraid of a little thing like dying, a mutated man at
115
FOURTH MANSIONS
that. But cowardice might be as necessary an element
as'arrogance and dishonesty and hatred to make a weave
a
really work.
Bauer postponed his own death for a while, regret-
fully, as he believed there was still much work to be
done in generating the weave and he believed he
could do it better in the body. Later, later he would do
it.
But he did enlist an actual demon named Baubo to
join the weave. This expanded the membership to nine.
We will see how it works, we will see how it works.
116
VII: OF ELEGANT DOGS AND RETURNED MEN
>
For I have written at great length of these
Mansions (the fourth), as these are they where
the greatest number of souls enter. As the nat-
ural is first united with the supernatural in
these, it is here that the devil can do most harm.
Interior Castle: Teresa of Avila
IT IS A southem river town with some pretensions of
being a city. It is intended to be beautiful, and often it
is. It has more greenery than most, and it uses its water
areas (both natural and contrived) well. There is grace
in the general placement of its public buildings, and it
has one quality which only the distinctive cities have:
it is never seen for the first time. It is always recognized
as something once known and forgotten for a while.
And like every southem river town it has its canker.
Every one of them has it somehow, like a beautiful belle
with a loathsome disease. There is no point in stirring
needless enmity (though it is fun) by naming the names
and recounting the venoms. But it's a fact that they are
a mean bunch of towns: many of them are likable, but
all of them are mean.
Every plain mean town in the land, Kansas City,
Natchez, Wilmington N.C., Cape Giradeau, Cincinnati
(certainly it's a southem town; it doesn't matter which
side of that river it's on), Morgan City, Memphis, Lare-
do, Baton Rouge, St. Louis, Louisville, Richmond, New
>
>
117
FOURTH MANSIONS
Orleans, every really mean town in the country is a
southern river town.
The capital has its own oreriness, as pervading as
the others, but it isn't the same sort. It never was a fun
town. It is not a robust sin town. Its fleshpots have no
real juice in them. Its vices are effete and heterodox,
and its moral rot is a dry one. Though its people have
come there from all parts, yet they are not all sorts of
people. They are very much of one sort. The ethic
.
climate here nurtures an ancient, evil, shriveled thing.
It is of the inhabitants of this city that the prophet
spoke:
Of those who do not have the faith
And will not have the fun.
There's an odor about all these southern river towns
that isn't entirely due to their dank rivers. Here there
is a sense of being in a tightly closed room even when
outdoors. Still, it's a pretty and pleasant town to come
to in the evening.
Oriel Overlark shouldn't be a hard person to locate.
Fred Foley would find her, ask her one question, and
then go back home if, of course, he got the answer.
There are several thousand persons in Washington whose
whereabouts will always be known to everyone. Any-
one in the trade will know.
Freddy looked up Mary Ann Evans. She'd know
where Oriel Overlark was at the moment. Mary Ann was
a casual acquaintance of Foley, but now he must origi-
nate the fiction that they were very old friends, and
Mary Ann must go along with it. She was a lady re-
porter, and her stories were entirely of the ladies.
But she looked at Fred Foley with amazement, al-
most with awe. Nobody had ever done that before.
“Foley! How did you do it? How did you know?
You had some of them almost before they happened,
118
FOURTH MANSIONS
all of them before or right at the moment when they
were discovered. I think there are pickup orders out
for you. Your paper denies knowing where you are.
You're going to have to answer some real inquiries.
How did you know about them? "
“About what, Mary Ann? That's the strangest greet-
ing I ever got from anyone. I just blew into town."
I
“About the thirteen suicides, if that's what they were.
Were they? You must be the one who knows all about
them.”
“Was my name on that story? That was way back
early this morning.”
"Your name wasn't on it-you'd be torn limb from limb
for it by now if it had been. Your boss-image Tankersley
is being. But we were able to track it back to you easily
enough. What are you following up on now? Six of those
suicides were here in Washington, but of course you
know that.”
“Oh, I'm not doing anything of a followup, Mary Ann.
My part of that one is finished with. All I came to Wash-
ington for is to see Oriel Overlark and ask her one
question.”
"What a cover, but who'd believe that? When did you
start doing ladies' features? Fred, you're so much older
and more maturel I can't believe it. I never saw a kid
get over being a kid like that. It's only a year since I
saw you.”
"It's only a week since Tankersley told me he wished
I didn't look so much like a kid. He didn't think I'd
ever get over it.”
“In one week you've matured and deepened like that?
What's happened to you?”
“Nothing at all, Mary Ann. And I sure haven't matured.
Now, can you tell me where I can find Oriel Overlark,
now, at this moment? I want to ask her one question,
and then I want to go back home.”
“There are very many people who want to ask you
>
119
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
very many questions, Fred. Why the Oriel fake? Is she
connected with the suicides?”
“Oh no. This has nothing to do with that. I want to
ask her one question, that's all.”
"For what she's worth, Fred, let me tell you that she
isn't worth anything to you. I've done three pieces on
Oriel myself, trying to see her in three dimensions. It
didn't work, though. She looks brilliant, but she's a flat
person. Not even low relief. She doesn't have three
dimensions.
“Carmody was an art collecter, you know, before he
became adviser to the advisers. Oriel is a piece of art.
Not profound art, but striking new art for all that. She's
a novelty piece. She's been imitated and parodied, but
only in a small circle. She'll never be a widespread fad.
Why do you want to talk to Oriel? What kind of ques-
tion do you want to ask her?”
“I want to ask her a question about Carmody."
“Why don't you ask Carmody the question about Car-
mody?”
“I will
, if Oriel doesn't give me the answer. I guess I
really want answers from both of them. I may have to
add them together. Oriel might not know all about Car-
mody. I'm sure that Carmody hasn't researched Car-
mody to any depth, doesn't really know much about
Carmody, but,”
"-added to what you know about Carmody, you
should have it complete. Is that it, Fred? There she is
now. And if you have to ask me which she is, then
you don't deserve any answers at all.”
“No. I don't have to ask which she is, Mary Ann.”
Freddy and Mary Ann were dining at Proviant's, and
the Oriel party had just entered. Certainly nobody would
have to ask which was Oriel, even though several of
those in her party were prominent. She didn't take the
center. She took a position where it was even a little
hard for them to see her. But she was the center.
120
FOURTH MANSIONS
Proviant's was a Germanish sort of restaurant. Mary
Ann hadn't known that Oriel would come here. It is
more likely that Freddy had made her come here
through some power he had from being brushed by
the weave. They could watch but not hear the Oriel
party from here, and Freddy's first impression was that
Oriel was not so flat as all that: that she might have
dimensions that Mary Ann didn't suspect.
"She's isn't really pretty,” said Mary Ann, “yet men
look at her as if she were. Her eyes are too close to-
gether; her hair grows too far down on her forehead; her
ears aren't a bit good, but she seldom shows them. She
hasn't enough jaw, and her neck lacks only a little of
being scrawny. Her shoulders are her best asset above-
board, but they're not in it with those of her two friends,
and
you
don't even notice them. She doesn't know how
to sit. She doesn't know how to walk.”
“But you'd recognize her in a crowd, or at a great
distance, Mary Ann."
“Yes. She's too light in the body and too heavy in the
legs. Her ankles are good, though, and her feet, particu-
larly the insteps. But honestly I can't give her much
else."
“Her hair?”
“Oh, her hair's by Schwob. I thought you'd know that.
“Not the color.'
"The color is about ten percent Schwob. He has
a way of putting the highlights in. It wasn't exactly that
color before, but it was close."
"It's blue-blonde. There can't be a color like that, can
there? Or it's like ashen-blonde seen under a blue
light, and the light here isn't. Gahh, I've had one too
many, no, two too many, ashen-blondes lately.”
“Really, Fred? Is that what's matured you? If only
she hadn't those washed-out blue eyes.”
“At least they aren't green, Mary Ann.” (But possibly
Oriel's eyes were a bit green.)
22
>
121
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Fooled you, Fred. I felt that one coming. I didn't
listen. She isn't at all intelligent. And she isn't a good
talker or a good listener. It's just that she's always
had it. She's even richer than Carmody. Oh, there's
Carmody joining them now! I didn't suspect he'd join
them.”
"I did. That stuff is hard work, though,” Freddy said.
"Shall we barge over and I make the introductions,
Fred? There's really no painless way to do it. They'll
make us feel like commoners in any case. It's their only
talent that I really envy. Whatever it is that sets them
apart and makes them that sort of people and not our
sort I don't know."
“Oh, I've been puzzling lately what makes a per-
son what he is, and not another. My puzzle's really the
same as yours. I remember now where I met Carmody
before. I had a slight notion that I'd known him. He
wasn't at all the sort of man one would remember or
notice, for all that he was rich and open. But this Car-
mody has carried over some details from the old.”
“Not notice that man? Fred, how can you say that?
Everyone would always have noticed him and remem-
bered him. Why, the smoothness is just dripping off
him."
"I know it. But he isn't the same man. I've got that
part of the answer now, I'm sure. I really had my trip
for nothing. But I don't believe that either of them will
tell me how he does the trick.”
“Is this something that I'm not supposed to understand,
Fred?”
"I don't think they want anyone to understand it.
They're nervous and unsure.'
"Nervous and unsure? Them? Never, Fred.”
“Why do they have people everywhere to kill people
who ask questions, then? I wouldn't do that unless I
was a little bit nervous about something."
So Freddy went over to where the august party was
122
FOURTH MANSIONS
settling down again after the arrival of Carmody Over-
lark.
“Mr. Overlark, I doubt if you remember me,” he
said. “Fred Foley. I knew you a little at Hot Springs
three years ago. You were a cheerful loser at the races
and
you sometimes stayed up after dark.”
“Yes, Foley, I got out among them a little more then,”
Carmody Overlark said. He had a twinkle on him, but
not what you would call a merry twinkle. Something
other, of a different humor. And, yes, he did have
archaic ears. “I've less time for diversions now, but I
still enjoy them. I remember you. A newspaper man,
aren't you? And there may be something you want to
talk to me about in my and your official capacity?”
"What would be the easiest way to go about it, Mr.
Overlark?”
“It's a vicious circle with only one possible solution.
I'll have to make an appointment for you with my secre-
tary, and he'll make an appointment for you with me.
Here, I'll write a brief note. He'll be able to decipher it,
but you may not be. It's the only way you can get to
see him, and seeing him is the only way you can get to
see me. It may be a day or two; I'm quite busy. Good
evening. And good evening, Miss Evans.”
They were dismissed, but Freddy had the scribbled
note. Freddy and Mary Ann went back to their table.
“Don't be resentful, Fred,” she said. “Besides, he
,
really is important. He wasn't being rude, just direct.
And you do have an appointment for an appointment."
"That's not my resentful look, Mary Ann. Pray that
you never see that. But he doesn't remember me. He
never saw me before.”
“Naturally not. Why did you make up that silly story
about knowing him at Hot Springs? Anybody could have
found out where such a prominent man as he was
three years ago and made it fit in.”
“Oh, I did know Carmody Overlark there, Mary Ann.
»
123
>
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
I spent part of a large night with him, but I'd forgotten
it. He was such an easy man to forget.”
“Fred, you're off your noggin. Nobody could ever
forget that man.
"He was easy to forget, and I had forgotten him, till
it came back to me a moment ago. But that man there
never saw me before and I never saw him.”
"Why did he say that he had, then? How did he
know that you were a newspaper man?"
"He said he knew me because he knows as much
about Carmody Overlark as one man will bother to
leam about another for a special reason, and he realized
that I probably had met Carmody. And he knew I was
a newspaper man because I look and act like one, and
because I'm with a newspaper woman, you.”
“Tell me about it, Fred. If I were onto anything queer
I'd tell you about it.” '
“My mother used to tell me that lying would make
my tongue black. What really made my tongue black
was chewing walnut hulls for tobacco, but she always
thought it was my lying. You'd no more tell me if you
had something live”
“Oh I know it. My tongue's black.”
They ate. It was good. They talked. And once Freddy
left the table briefly. It was not coincidence that an-
other person left another table at nearly the same time.
It was planned that way, but the way the planning was
implemented is harder to explain. Foley had his own
way of getting an idea across, especially with his new-
found maturity, and he was more capable than most
gave him credit for.
And now he had made another appointment, which
did not involve a secretary. He had hopes, for the first
time, that perhaps the trick would be explained to him
after all.
Anyhow, he had a date with Oriel Overlark now.
124
>
a
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Freddy and Mary Ann left Proviant’s. They ditched
each other. Mary Ann went to make inquiries on wheth-
er there was really anything new on Carmody Overlark,
on the fifteen suicides, on tip-man Freddy Foley who
had now won inner-circle fame for a story he'd already
put out of his mind.
Freddy walked not quite at random. He walked rap-
idly in the bright streets and slowly in the dark ones.
“That damned spider,” he said and brushed his hand
across his eyes, but there wasn't any spider, only a silk
streamer out of some web attached to him. He doubled
and redoubled. He knew the tricks. He came up behind
the man who had been following him and collared him
firmly.
It was the inventor from the train.
“Not that you worry me," Foley said, letting him go
again when he saw what fish he was, “and not that I
care about being followed, but I am curious. Why have
you been following me?”
“I wasn't,” said the man. “It only seemed like it. Actu-
ally I was following the man who was following you-ah,
this is a little hard to put into words—the man who
was following you so he wouldn't seem to be following
me. You were just a little pawn we maneuvered around,
Then you maneuvered to get behind both of us. You
didn't notice him at all, but he's waiting quite near.
He's a better shadow than I am. Why was it that you
noticed me and didn't notice him, since he was between
us most of the time?”
“I don't know. Well then, why were you following the
man who was following me?”
“To keep him in sight. And because I didn't quite
understand the situation. I still don't. It's almost as if
there was something important about you. I told you
back on the train that there was a man in our car who
slept with his eyes and ears open and missed nothing.
He was following me to destroy the secret of the re-
125
FOURTH MANSIONS
markable invention I carry, and perhaps to destroy the
inventor too. That is the same man who is still waiting
a little ways off. You had the idea that it might be
you he was following, as though your own invention
( whatever it is) could be of such import. Now I'm a
little in doubt myself. It's a blow to my pride, but it
just may be you he is following. Are you in danger?”
"Not in immediate danger, I don't believe. I've passed
several darker corners than this where it could have
happened if it was meant to happen tonight.”
“Say, I'm Crabtree, Carlyle S.," the man said. “You
should know my name, but most inventors are unin-
formed and unacquainted outside of their own narrow
field. I except myself. Most don't know their own next
door neighbor in the speculative neighborhood. Yet I'm
an important man, and possibly you are, since you also
seem to be a focus of interest. You may regard me, sir,
as a little sawed-off joker with a lot of talk who'd be
no good in a showdown. But I boxed at Tech, school
middleweight champion. I'm still handy. Shall we go
jump him and see what he's made of? We could cut
him off both ways from here.
“It might be fun, Carlyle S., but we wouldn't find
out anything, and I'd lose a possible lead. A man follow-
ing you can sometimes lead you to a place you wouldn't
otherwise be able to find. Now, Carlyle, I'm going to
phone a man from the corner drug store there. He's
given me things in the past. Do me a favor and watch
my shadow for a little while. I'll be right back. We'll
talk some more, then, and you may want to go with
me and talk to this man also.
“His name, sir, in case something happens to you,
and I may be stubborn enough to follow it out myself?”
“Harry Hardcrow," said Fred Foley. “I don't know his
number till I look it up. I don't know his address any
more either. He's known in the newspaper business, if
you would want to find him.”
>
a
126
FOURTH MANSIONS
“And your name, sir? I don't even know that.”
.
“Fred Foley. I'm also in the newspaper business, but
not as well known. Watch my shadow for a while. But
nothing will happen.”
“I believe that something will happen, Foley. I have
an instinct for these things and I've never been wrong
yet. Something very direct will happen suddenly, but
I will try to be ready for it.”
Foley went into the corner drug store, looked up the
number and phoned Harry Hardcrow. He got him at once.
Hardcrow seemed half glad to hear from him. At least
he placed him. And suddenly Hardcrow seemed much
more interested. Fred Foley had new fame as a tipster
going for him.
“Foley, honest, I want to see you and talk to you.
I want to ask you about, But honestly, I have something
big I have to cover right now. I do want to see you later.
You may be able to do something for me, and I'll do
almost anything for you. Could you come by my place
about midnight?”
“Oh sure, Hardcrow. You still live at the same place?
Yes, I can find it.”
Foley left the drug store and walked back to meet
Carlyle S. Crabtree, the inventor. He thought he might
go to the hotel and talk till time for the meeting with
Hardcrow. An inventor might have a mind that would
hit on overlooked corners of a problem. Besides, Crab-
tree seemed like a man who would stay with a friend,
once he had become a friend. In a way, they had
pact between them.
But Crabtree wasn't standing where he should have
been. Foley approached the dark spot very slowly. If
Crabtree weren't there. But he was there, as Foley
saw with the absolute opposite of relief. Foley was
always cool. He should have been doubly cool with his
new maturity. Cool! What he saw froze him solid for a
minute.
127
FOURTH MANSIONS
Carlyle Crabtree wasn't standing there, but he was
lying there. And the way he was lying, Freddy knew
that he was dead. He was lying on his face, dragged
back into the doorway of an unlighted shop. He had
been knifed deeply and his life still ran out in black
blood, but the main bleeding was over with. He had no
pulse. He had already begun to go rigid.
Freddy was surprised that he remained calm. But
he had been calm in tricky situations for several days
now. After all, according to Mary Ann Evans and to
his own new feeling, he had achieved maturity. But
what now?
The shadow was nowhere to be seen, but he might
still be near. He had killed once, he might intend to do
it again. But Freddy began to get mad.
“I'll have you for this!” he called loudly. Then he was
silent. He had no wish to be associated with the death
itself so he worked rapidly. He turned Crabtree over.
The man hadn't even been gone through. He still bulged
in the same places. Whatever interest they had in Crab-
tree, it hadn't been in what he was carrying.
Foley took out a very large, very full manila envelope
that Crabtree carried inside his shirt. He had known
that Crabtree carried his most precious possession there.
The chubby little man wasn't that chubby. Freddy also
took the money-belt and the wallet, as such things can
be handy.
He finished with it. But he had his new instincts and
insights, and also his old reporter instincts. They shrilled
at him "Plant Plant!” Freddy had been wrong at first.
Crabtree had been gone through. Someone had a very
great interest in what he had been carrying, to frisk so
quickly and completely, and to substitute authentically.
Freddy had begun to like the little inventor, but he
left him there and walked rapidly toward his hotel.
Two people were signaling his mind. This business of
distant people talking to him was something new these
128
FOURTH MANSIONS
last two or three days and he didn't attempt to account
for it. They had to be people who had also been
brushed by the brain-weave, for that acted somehow as
communication satellite to bounce the messages. But
this was Benchez, Bedelia's father. Had the weave at-
tacked him too? Or had he had some earlier encounter?
After all, he did have a great scar on his forehead from
some youthful encounter, and it was very like the mark
the Harvesters had inflicted on themselves lately.
"Stay there and wait, Freddy,” Bencher was saying.
"I'll get you out of there.”
“Stay here and wait nothing!” Freddy snorted. He
had picked up his shadow again after two blocks and
he didn't intend to make a mistake. Freddy was very
alert now and very angry. Turning a corner, he paused
and listened. There was nothing to be heard, though
he fancied he could hear another man listening. Foley
reversed. He was fast. He thought he could collar that
shadow quickly and have him, knife or no knife.
The shadow was faster. Foley couldn't run him down.
He followed him around another corner, and the shad-
ow had disappeared completely. But there wasn't any
place he could have disappeared.
"Stay there, Freddy, you have to stay there,“ Bench-
er was saying again. "I'll get you out, I'll get you over
the wall somehow.”
“Over what wall?" Freddy asked. Finally when Fred-
dy had neared his hotel, the shadow was there again,
but further back.
“Ah well, this is your game,” Freddy said. “I'll find a
game that I can play better than you. There's no use
getting cute now at this end of the trail. If you followed
me before, you know where I'm staying.” Freddy went
into his hotel.
“It's simply diabolism,” Bencher was saying. “I don't
know why my daughter became involved with it. It
isn't that she's brainless, it's just that she's still a kid.
.
129
FOURTH MANSIONS
I'll figure it out. I'll sort out the different powers in-
volved. This simple diabolism I can whip. Stay there
and don't worry. I'll get you over the wall."
“Leave it, Bencher,” Freddy said. “I'm not behind walls,
and I can whip simple diabolism myself. This is more
complex.”
Freddy went to his room, bolted every bolt, checked
windows and such, went into the bathroom to be safe
from possible gunfire from outside, and dumped all
the Crabtree loot onto the floor. He even sounded the
wall between his and the bathroom of the next room.
It sounded firm and untampered-with.
But the second voice came now. It had waited polite-
ly for the first one, Bencher's, to finish.
"You know who I am," came the slightly-slurred, slight-
ly-accented voice of Miguel Fuentes to Freddy's inner
ears. “We have not met but we know each other. We
are both brushed by the devil-weave, and we can fox
back and talk by it. I want to make proclamation. You
will proclaim this for me from the capital of your
country. Let me talk now. You will not need to write it
down till later, or you can phone it in to someone and
not write it down at all. I know you are like me, you
have a memory for words, and you will remember all
of mine exactly
“I make proclamation of who I am and what I will
do for the world. I was roused to my activity by devils
for a devils' game, but I will not do devils' work. This
is a mistake that the devils make, that they believe they
have the ordering of things. They cannot remember that
very often these things turn against them: that they can
start a wind but they cannot order which way the wind
will blow. This is what I am: a poor man, but a good
man at several trades; a man of brains who has never
used his brains until now; a bad man very often, but
one who was never so dishonest as to pretend that his
bad was good; a slob, un chapucero, there is no word
130
FOURTH MANSIONS
in English to say what sort of slob I was; a strong man,
particularly in the arms and back and loins and legs;
a humorous man even when the great gash of false
justice and misery cuts across the whole world picture.
“Why has this thing come to me? Why, because it did
not come to another man, I suppose. The world is in
need of ordering, and there is no other man who steps
forward and says ‘I will order it.'
"I will be called fascist. I and mine will be fascist
in the old Roman sense, not in the sense of the modern
sniveling things that are of the left and not of the right.
We will be fascist in the real sense and sign of the fas-
ces. This is the battle-ax bound in with sticks and rods,
and the meaning of it is authority by steps. Ax cuts
sticks as threat, sticks beat dogs, and dogs (when comes
an unusual revolution) eat up ax. This is like the hand
and fist game that children play when they put out their
hands to challenge each other: rock breaks scissors,
scissors cuts paper and paper covers rock.
“As to the last part of my instance, the revolution
where dogs eat up ax, I will proclaim it in a moment
what elegant and bristling and false dogs. those are,
and how they are not of the people at all but are vi-
cious prey on the people.
“This is the fault of the world, this is the reason that
it needs ordering now: it is bankrupt in the middle of
its wealth, and it offers a life that is not worth living.
It has stolen their old poverty from the people and given
them meaner things under new names. It has brought
back a slavery that is more abject than any in history,
though its chains are not of iron but of peculiar compul-
sion. The world has befouled itself and it needs to be
cleaned. Think of me as the cleaner of the world. If
I use a little blood instead of useless detergent, it is
to cleanse it the better.
“I speak good words of Indians, the earth people of
earth. I have traveled to countries and continents as
131
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
sea-man and irregular soldier and I have seen that it is
the same everywhere. There are always the earth-peo-
ple (I will call them Indians, though they have other
names in other places; there are even blond and red-
headed Indians, and fair and black and the color mor-
ado); and there are the ravening dog- or wolf-people
who prey on them. It is the dog- and wolf-people who
use revolution and the liberalism-slavery trick and the
devil catchwords to disorder the world. In every land
of Latin America and in most lands of the world, there
have been at least three revolutions by these dog-people
(some of blood, some of idea only), and all have been
in the name of the earth-people. Now there are the
great families and groups who rule and enslave every-
where. They pass the dog-lie that it is the old stub-
born rich families, that it is the old stubbom church,
that it is the old stubborn ways that are obstacles. This
is all lying. It is always the new rich dog-families and
groups, the novel church of the itching ears, the ways
of new hell that enslave. And it is these dogs who rule
always who ask falsely for more revolution; it is they
who bleed false blood for the new poor who are their
own creation; it is they who preach love instead of law.
For the law obliges them and restricts them. But it
costs them nothing to use the word 'love.'
"I call them the elegant dogs, and I begin to kill
them now. They rule the world but they do not believe
that there is another world above and after.
“I speak good words of church who is mother here
and also hereafter. But it is for real love of church that
I will kill certain judas priests and judas bishops and
almost all of judas editors and journalists.
“But for our great compassion, we will not kill so
many people as many might wish. Of most of the ele-
gant dogs we will only pull the teeth. “This is no good,'
says an adviser who joined me only today. “Those dogs
will
grow new teeth. Kill them all. We will see. If they
132
FOURTH MANSIONS
persist in growing new teeth, then it is time to kill them.
“We will kill only such persistent false voices as can
not otherwise be silenced. In all the world we may have
to kill no more than one million liberals, communists
and doctrinaires. The rest will shrivel, for a time at
least.
“I understand, with my new insight, the four powers
that are on the fringe of the world. I have now become
actionist and captain of one of those powers. I under-
stand the abiding men and the returning men. I under-
stand which support us and which support the dog-
faced octopus.
“Am I so sure that I am right? No. I am not. A man
who is sure he is right is always wrong. But I am sure
that the elegant dogs are wrong. A patrick whose mind
I encounter tells me that God still regards all four sets
of us things as exterior creatures, not to be allowed
into the castle or the world, not good for the castle
or the world. I believe that God is mistaken in classing us
with the other powers, and I will convince Him of His
mistake. But I will do what I have to do, even though
I was roused by devils and have not yet the full approval
of God. That will come if I do my work well.
I
.
"To all the governments and governors of the world:
Wait and do not panic. I am coming to relieve you
of
your governing as soon as possible. Do not abuse any-
thing while you wait. You are on time and sufferance.
I come quickly, but there is a whole world to occupy.
I will kill only the anti-life people who speak of un-
wanted people, as if there could ever be too many
people, as if there could ever be too much of this high-
est created excellence. I will kill only unreformable lib-
erals, and clegant dogs who oppress, and the evil re-
turning men who are fine and yellow in toadflax.
"To the world in disorder: Wait. Persevere. I come
to order it now.
133
COURTH MANSIONS
“Proclaim that, Foley, proclaim it. It will really come
about.'
“All right, Miguel, all right. I'll proclaim it,” Freddy
said. “Yes, I will remember it all. Leave me now. I have
my affair with elegant dogs and returned men fine in
toadflax.”
134
VIII: THE LINE OF YOUR THROAT, THE MER-
CURIAL MOVEMENT
What adders came to shed their coats?
What coiled obscene
Small serpents with soft stretching throats
Caressed Faustine?
Swinburne
IN HIS HOTEL ROOM Fred Foley examined the money-
belt and billfold he had taken from Crabtree. Finding
nothing of interest in them except money and identi-
fication, he made a bundle of them to parcel post to
the police. He examined casually the contents of the
large manila envelope. This, he decided, he would keep
for further study.
It was the detailing of Crabtree's latest invention,
the design of a cubicle. The cubicle would be the size
to hold a man lying down. It would be airtight and
nearly indestructible when sealed. The purpose of it
was obscure, though the papers said it was an Ener-
vator. “Who wants to be eneryated anyhow?" Foley
asked himself.
There was considerable electromagnetic apparatus,
minute controls to maintain conditions and large con-
trols apparently to set up conditions. There were many
pages of mathematics and schematics which could not
be digested casually; by many persons they could not
have been digested at all. But Foley, who had been a
135
FOURTH MANSIONS
science feature writer, had a talent of going to the
heart of a thing and he soon had the basic idea of it.
“But it's all wrong,” he said.
“Of course it is,” said Hondo Silverio. “It's a substitu-
tion, but an ingenious one.
"It isn't an Enervator, of course,” said Richard Bencher.
“It's an Hypnotic Dredge. Even in its wrongness I can
see that the original is meant to bring up the strengths
and varieties unused, the vitality untapped, to awaken
the interior nourishing weirdness and so demolish the
exterior mock-root poisons. Stay there, Foley; I'll get
you over the wall.”
“No machine will do it-not this, not the original,” said
Hondo Silverio. “But they're afraid of it and have in-
tercepted it. They're terrified of our interior strengths.”
"I didn't know you two were tuned in,” Freddy said.
There was a note by Crabtree to the effect that the
thing had never actually been tried out. There was
writing that Freddy called the “A” or Crabtree hand;
there were some that he called the “B” substitution or
other hand, but this was so near to the Crabtree hand
that Foley did not know how he distinguished them.
There was a feeling about all this that Foley had from
the first, a feeling which he knew would persist no
matter how deeply he delved into it: that was the
feeling that the whole thing was a hoax.
At the same time there was the even stronger feeling
that Carlyle S. Crabtree had been in no respect a hoaxer.
But can a straight man perpetuate a hoax unwittingly?
No, not that man. He might perpetuate some non-
sense, or a failure or an ineptitude, but never a hoax.
But this smelled of hoax all through it. “Well, I'll
leave it here a while,” Freddy told himself. He would
go out. He knew that his room and his things would
be gone through while he was out. No matter. Whoever
they were, they already knew what it all was, and he
didn't.
136
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Freddy went out for his meeting with Harry Hardcrow.
He stopped in the street in front of his hotel and whis-
tled loudly. “Coming?” he called then. “Coming after
me?” But his shadow was not to be seen. Then a taxi
rolled around the corner and stopped to his hail. Freddy
got in. He had the feeling that he would be taken to
his destination whether he gave it or not, but he was
skittish of testing it. He gave the driver Harry Hard-
crow's address.
“Not that you aren't, and not that I'm not,” said Harry
Hardcrow, who often talked that sort of shorthand, “but
I'm wondering if your visit is casual or urgent.” He shook
hands with Foley. “You had a slight tone of excitement
when you talked to me on the phone earlier, Foley.
And you appear now still more excited. Has anything
happened in the meanwhile?”
“Not that I recall, not anything important,” Fred Foley
I
said. “Oh yes, there was the murder of a man whom
,
I knew only a little bit. But he had been waiting for
me when it happened. It shook me a little more than
has come to the surface yet. But it wasn't involved
with my main line of inquiry, so we'll let it go for the
moment."
“It may be involved with your main line of inquiry,
Foley. What is your main line of inquiry?” Hardcrow
asked.
"I'm looking for the answers to a couple of ques-
tions that will sound asinine to you, Harry, though not
so asinine as if I'd put them in their first forms. The
first one I ask seriously, though it sounds almighty trite.
What's your opinion of the state of the nation and the
world now, Harry?"
“Worse than perfect, Foley-jittery, almost hysteri-
cal in certain circles. And nobody knows why. Two years
ago it was the best it had been in decades, maybe the
best ever. And everything has improved since then. Two
years ago there was real feeling of hope and trust all
>
137
FOURTH MANSIONS
around the world. Differences had almost disappeared.
Health, national, physical, moral, and financial, was good.
Crime was down. And there had come that sort of
creative gaiety that marks only the very great eras. We
had come into one of the really golden ages. It wasn't
just the arts, Foley (though they were burgeoning as
not since that short springtime in Florence half a mil-
lennium ago); it wasn't just material prosperity (we've
had that before, though not so solid nor so unmixed);
it was just a general breaking into the light after many
years of work on all fronts dedicated to the advance.
It was a good harvest in sight after a long labor."
“I know how it was two years ago, Hardcrow. And
I know a little how it is now, though the worst is kept
from us peasants. But how has it become worse while
getting better? What has happened in between?”
“It was a series of unprecedented advances that some-
how left us far in arrears, Foley; a program of wise and
probably perfect moves that left us in a stupid situa-
tion; a whole array of undoubted improvements that
has nearly reduced us to a shambles. Nobody knows
just what has happened. And all are trying, on the
advice of the best minds available, to restore some san-
ity to our position.”
"On the advice of the same best minds available
which engineered the unprecedented advances, Hard-
crow? The wise and probably perfect moves, and the
array of undoubted improvements? We slide back two
steps while we advance one.'
"It's easy to criticize, Foley, but one doesn't do it in
time of crisis. It may be that our position really is im-
proved, so much so that we're allowed to see some dan-
gers now that had been hidden from us. Or things might
have been worse had it not been for the careful plan-
nings and actions. It may be that these have taken the
edge off a terrible debacle that was due for us.
"And it might not be. Who's chopping us down, Harry?
138
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
Hardcrow, you were stitting here right in the lap of the
nation's pulse, to tum a metaphor. Have you noticed
the appearance of a series of brilliant 'new' men who
may have something to do with our backward improve-
ments?”
“I have noticed the new men, Foley, and they're
what gives me hope. We may be in a transition canyon
when we thought we were on top of the crest, but these
new men will lead us out of it. I've been fascinated
by them; I've asked myself 'How is it possible that we
should be so rich in talent?'
"You seem hypnotized by this, Hardcrow.”
“Yes, I am a little. I believe now that our setbacks are
only temporary, or only in appearance. I believe that
these new-appearing great minds will advance us along
that great road."
“As far along as we were before they appeared?”
“Much further along, Foley, all the way. Our prema-
ture flowering may now become the real thing. Oh, I
know the snide hints that have been going around the
country. I'm sorry to see that you appear to have fallen
prey to some of them. I'm not yet ready to believe
that our advance has been thwarted deliberately, surely
not that it's been thwarted by those who seem to be
advancing it most.”
"When will be ready to believe it, Hardcrow?”
“Never, I hope. Tonight I saw a new prospect. I'm
on fire with it. Foley, there's expectation in the air,
and nothing the stodgy people can do will sour it. To-
night I was present at the unveiling, so to speak, at
the introduction to Washington of perhaps the most
flexible and curious mind in the country. We can't fail
in anything when we have such men as he. I believe that
he, as well as other such brilliant men, will get uis off
dead center, will fill our sails with billows once more,
“A sail-seaman you're not, Hardcrow. What sort of
apple is this new man?”
you
139
FOURTH MANSIONS
“I'd say a crabapple for a joke. For coincidentally
his name is Crabtree.
"Not Carlyle S.?"
"It certainly is. How could you have known, Foley?
You aren't big enough to have entree to, You aren't
high enough in the trade even to know of such a man.
Still, you did scoop the country on the suicides, and
on some of the happenings of the Fuentes fascist fellow.
And you do seem to have come along remarkably,
Foley. Is it only a year since I saw you? You seem older
now, and much more"
"Mature, Hardcrow. It's my new maturity. Yes, I'm big
enough now to hear stories of big men when they ap-
pear."
"Well, you've been a science feature writer, and I
understand that Crabtree had some standing as scien-
tist and inventor in the hinterlands. You knew he was
in town?”
"Yes.'
"That's odd. Nobody was supposed to know. Still,
how perspicacious of you to guess that he would be
selected for high position, since it hasn't yet been an-
nounced. He's a wonderful inventor. Marvelous ideas!”
“Most marvelous. How long, exactly, Hardcrow, is
it since this great unveiling of this flexible and curious
mind? How long ago was it that you saw Crabtree?"
“Why, I've just come from the meeting. None but us
selected correspondents was there. And the officials
and dignitaries. It isn't twenty minutes since I saw him
last.”
"And it isn't much more than two hours since I saw
him dead, Hardcrow.”
"What are you saying, Foley? Are you trying to fish
a story out of me? I'm onto your cracked talk. Don't
try it with me. What are you trying to say?”
"That I'm fortunate to be near the actual birth of one
of these new men, Hardcrow. It makes me feel a little
a
140
FOURTH MANSIONS
like a midwife. Can you tell me what Carlyle S. Crab-
tree was wearing?"
"Foley, do you doubt that I was there, just because
you weren't selected? I can do even better than tell
you what he was wearing; I can show you. Naturally
I
cameras were forbidden. And just as naturally every
correspondent had his own pinhole camera. We'll just
roll them out. Here. Here's a good one of him on the
very first picture.”
"Yes, that's Crabtree all right, Hardcrow. Or it's so
near to Crabtree as to deceive all except the elect. I'd
give a lot to know how it's done. And it's his same
clothes, baggy pants, jacket and all. I wonder what they
did about the knife-cuts in the jacket and shirt? Hey,
I wonder how they got the blood back in him? And if
they had a body left over? He was a nice fellow."
“Seems to be, Foley: a plain man as all very great
men are. He came dressed just as he arrived in town.
But he's absolutely incandescent with ideas. What was
that other stuff you were talking, Foley? You seemed
to be talking nonsense, perhaps dangerous nonsense.
"Yeah, I know. Crabtree was wrong at the last, though.
The shadow wasn't following me after all; he was fol-
lowing Crabtree. Or there may have been one on each
of us and they may have been in concert. I still have a
little pride in my own importance. Did Crabtree pro-
vide anything startling?”
“With the simplicity of the truly great he had carried
things of the highest importance in a large manila
envelope inside his shirt. Imagine, Foley, these were
things that may change the whole destiny and nature
of man.”
“Crabtree took the manila envelope out of his shirt?
You saw him do it?"
“Yes. A pandora's box in a manila envelope. That is
what he took out.”
"Then I wonder what I took out.”
>
141
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"It will take years to analyze it, Foley. But it will be
wonderful.”
"It may be. But Crabtree rather wanted to put it
into effect without waiting years. He was even a little
in a hurry that it be done at once. He was afraid that
certain groups would prevent it. I see that they have.
And so a new man is born."
"Foley, there's something about your attitude that I
don't like,” Harry Hardcrow said harshly. “There are
some things you don't have any business guessing if you
don't know other things. A newspaper man has got to
know when to keep his mouth and his mind shut. You
might end
end up dead.”
"Isn't that the usual fate of men, Harry?”
"There have been other times, Foley, when you seemed
ready to disassociate yourself from the mainstream. And
you've been throwing out insane hints for ten minutes.
Unless you explain them you'd better leave at once.
You may be too hot to handle as it is. I don't intend to
get my hands burned for any unlicked cub.”
“There's another question I'll have to find the an-
swer to, Hardcrow. How do they subvert minds like
yours? You aren't stupid. You've been here in the mid-
dle of it. You do know part of something that's going
on. You weren't always servile. You weren't always
scared. Is there more than one way of intruding a new
man into an old? Are you entirely the Harry Hardcrow
who used to be? He could look at both sides of a coin,”
"So can I yet. And I know which side is heads.
“You know more than you say. Those are prisoner's
eyes looking out of your head. But you've thrown in with
it.”
"I said that I was one of the selected correspondents,
Foley. I'm selected on most things. One must give up
a little bit to be selected. But most aren't even given
the chance. Foley, before you call anyone a sellout,
you just think if you were ever good enough to be
142
FOURTH MANSIONS
given the chance. Who ever wanted to buy you? Few
are selected, and none of them turn it down. And those
who howl at the distant scent of it are those so far
below consideration as to make it comical.”
“It is comical, Hardcrow, and I'm laughing," said Fred
Foley. “But in my way I go on.” Foley tried to brush
something from his sleeve but there was nothing there.
“Is there any way you could step out of the room for
a minute, Harry,” Fred Foley asked, “and let me talk to
the other Harry for only a bit?”
“I am the only Harry Hardcrow,” said Harry, “and
I'm about full of you, Foley. Get out of here right now.”
“Goodnight, Harry,” Fred Foley said to the harsh
mouth and flushed face. And then, more softly. “Good-
night, Harry,” to the prisoner's eyes inside the man.
9
2
Freddy phoned the Miguel Fuentes proclamation to
Tankersley. That man had become somewhat meek
about accepting anything Freddy gave him now.
"Are you sure, Freddy?” was all he asked. “If you
are, then I'll print it.”
"Oh yes. I've got it right. That's just the way he wants
it to be run.
Fred Foley went back to his room. The room had
been gone through, but they hadn't been messy about it.
.
"They'll have to open my head to find out whatever
I'm carrying,” he said to himself.
Freddy looked at himself in the mirror. It was true;
he had become a little older, and much more mature.
He had a new respect for himself. Then a short night
in bed and a rugged one.
Fred Foley had never adjusted to the twenty-four
hour cycle of this world, and often in his trade he had
avoided it. Usually he did not go to bed till he wanted
to and he did not get up till he wanted to. He was
strongly on the thirty-four hour cycle of the world from
which people originally came. But sometimes he had
143
FOURTH MANSIONS
to adjust a little, and he did have an early next-mom-
ing date with a woman who was riddled with riddles.
Pungent dreams then, and irritating wakefulness. And
a spooky wasteland between. Fred Foley was a mes-
sage center sometimes with all sorts of froth swirling
about him.
James Bauer was being opposed by a strong and
intelligent man, Richard Bencher, the father of Be-
delia. This Bencher was tough of mind and he had
real depth. He was direct. He was smart. He could go
to
the actual (that which acts upon the ambient) center
of an apparatus, so he went directly at the mind of
Jim Bauer. Bencher had had youthful encounter with
some such thing before. He had come out of it, de-
fiant and victorious, and had lived a concentrated and
successful life, but he had been inattentive to many of
the small details of his life. One of them had been his
daughter Bedelia. Now he would make amends.
Bencher had begun to smash and break the weave;
and Jim Bauer, bellowing in his resodant soul, had called
the brain-weave to fight back. But was Bauer really
the master of the weave? There were some strong per-
sons in it.
Hondo Silverio was arranging his own encounters. He
was suggesting to Bencher that they should kill James
Bauer and destroy his residue-brain by a method which
Hondo believed would work. And he suggested that
he, Bencher, should then join them in the weave in
place of Bauer. This startled Richard Bencher. “How
do
you know when a snake's kidding?” he asked him-
self. “I know so little of their psychology, but I must
learn. No, I will not do it,” he said. “That's mad.”
When Bencher fought a thing he fought it all the way,
but this would be harder than he thought. He could tack-
le Bauer front-on. He was as tough a man in mind and
body and spirit as was Jim Bauer. They could battle
144
FOURTH MANSIONS
like bulls. But what was he to make of the mottled-
green
humor of Hondo Silverio which he did not find
entirely evil? Inhuman, yes, but not entirely evil.
How of those other psychic athletes in the weave?
How of Wing Manion the saintly sexpot and Klee fish?
For a moment he thought that he encountered in her
the mind of his dead wife. How of Salzy Silverio of
the helical passion? She shook him till he was dizzy
and half mad. How of Arouet Manion the elegant devil
who was so much a concordist that he brought in the
slime of a thousand worlds and reveled in it? There
was the ashen-ghost Letitia Bauer and the ashen-flesh
Letitia Bauer, one dead, one in hypnosis, both in maso-
chistic agony and longing. There was real mystery and
cyclonic energy about that strange duality which Bench-
er did not begin to understand. And there was Bede-
lia herself, and the real demon who had joined the
weave, and these two had become unnaturally close.
,
"Gad, she's had some odd boy friends,” Bencher bat-
tled, “but not a real demon before. She's loose in her
mind. This one even makes Freddy look good. That
such a she should come out of my loins!”
Richard Bencher, for all his scope and determination,
was confused in the multiplex thing he encountered.
Even his own daughter refused to come out of the
weave, but she would not herself attack him. She even
invited him to join the weave, as had Hondo Silverio;
her own suggestion was that he kill Arouet Manion and
take his place in the weave. In her conscious state,
Biddy did not know anything about this battle or this
offer, however.
Salzy Silverio of the spiral passion was drawn in-
sanely to Bencher, as she was to all strong men. And
Wing Manion was trying to explain to him what it meant
to be a Harvester; and how, perhaps, the Harvesters
were more important than the harvest.
One who battles a dragon must watch that he be not
a
145
FOURTH MANSIONS
ensorceled by the beauty of any part of it. Dragons are
sometimes iridescent in some of their limbs and append-
ages. They are curious and arty and there is a sort of
rousing music in their bellowing and fire-snorting. Rich-
ard Bencher had him a battle; so many parts of the
opponent were also parts of his own curious self.
persons and
»
Other messages, other
scraps
of
persons,
other flitting souls around other scorchy flames.
Michael Fountain was wringing his hands over a bro-
ken world. He knew so much, but he did not know how
to fix a world. His latino namesake at least knew that
much.
Miguel Fuentes was executing nine men after a night-
court sentence in the middle of wild chaparral. It was
an unpleasant thing to have to kill these unreformable
elegant dogs, so he did it himself. Then he was sobbing
disconsolately with his head on
the
rump of a burro.
"He's even younger than I am,” said Fred Foley. “There
must be someone else who could order the world.”
There was the invisible dog of the patrick Bertigrew
Bagley, who was more ape than dog, and who could
sometimes be seen if one knew how to look. Foley
saw him now, and the plappergeist winked solemnly at
him. Freddy knew who he was then. He was the island-
ape who used to be in the Katzenjammer Kids in the
funny paper. But all grotesque funny paper characters
have independent and exterior existence, unknown usu-
ally to their drawers. It was good to have the dog, the
ape, the polter-plappergeist on your side. He was smarter
,
and more mischievous than other dogs or apes, and
he could kill effectively.
There was Carmody Overlark, the urbane toad with
the jewel in his head. Was it for pain of that that he
had to soak his head in a bucket? But this Carmody
had a talent in full which Fred Foley had only a little
and that only these last several days: he knew when he
146
FOURTH MANSIONS
was in anyone's dream anywhere. He became himself in
the dream, and not an image of him. He came in astrin-
gent and powerful. One dreamed or thought of Car-
mody Overlark at his peril.
A short night and a rugged one. It was not the pungent
dreams or the irritating wakefulness that was the worst.
It was the spooky wasteland between. Did people,
when they were still on the world whence they came,
when they were naturally adjusted to their longer day-
night cycle, suffer from dreams at night, from wakeful-
ness, from wastelands? Or are these only of the present
period of adjustment? Take them away and you take
away something. Amputate them and we bleed; they
are part of us now.
Patricks and falcons, dog-faced hydras with more and
ranker arms than one could count, people who popped
up in unlikely centuries, castles and mansions, and a
house named Morada that had a broken stairs going
down from its patio to ... what?
Finally dawn-morning came.
“Damn, it took you long enough," Freddy told the
shining wench.
Freddy Foley rented a rent-a-car in the morning and
drove out to the morning-Maryland hideout. He found
it more by instinct than by the Oriel description, which
had been brainless and hunied. He caught a whiff of it
as he came near, the something distorted in the morning
light, the unreality and impermanence of the surround-
ings, a too-shrill music to hear with proper ears, the
sick poetry, the paleness of grass and bush as if a great
stone had just been rolled away exposing it all. But
Foley had been through that choppy and building-
pocked countryside before and it hadn't been like that.
Lately, however, he had been learning to see with other
sorts of eyes, with Harvester eyes, with patrick eyes,
147
FOURTH MANSIONS
with falcon eyes, with toad eyes. A man misses so much
if he uses only one set of eyes.
The house was nearly hidden by the pale boscage.
It was elegant and low—“squat like a toad, close at
the ear of Eve”-it was the place, it could not be the
hideout of any other creature. Freddy had not known
she was like that the evening before. Now he caught it
all before he saw her.
Oriel Overlark met him at the door, throat and gills
aquiver. She jibbered in silver, she shined like green
bronze, she was the most striking and puzzling thing
that Freddy Foley had ever seen.
“Did you bring them? Didn't you bring any part of
them? Did you bring part of them in yourself? Be open,
boy, or I'll crack your brains like walnuts and eat them
right now. I want them, I want the two of them right
now. How did you attach to it? I want to merge with
it! Help me to merge with it right now!”
“The people of the brain-weave, Mrs. Overlark? How
did you know about them? Do I have their smell on
me? They barely brushed me. We'll forget about them.
I want to ask you several questions, that's all.”
“Oh questions! I want the spiral passion and the mot-
tled snake humor. I want his body now. More, I want
hers! Has anything from them entered into you? I want
you then, right now."
Oriel had clasped Freddy and he was shocked by the
heat of her. A body heat of a hundred and twelve at
least is unusual in an old-recension human. Freddy
would have sworn also that she had two hearts beating
furiously. And her eyes, they were made to look at, not
to see out of. “Throw hither all your quaint enameled
eyes” ran through his head. A nameless emotion burst
up through Freddy Foley and almost exploded in him.
"Tell me about him," the jewel-eyed creater pleaded.
“Has he really two of them? How is she? The writhing,
the convolutions—tell me, show me.”
,
1.48
FOURTH MANSIONS
"I barely know the couple on sight, Mrs. Overlark.
They are weave people and I have been brushed by the
weave, but that's all. Hey, cut that outl”
An overpowering emotion still more upwelling in Fred-
dy Foley! It would burst him! And into his quaking
breast came certain spoof lines of Chesterton:
Or didst thou love the God of Flies
Who plagued the Hebrews and was splashed
With wine unto the waist, or Pasht
Who had green beryls for her eyes?
The emotion overpowered Freddy completely. It burst
him asunder.
"You’re laughing at meľ Oriel Overlark gasped in
white amazement. “Oh, I am wounded! I am deadl
How could anyone be so ungrateful? Don't you know
that's the only way we can be wounded?”
Well, it had been that or rupture himself. Freddy'd
had to do it. By the time he had gotten rid of the
bigger globs of laughter, the torrid Oriel Overlark had
turned to ice.
"I'm sorry, really I am,” Freddy explained. “Your
eyes are like nothing else. Your form is like nothing
else. Your passion, perhaps, belongs in the weave itself,
and I'm sure you've been in weaves like it. It's only that
I'm a boor, one without the true lower feeling, and I
don't understand these intense things. Now pout for a
moment (you do it wonderfully), and then answer
some questions."
But Freddy nearly burst again. “The gold and flowing
serpent” ran through his mind, and Oh those lines!:
Scorpion and asp, and amphisbaene dire,
Cerastes horned, hydrus, and ellops drear.
Oriel Overlark was all those things, and pretty be-
149
FOURTH MANSIONS
sides, and who was the oaf who would not appreciate
this, wrapped as it was in kata-chthonic passion and
overly sweet poetry?
"I don't believe at all in asking questions,” said Oriel
in a sulky and lifeless manner. “Still less in answering
them. Both use up time, and time is the one thing we
have so little of.”
Oriel had been badly wounded by the laughter and
was still gasping. She had been mortally affronted and
her jeweled eyes had gone dull.
“Mrs. Overlark, kid, green-eyed doll, I've lately been
searching for a group of people who seem to have plenty
of time,” Fred Foley said. “Centuries of it.”
“No, nobody has plenty of time,” the wan Oriel said.
“Almost all have about the same amount of it. Every
day we live we get a day older. It's frightening. We
look for a way out of it but we don't find one.
“How long have you been in a hurry, Oriel?”
"I've always been in a hurry. I must make every min-
ute count. Every second must be of the highest interest.
You somehow gave me to believe that you would be
of highest interest. The line of your throatl The mercurial
movement of your body! Please don't disappoint me.”
"I'll have to; I'm not geared to that at all. Nobody can
stay at high point all the time.”
“Yes, at high point all the time, every living minute,"
Oriel insisted. “There has to be variety, excitement,
even a new kind of calm, a sharper agony as is mine
at the moment, an additional facet. It must be really
new, and it must not last long. After a while, real variety
is hard to find. Then we must lie fallow to whet the
appetite and to save the precious days.”
"Well, this won't take too long. What I want to find
out, Oriel, is this: was there any significant change
in your husband Carmody Overlark about two years
ago?"
“What I want you to do is not ask me any questions
150
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
at all. Of course there was! There's always significant
change in him-two years ago, two days ago, two min-
utes ago I'm sure. That's why he's so wonderful.”
“I have a curious theory, Oriel, that the Carmody
Overlark of more than two years ago was not the same
man as the Carmody Overlark of today."
“But of course not. He's never the same. He's protean.
He's a chameleon. All of us are.”
“Who is us?”
"Please don't ask questions. It's annoying. If you won't
be passionate, go away. When you looked at me last
night I thought you had more in mind than asking
questions. If you want answers to questions go to the
encyclopedia.
“You may be one, Oriel. Are you quite sure that the
Carmody Overlark you were married to two years
ago is the same man as the Carmody Overlark you're
married to now?”
"I have been married to only one man.”
"For how long?”
"Oh, who knows? It's so hard to figure. You have to
subtract so much, and add a little, and who keeps track?
That's the frightening part, keeping track. Even figuring
it out takes time and I don't have the time.”
"I met Carmody Overlark several years back. He was
not the same man I met last night, but he sure looked
the same.
“No, that was just a little goof we– I never knew him
at all; I only saw him once. I don't go in for the details.
They're handled. Haven't you been told that it's danger-
ous for you to inquire along this line? I wouldn't want
anything to happen to you. The line of your throat! The
mercurial movement,”
“I know, Oriel. Oh, my life's been threatened. Three
men told me they'd kill me if I didn't lay off, and one
man told me he'd kill me if I did. I figured they can-
celed out. I believe that the Carmody Overlark of to-
27
151
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
day is the same man as a Khar-ibn-Mod who lived
something over five hundred years ago. Would you know
anything about that?”
“A rather humorous piece has already been done on
certain coincidences between my husband and that man.
“My piece, if I do it, may not be humorous.
“Your piece, and you will not do it, would not be
believed in any case.
“I'm puzzled about one thing, Oriel. I had under-
stood that the Mamelukes were abridged men. Are you
sure he's so wonderful? Or does this reanimation that
I'm tracking down consist of more than I supposed?"
“Oh, you don't understand it at all. Line of
all. Line of your throat
and all, you just don't understand it. The methods
weren't at all those which you call by the same name.
Actually, there was a thousandfold increase in passion.
Perhaps it's a good thing that the uninitiate aren't ac-
quainted with it. It wouldn't do at all for a weak race.
And yet some of the contemporaries do have something.
Oh, the people in the weavel Oh, yourself if you wished!”
" “The man who was Carmody Overlark until two
years ago, what happened to him, Oriel?”
"I imagine they killed him. I hadn't really thought
about it."
“Don't you care? After all, he was your husband.”
“He was what? How far off can you get? How can
you only guess a little bit and miss the rest so far?”
Oriel was fiddling with her hair. She was becoming
bored. Even the exquisite agony of rejection had lasted
too long. She fluffed her hair out as though to cool her-
self. Then Freddy saw it and understood a little more
about her.
“You don't understand anything about me, do you,
sleeping Adone?
“Yes, now I understand almost all about you, Oriel.”
“What made you
uriderstand?"
"Your ears. Miss Evans said last night that your ears
152
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
weren't at all good and that you seldom showed them.”
"She'll suffer for that remark. My ears are excellent.”
“Yes they are. But they're archaic ears.”
"Of course. Should I get new ears each time?”
“You also are one of the reappearing persons?”
"Certainly. And now that you've guessed a little of
it, what can you possibly do with your knowledge?
There's a group in one of our finest institutions; they're
there just because they guessed just about so much. I
can arrange it quite easily that you join them. Insanity
is only the refusal to accept facts as they are. That we
are unassailable is one of the facts that are.
"Why are all of you so nervous and jittery and
guarded? Why do you have to kill or confine to protect
your secret?”
a
“Oh, because we're in such a hurry and passion, and
because time runs out so fast."
“What happened to the Oriel Overlark of before
two years ago?”
“I really don't know and I really don't care. She may
be in one of the institutions for claiming to be me,
or she may be dead.”
“Don't you use the old bodies?”
"Sometimes, in a way. Again sometimes, in a lesser
way. You don't have to know.'
“Do you know anything of your group substituting for
an inventor named Crabtree last night?”
“The man who became Crabtree last night is an old
friend of mine. I welcome him back. He's one of those
of the thousandfold passion. I don't know anything about
the man who was substituted for.”
“How are you able to substitute so well without being
detected?”
“Oh, we're mimics. It's an ancient art. And we also
force them to mimic us, back in time—you wouldn't
understand it. We keep our own appearances, but we
also assume the appearances of the persons we re-
153
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
place. You'd have to know more than you ever will
know about the old mimicry to understand how it's
done.'
“I know a little about it by comparing pictures and
images. What's the object of all this? Why do you slow
down and obstruct the world?”
“I don't make policy. Partly it's just that we intend
always to run the thing and we can't let it have loose
rein. We do it because we want to do it and for other
reasons that are not for you to know. We do it because
the world and its people are our footstool and we
don't want our footstool to become too grand. Ask my
husband when you have your interview with him. He'll
elude you much more adroitly than I can. And I im-
agine that after you've talked to him you'll be put
away in one way or another.”
"I may have something to say about that.”
“Not very much, mercury movement, not very much.
The others will not regard you as an omament, as I do.”
"Are there others of your talent who are not of your
group?"
"Oh, there are randoms. Have you known some?”
“Maybe. I'm not sure. How far back do you go, Oriel?”
"You shouldn't ask the age of even a reappearing
woman. Quite a ways back.”
“As far back as Carmody?”
“Oh no. Not nearly so far back. I was picked up much
later. We recruit, you know. We must, since we don't
generate. And some of us are lost accidentally. We've
tried for centuries to outlaw embalming. We've suc-
ceeded only locally and for short periods. We leave elab-
orate instructions and commands for our own disposal,
and yet the abominations still have their way with some
“
2
22
of us.
“But all of you will die some day. And then what?”
“But all of you will die some day. And then what
shorter what? All of you alive today will die long be-
154
FOURTH MANSIONS
fore we do. And no one of you has come back to bring
an authentic report.”
“Haven't you any consciences at all?”
"I haven't. No, I don't believe that any of us have.
There are signs that you uninitiates are also losing
yours. We're both behind and ahead of you in the evo-
lutionary scale, spanning quite a space. No, we've
sloughed our consciences completely if we ever had
any. And now you've overstayed your welcome. I thought
you'd have the passion, would at least be a man, or an
animal, or even a reptile. Really I like them best. It's a
long time since I've had such a letdown. I could have
given you an experience you won't otherwise get in life,
and I did expect a little variety from you. We are all of
us consummate sensualists."
“I'm sure you are, Oriel. Two more questions even
though I am overstayed. Why does your husband keep
rats?”
“A hobby. You don't need to know any more.
“And why does he soak his head in a bucket?”
"You ask him."
"I will."
Fred Foley left the morning-Maryland hideaway.
“The line of the throat, the mercurial movement,
Oriel said.
“ 'Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in,' ”Freddy Foley said.
D
> >
155
IX: BUT I EAT THEM UP, FEDERICO, I EAT
THEM UP
The ascension, when it comes, will be in the regu-
lar sequence, but rising a stage above the old pattern
and continuing to rise. We will have had our spring,
our summer, our autumn. We will have our winter
then, and it is the breaking season: we will break
upward into pattemed rise, or we will break down.
This must not be the Fimbul-winter, the destruc-
tion winter, the wraith winter of the fulminous mon-
strous unwarming fire laid by the Frost Giants;
not the withering sub-tropical winter, the torpidness
that brings the four exterior creatures through the
gates; not the inanity winter, the loss-of-nerve win-
ter. After such spiritual and psychic frosts we can
have only repetitious sick springs.
It must be, in some manner, an evergreen winter,
a singing winter “a summer bird which even in the
haunch of winter sings” a time of swift sanity, of
right ordering and careful law, of interior handicraft
and joiner-work. “Who are these spectral forms com-
ing with pale sickles? The year's harvest is already
in. Begone, pale harvesters, it is another season now.”
It is only after our winter of swift sanity and steely
nerve that we will have our second spring. It will not
be repetition, it will not be beginning again in the
old way. It will be a tumultous springtime higher on
the helical, the ascending spiral; with birds more
156
FOURTH MANSIONS
songful, colts more clattering, earth more burgeon-
ing, spirits more exalted, sky more eternal. It is
only after we have broken the wraith winter that
we may have our helical springtime, that we may
finally enter our Fifth Mansions. And then the rest
is all sheer and joyous ascent.
Prose Poems: Maurice Craftmaster
FREDDY FOLEY was putting his affairs in order, inas-
much as that can be done in a short time. He had a
happy head on him while he did it even though the
fuliginous Harvesters were romping and wrecking
through its inner channels. He discovered, as had Rich-
ard Bencher, the iridescent limbs and rousing music
of parts of their dragon.
The manila packet of Crabtree was now consigned
by Freddy to a responsible man, Michael Fountain, even
though Fred was now convinced that it was a hoax and
the original packet had been put to other use. Michael
Fountain would be able to guess much of the original
thing from the false shadow of it.
And he met Salzy Silverio in the middle of his mind.
"The snakes are shedding their skins early this year,
Freddy said. “It means an early and auspicious spring.”
Freddy phoned the lawyer back home and instructed
that man to consider his Will Number Three as his only
last will and testament, and to destroy wills one, two,
four, and five. Freddy hadn't many tangible things to
will anyone, and yet there were some things in that
which were worthy and almost tangible.
And Bedelia Bencher was on the edge of his mind,
impudent and exasperating. Pink sulphur, scented rosy
fire and all, he would not give his girl over to any sec-
ondclass devil. This part was not over with.
Freddy had made up several packages and large
envelopes. He went out to mail them, sending the big
heavy envelope to Michael Fountain by registered mail,
157
FOURTH MANSIONS
Then he went to get a shave and haircut so he would
be his best under scrutiny.
"I have bom other children out of my body," said
an ashen ghost in Fred Foley's cerebellum while he was
in the barber chair. "They are all of them deformed
monkeys, or snake children, or elongated toads, or queer
fish, or specter children. Fortunate that they have al-
ready perished! I am lost, I am confused. But I will
still go another way. I will not go the way they have
set for me. Tonight, if it is night, today, if it is day. I
will bear another child who is beautiful and full of light.
They cannot dominate one who is indomitable.”
Fred Foley gave himself a pep talk and then went
directly to the doctor's office. He did not go to just any
doctor. He went to the one doctor of really solid reputa-
tion. There was one thing he wanted to be sure of and
to have the proof of.
“Be careful, Freddy,” said an intelligent and superior
and noble snake out of its coiling passion and great
center of compassion. This was as Freddy came into
the anteroom at the doctor's. "Think, Freddy, who di-
rects your steps there. Should you not tum and leave
as rapidly as possible? This kind of doctor you do not
need."
“This kind of doctor I may well need,” Freddy told
the projection of Hondo Silverio. "With you things romp-
ing in my head, I have to have a guarantee of my san-
ity before I go on.”
I
“Go right in, Mr. Foley,” the appointments girl said
to Freddy's outer ears, and Fred Foley went in.
"I'll state my reason for coming as quickly as possible,”
Fred said to the doctor of solid reputation. He couldn't
see the doctor's eyes, only the glint of light on his glasses.
But there had to be eyes of solid reputation behind
them. “I want to be certified as sane. Is that ever done,
Doctor? I want you to go over me very carefully and
158
0
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
then give me a written opinion that will stand up legal-
ly."
“Well, no, it really isn't ever done, Mr. Foley, not
quite like that. A man doesn't ask for such a legal cer-
tificate without a legal threat. Has your sanity ever
been questioned?”
“Oh, a little bit, here and there, you know how it is,
Doctor. It's usually in a kidding mood that people tell
me that I'm crazy. Ah some of them are serious,
though. But I have reason to-believe that my sanity
will be questioned, and that quite soon. I believe I may
be railroaded, and without recourse. I'd like to have
the opinion of a competent doctor on record before that
event.
“Most committed persons believe they're railroaded,
Mr. Foley, but most don't suspect it before it happens.
Are you given any alternative to being put on the rails?”
I “I was once given the alternative: to shut up. I didn't
I
do it. It's probably too late for that now. Well, go over
me and tell me how sane I am.
-“You must be prepared for the possiblity that you
are a little off, Mr. Foley, and that if you are sent up
it will be for a reason. You seem to have delusions of
persecution.”
"They aren't delusions, Doctor. Two sets of threats
have been given to me, one on my life, one on my free-
dom. I was awake and not suffering from hallucination
both times. My hearing is better than normal, it's acute.
My knowledge of people is sound. I've been threatened
to make me lay off a peculiar line of questioning."
“Then lay off. That's what a sane man would do. A
sane man solves his problems in the most direct manner.
Laying off would seem the most direct manner for you.”
“But I don't want to lay off.”
“Then you probably are insane, to an extent, on this
one subject. Why don't you want to lay off the thing
that threatens your life?”
22
2
2)
а
159
FOURTH MANSIONS
'I have a certain amount of stubbornness. And I have
my principles.”
"Neither is a sign of sanity, Mr. Foley. More often
they're the opposite. An insane man will always have
a considerable amount of stubbornness, intractability.
And he'll have very strong principles, though usually for
very weak reasons. A sane man bends to reality, and
his principles die a little as he gets older. Yours should
at least have begun to weaken. You aren't a child. Chil-
dren, you may not realize it, are never sane. But sanity
should have begun to develop by your age."
"We may not mean the same thing by sanity. I was
sane when I was a boy, Doctor. This is one thing I do
know. And other boys were mostly sane. Some of them
have lost it, a little, when they come to be men. I don't
believe I've lost very much of mine."
“No, we certainly don't mean the same thing by sanity,
Mr. Foley. You have a backward idea, an insane idea
of it. Sanity is adaptability to the world as it is, even
though that world may be a little insane by ideal stand-
ards. You seem to be in fine health, and I'm sure that
your senses are acute. Your attitude isn't truculent, so
far. If committed, you probably wouldn't make a diffi-
cult patient; that's one thing to be thankful for. The
difficulty of adaptation is always harder on the patient
than on the overseers. Now then, Mr. Foley, let's ex-
amine your attitude toward reality, taking into consid-
eration that your profession is based largely on fiction.
When you fictionize in your reporting-do you realize
it?"
"Certainly I realize it.”
"And you're never carried away by it, never to the
point where you can't see the difference?”
“Certainly I'm carried away by it, or I wouldn't be any
good at it. But I believe it's the same way an actor is
carried away. And I do see the difference between the
fiction and reality, where it's necessary to draw a dif-
160
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
ference; most of the time it isn't necessary, it doesn't
matter.
"You think it doesn't matter what you reject and
what you accept, and how you handle it all? Mr. Foley,
suppose you interviewed a very magnetic man who
said that he had ridden to other planets in alien space-
craft? Would you be immune to his evidence?”
“I sure hope I wouldn't be immune to anyone's evi-
dence about anything, Doctor. I wouldn't reject any
evidence for anything without examining it, not as re-
porter. And your question isn't merely a supposition. I
have interviewed three such men who said that they
had ridden to other planets in odd craft. And all three
of those were magnetic. They projected the stuff, they
talked the stuff, and they said that the crafts were
driven by the same magnetic stuff. Two of the men
certainly didn't convince me, though they did make
good copy. But that third man had my mind wide open
for quite a while.”
“Oh. What closed your mind to his insane ideas
then, Foley?”
“He told me he'd arrange for me to take one of those
quick trips to another planet. But he never showed up
for the appointment."
“I see. And if you had taken such a trip, would you
have believed it?”
“Certainly I'd belicve it. If I had actually done it,
then of course I'd believe I had.”
“Even knowing that it was impossible? That's bad,
Mr. Foley, bad.”
“If I had done it, Doctor, then I'd know that it was
possible. He shouldn't have stood me up. That shook my
trust in him. He did send me a postcard, though, from
Ganymede. He explained, not too implausibly, that their
takeoff was hurried and that they'd been forced to
leave without me.'
“A postcard from Ganymede, Mr. Foley? Do you
161
FOURTH MANSIONS
realize what you're saying? Ganymede is one of the
moons of Jupiter, or at least one of the large planets.
How could you believe”
“Actually the card was postmarked from Pueblo, Col-
orado, Doctor. It was one of the disappointments of
.
“You wanted such things to be true?"
my life.”
“Oh yes.”
>
“Bad, Mr. Foley, very bad.” ”
"Bad that I should want the marvelous to be true?
I would think that normal.”
"Only for children, Mr. Foley. You have a decidedly
immature attitude toward the world. That isn't com-
pletely damning in itself, but let's go on a little further.
If you were told that a new race of giant snails was
going to take over the earth and abolish mankind, how
would you react?”
“I'd react by considering my informant and question-
ing where he got his information. If he had even the
slightest snail-horn of information, I'd follow it out. I'd
try my mightiest to find out whether there really was
a new race of giant snails trying to take over. I'd ex-
amine all the evidence my informant could give me,
and all that I could invent myself, always with an eye
as to how I could tumn it to account. I'd consider the
treatment-quizzical, facetious, sensational, or who-
knows-after-all?-even before I had anything to treat.
If there were real evidence, Doctor, I'd really follow it
out. I can see the banner on my feature piece, On the
Track of the Giant Snail, in my mind's-eye now. Be-
lieve me, I'd try to be the first to interview the snail
leader."
"You would actually spend time on such a report,
Mr. Foley?”
“Yes. I may spend time on that very thing whenever
I'm through with what I'm on now. There's bound to
be an interesting story in it: if not of the giant snails
-
162
FOURTH MANSIONS
themselves, then perhaps a story of a man who believed
in giant snails.
“Worse and worse, Mr. Foley. Now then, what would
you do if you had the report that there was a race of
superhumans secretly ruling the world to the detriment
of normal mankind? Would you credit the report, Mr.
Foley? Would you examine it? In a way, this is the
test. There is a pattern of such belief in a certain form
of insanity."
"Oh, is there now, Doctor?”
How many strands would it take to bind a man, and
each of them so much thinner than a hair? Would you
believe a report about secret spiders? Or would you
refuse to believe it even after they had tangled you
in their webs?
There was an abnormality about this doctor. It both-
ered Foley while they talked. What it was slipped
away from him, but he hovered over it. He would have
it in a minute.
"You don't answer me, Mr. Foley. Do you believe in
a race of superhumans? Now then, what if it was re-
ported, or it came into your mind somehow, that this
race of superhumans had one slight peculiarity which
distinguished them? Would you see this peculiarity
wherever you looked and would you imagine a con-
spiracy? Would you imagine you saw this peculiarity on
people in the streets? That you saw it on someone fol-
lowing you? That you saw it on someone you came to
for advice? That you saw it on a doctor whom you
came to visit?”
"Such as archaic ears, Doctor?”
“Such as anything, Mr. Foley. Is archaic ears one of
the forms that your delusion takes? Do you imagine
that a race of men with funny ears is out to dominate
the world?”
“Either I'm imagining it or it's happening. Yes, I be-
lieve that certain old people with funny ears are out
163
a
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
to dominate the world. It does make me sound as if I
were a little off, especially since nobody else seems to
see such things.”
Foley was tempted now to doubt his own sanity,
the doctor had put it all so smoothly. He was tempted,
but he didn't really doubt. He had evidence before his
eyes now, if his eyes were still good. The doctor had
the funny ears, no doubt about that.
“Bad, Mr. Foley, very bad,” the doctor was saying
again.
“Doctor, how did I come to seek you out?” Freddy
Foley asked suddenly.
“How would I know, Mr. Foley? I suppose you came
I
to me because I'm a doctor of solid reputation.”
“Well, who told me that you were a doctor of solid
reputation?”
“It could have been almost anybody, Mr. Foley, for
I am.
“How did I even learn your name and address?"
“I don't know, Mr. Foley. It was probably given to
you by someone who thought you really needed a doc-
tor. Or you could have had it from the phone book.”
"I could have, but I didn't. Doctor, I don't know your
name and address. What brought me here?”
“Your feet, perhaps. A vehicle? I don't know."
“I never heard of you. I never heard of your solid
reputation. But I never even thought of going to any
other doctor. I didn't ask any of my acquaintances the
name of a good doctor. I came directly to you without
asking directions or anything else. I came directly to
a man I had never heard of, already convinced that he
was a man of solid reputation. How was this put into
?
“Ah, now you believe that the super-people can con-
trol
your mind? Bad, Mr. Foley, very bad.”
“How did you know my name was Foley? How did
164
my mind?”
>
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
your appointments girl know it? How did you lmow
I was a reporter?”
"Have you suffered these gaps of memory and in-
formation before, Mr. Foley? Is it that you become a
little excited now? If you will allow me, I'll give you
a sedative, and then we'll delve a little deeper into
this.”
"You come out of that chair and I'll knock you back
into it, Doctor! You're not giving me any sedativel”
“My, aren't we violent! The symptoms continue to
unfold.”
"You can stow that, Doctor. I know when I'm being
taken. You're one of them.”
“I am one of them? Soon, Mr. Foley, as your mind
weakens, everybody will be one of them. You'll see
them everywhere you look. It will be the whole world
in conspiracy against you.
“I considered that once before, Doctor, but it didn't
hold up. It isn't the whole world in conspiracy against
me, it's a small bunch of you in conspiracy against the
whole world. How was it done to me, Doctor? By
subliminal or subvocal suggestion? How?”
"Your suggestions follow a pattern of a familiar de-
mentia, Mr. Foley. You can believe any or all of them.
I'm not sure that it will be well for you to be walking
the streets. You have shown signs of violence.
“I'll show more signs if you try to stop me.
“I can have a pickup order out for you within sec-
onds, Mr. Foley.”
“Why bother? I still have an appointment in the par-
lor of a bigger spider. He's at least a little curious about
me or he wouldn't be willing to see me. He's at
least a little nervous about me or he wouldn't have de-
toured me here. And I have the feeling that I'll be
watched by archaic and many-faceted eyes when I go
to his parlor.”
“In the parlor of a spider, you say. Sheer infantilism.
>
165
FOURTH MANSIONS
Yes, Mr. Foley, I would be willing to give a certificate
concerning your sanity, but it would be the opposite of
the one you came for. But you're right, you will be
closely watched wherever you go. There's really noth-
ing you can do in the little time you have left.”
Foley left that doctor of solid reputation. He came
angrily and alertly out into the street again, careful of
ambush, careful of everything. But there is a danger
in being too careful, and he knew it; it makes you too
tight.
And now Foley was tempted again to doubt his own
sanity. He did see the distinguishing mark, those damned
odd ears, on people in the street: newsboys, shoppers,
loitering messengers, hurrying tourists. Either he was
going crazy, or another galloping suggestion had been
implanted into his mind. Those ears were on the shop-
girls, on the policemen, on little colored kids no bigger
than toys, on kind old ladies. He thought about post-
hypnotic suggestion and such rubbish; he thought how
an ordinary thing will sometimes appear extraordi-
nary as though seen for the first time; he thought This
is it, Freddy, this is it. But for all that, he decided
that if he had gotten into the state he could get out of
it.
He squinted his eyes. He could make the strange
ears appear. He could make them go away. He could
see the snakes. He could cast out the snakes. He had
once learned this from an old snake-watcher.
The snake-watcher had told him how to stop seeing
snakes. This was when Freddy had been on the jail
beat. One can stop seeing snakes: it takes great strength
of mind, intense concentration, deep resources of cour-
age, and a blind denial of the obvious. But the giant
effort to make the snakes go away can be made.
The difficulty, the snake-watcher had said, is that it
takes so much out of a man that he is left weak and
shaken and has to be restored. And the handiest restora-
>
166
FOURTH MANSIONS
tive is just what made him see snakes in the first
place. “Leam to live with them, learn to live with
them,” the old snake-watcher had advised.
But if hallucinatory snakes can be made to disap-
pear by giant effort, so should archaic ears be capable
of being modernized. Foley made the giant effort, and
then the people in the streets no longer had peculiar
ears. Or rather, they no longer had the archaic ears
of the reappearing folks. They still had peculiar ears;
Fred hadn't noticed ears much before; he saw now the
thing that many people never see, that ears themselves
are forever peculiar.
Having seen this much, Freddy went further with
sudden insight: he saw that people themselves are pe-
culiar by nature, that there is no norm. But this didn't
help much.
“What I need now is one rich and powerful friend
who'll be faithful to me to the end,” Freddy told him-
self. “I need a foul-weather friend. There has to be
somewhere at least one person who cares what happens
to me, one who has a gracious way with money and
no fear at all of embarrassment or danger. There has
to be one person who'll stand by me whether I'm crazy
or not, one who'd enjoy a battle. If I had such a friend
I'd communicate at once and give a hint of what just
might happen to me. But do I have such a friend?
“Yeah. I do. Besides, it might shake her loose from
that demon she's stuck on. She likes to be needed and
I need her now.
Biddy Bencher, whatever else was wrong with her,
was such a friend. She had a gracious way with money
(her father's), she certainly had no fear of embarrass-
mentor danger. She was more likely to stand by a
crazy person than a sane one. And she did love a
battle. She was a foul-weather friend all the way. So
innocent and yet so foul. She was the one. Nobody was
more loyal, to more things. She changed loyalties like
167
FOURTH MANSIONS
coats. Well, it was time for her to put on her Freddy-
coat again.
Freddy called her up, not by phone. Other forms of
communication had come onto him lately almost with-
out his noticing them. He got her but could not get
her attention. She was lounging on subterranean beaches
and wild dogs were tearing her apart. “You're miss-
ing pieces, you're missing the best pieces,” she kept call-
ing at the tearing dogs. “All you’re tearing off is the
legs. Don't
any
of
you
like the white meat?”
| Freddy couldn't get her attention that way. Finally
he called her on the telephone and she answered on
the fourth ring. “Hello, Freddy,” she answered at once.
“I was playing the record-player and I couldn't answer
until that movement was finished. Sure, I'll come there
if you need me. Where will I come? Where is there?
Is this Freddy or have I answered a dead phone?”
“I'm in Washington, Biddy. I'm fine, as fine as one
can be in Washington, temporarily fine, but possibly I
won't be free by the end of this day. If I am confined,
in all likelihood it will be at the Asilo Santa Eliza, and
they'll deny that I'm there. Come get me out if you
don't hear from me again."
"Freddy, little short end of the stick, phone me at
home late tonight if it hasn't happened. If I don't hear
from you, I'll fly there and be there in the moming. I
understand, dear, I know what kind of people they put
in Santa Eliza. I always knew you were a little, but
I don't want other people thinking it, and I sure don't
want it made official. Are you on the same jag, Freddy?”
“Yes, the same jag, Biddy.”
“There must be something to it, then. If it was just
a crackpot idea they wouldn't lock you up. They don't
lock up crackpots. I know they don't. Shall I bring Papa?”
“Yes. He said once to wait and he'd get me out. I
wasn't in yet then, but I think he had a futuristic insight.”
168
FOURTH MANSIONS
“I'll come either on bat-wings or by commercial flight,
Freddy."
It is good to have one rich and powerful friend.
An hour and a bit to the west another young man
found himself circumscribed and threatened with con-
finement. Hasty army units of two nations had him near-
ly in a pocket. United States forces, with plane and
copter overhead, with radios sputtering back and forth
and
up and down, mobile with jeep and track, toothed
with rifle and automatic rifle and bazooka and machine
gun, covered both sides of Canyon Creek to its nearly
dry mouth and spread out both ways along the Rio
Grande itself. Mexican forces had worked out of the
wild and rocky mountains of Serranias del Burro and
covered most of the near south shore of the same big
river. Little armed river boats stood ready with roaring
power barely muted, and ripped here and there in the
chocolate colored water.
Miguel Fuentes and his one hundred men; no, his
sixty men; no, his twenty-five men, were nearly in the
bag. But their numbers and grouping dwindled as
streams sometimes dwindle into the sand in that re-
gion. Half of them had merged into the roving Mexi-
can patrols; many of them actually belonged to those
patrols, but now they had a new loyalty.
Fifteen men and a leader. Where had the rest es-
caped the closing net? Then three men down with gun-
fire. Twelve men and a leader into a canyon be-
tween rough bald-headed hills, and the covered mouth
of the canyon was right on the river. Got them from
both ends, got them from sides, covered them from
above, harried into the last turn; shouts, warnings, ex-
pectations, rattle of hard weapon fire. Final caution,
and the converging troops came together
The bag was closed, but there was nothing in the
169
FOURTH MANSIONS
bag. Every way out still closed. Most minute search.
Counsel and cursing. Air to ground to air communica-
tion in two languages. Flamethrowers firing every
thicket. Where were the twelve men and their leader?
They had gone into the short bare canyon, they had
not come out of it, and they were not in it.
>
22
"Federico, Federico, hey Freddy,” a voice communi-
cated from cave via weave to distant city. “Do you
watch the trick? Hey, is that ever a trick!"
“Go away, Miguel, I have no time for you,” Freddy
Foley communicated. “I've got a noose around my own
neck and I'll have to learn to like the feel of hemp.
“Noose I'm talking about,” Miguel exulted. “Hombre,
was there ever a noose around mel You have watched,
I know you have watched.”
“I watched you but I had other things on my eyes,
Freddy communicated. “Anybody could do it with a
setup like that. But how will I do it?”
“You know where I am? In the very middle of the
earth I am."
“You're down in the complex of caves that Auclaire
the patrick told me about, Miguel. You'll get lost in
them and never get out. They're thirty miles each
way and nobody but the patrick knows their windings.”
"And can I not compel the mind of the patrick Au-
claire? Now I give you statements which you will
proclaim."
“I haven't the time for you, Miguel. You're taking
things by the wrong end of the stick. You're as vile a
thing as the other creatures.”
“I may be so, Federico. If it is so, then I am called
to be vile; it is my mission which I may not question.
If I am as vile as the other creatures, yet I am not the
other creatures. I beset them, I cut them down. I am
the snake-eater. What, is the snake-eater not as vile as
the snakes? But I eat them up, Federico, I eat them up.
,
170
С
>
::OURTH MANSIONS
I come soon to my hour. Now you will proclaim the
statements I give. I compel your mind to this.
“I have loosened more than eighty men, more than
eighty seeds. They are scattered even now. They find
quick places to root. They are completely instructed by
me, even if only for short hours. They will root, they
will grow, they will form other groups immediately.
Tell the world that I am down in the middle of the
world now, that I am under the ground in a grave. And
tell them that I will emerge on the third day as a sign
and a wonder. Is that not a blasphemous way to put
it! Hey, it is fun to cut these holy corners sometimes
and shake the elementals. Proclaim it for me, Federico.
I compel you to."
"I know you do, Miguel. Rot your brown bones any-
howl I'll proclaim your stuff and then I'll be shed of
you. Emerge on the third day as a sign and wonder!
Oh brother!”
“A tip, Federico, a tip. You also will go underground,
be hunted into a hole, be trapped underground inside
a confinement and inside yourself within that. You will
be invaded, you will be dead, you will be buried under-
ground in a peculiar grave. And on the third day you
also will emerge. Don't knock it, Freddy, it's a good
,
trick.”
“Get out of my head, Miguel. I've had enough of
you."
“But you will proclaim my statement, Freddy. I com-
pel you to
“I know it. I'll do it. And then we're quits. Gah,
they're worse than reptiles before they're full-feathered!”
>
>
1
Fred Foley phoned Tankersley and gave him the
statement of Miguel Fuentes.
“He really has the Messiah fever, has he, Freddy?
Say, there's a group in Norway came out for Miguel
today, and one in Indonesia. And about all they know
171
FOURTH MANSIONS
about him they have from our own dispatches. Sure,
I'll run it, Freddy. You've kept us ahead of the world
on it so far."
Then Freddy started out toward the office of Car-
mody Overlark. He didn't know where Overlark's of-
fice was any more than he had known where was the
office of the doctor of solid reputation; but his feet
would bring him to it.
Something clicked in Freddy's head. The appointment
he had been wanting had come through. Overlark
had given the word that Foley was to be admitted at
once, and Foley was coming at once.
172
X: ARE YOU NOT OF FLIMSY FLESH TO BE
SO AFRAID?
Ere- Mor the Peacock flutters, ere the Monkey People
cry,
Ere Chil the Kite swoops down a furlong sheer,
Through the Jungle very softly flits a shadow and a
sigh-
He is fear, O Little Hunter, he is fearl
Kipling
2
OVERLARK's secretary had a rough, white, unfinished
face that seemed to Foley to express cruelty and cow-
ardice. “You are his dog and you mirror him," Foley
said softly to himself.
This may have been Foley's imagination. The secre-
tary might have been a nice enough fellow but he
wasn't the jolly type. He had smoky eyes that almost
made it appear that he was blind.
“I have no idea why Mr. Overlark is willing to see
you,” he said, “but I must write down your reason for
visiting him. What is it?”
“I want to give him some advice,” said Fred Foley.
"He is hardly in need of that, from you at any rate,
the secretary said.
“Since that's the commodity he deals most in he
might want a new line of it,” Foley said stoutly. “Mine
is a little out of the ordinary and it's given freely."
"He has sent out instructions that you be admitted,
>
173
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Mr. Foley. I had just made attempts to reach you but
I failed.”
“No, you succeeded, smoky-eyes, you succeeded. You
reached me nicely."
"Go in then. But I beg you not to take any more of
his time than is necessary. His time is very
limited.”
“So is mine, but I haven't learned to budget it so
finely.”
Oh it was a plush place inside, but a different plush
than Freddy had imagined. It looked like an office
where a great amount of work was done, and this sur-
prised him. It was large but still crowded, containing
files (files which were themselves works of art in their
haunting ornamentation), two very large tables that
could have been conference tables if only the piles of
bulletins were ever cleared off them, several desks that
were almost cockpits with the amount of instrumenta-
tion about them, and a variety of taping and viewing
and communication equipment. And there was Car-
mody Overlark himself, an ornamental man.
"You were intending to ask me questions, Foley,”
said Carmody Overlark (he didn't ask Foley to sit, but
Foley did, and it seemed to irritate the man), “but I
imagine I'll do most of the talking. First off, and natu-
rally, we are not alone, in case you have any wild ideas.”
"Why are you afraid of little Fred Foley?” Freddy
mocked him.
“I'm afraid of nobody, Foley. I'm physically ca-
pable but I seldom task myself with the duties that be-
long to subordinates. I hear you've been acting oddly
today. Why?”
Carmody's eyes weren't those of a prisoner looking
out; they were those of one who had taken refuge
within. He didn't want out. He wouldn't come out.
“I went to a doctor this morning, Mr. Kar-everlast-
ing-Mod, to get an opinion on myself. I don't know
174
FOURTH MANSIONS
whether that's odd behavior or not, but the doctor was
odd. He tried to get me to doubt my own sanity.”
“He tried to get you to recognize your own insanity,
Foley. That's the first step toward
toward a cure, and we
have cures for everyone.”
“There's a proverb about the cure being worse than
the disease, Mr. Overlark. I want to ask you some ques-
tions about a strange movement. I believe you're near
the center of it,” Freddy said, and Carmody looked at
him with eyes like shattered glass. They were discon-
certing, those eyes. One couldn't look into them; one
bounced off their facets.
“What you want is to startle me with how much
you've guessed, Foley, and to force a full revelation
from me. That's pretty childish. Don't you realize what
a nonentity you are?”
“No. I've never admitted to myself that I'm a non-
entity. I have always believed that every man"
-is entitled to his mete of human dignity. That's
really a very late idea and there's nothing to it. You're
here without any advantage at all. What possible cir-
cumstance would impel me to tell you everything or
anything?”
“The circumstance that I'll soon be put out of the
way and won't be able to use the information. And
the sort of pride that holders of tight secrets take
in revealing such secrets to their captives.”
“I have no such pride, Foley. Oh, maybe a little. No,
that's not at all the circumstance that would impel me
to tell everything or even nearly everything to you. But
there is such a circumstance."
"Is it present?”
“Oh yes. But barely. It seems to me, from what I've
heard of your activities, that you've already discov-
ered the essentials about us. This is: that we live when
we want to live, that we go into a non-aging state that
is very near death when we want to do so, and that
a
175
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
we live again, and then again: that we try always to
live at most heightened experience and to spread our-
selves out for as long as we possibly can; and that we
do not permit interference. What else do you want to
know about us?"
Fred Foley understood in a sudden glimpse that
Carmody Overlark was mad. What, “The Sanity of the
Centuries” (that had been one of his titles when he
was Khar-ibn-Mod) was mad? Absolutely. He lived in
a different world entirely. He didn't see the world be-
fore him, not even with his multiplex eyes. That was
madness.
“Why don't you live and die and live again without
bothering the world with your doings, Overlark? Why
do you impose a deleterious effect on the world?”
(I've been wrong about him, Foley thought. What I
guessed, what he himself believes to be the way of it,
isn't the truth of the matter at all. There's much less
here than meets the eye.)
“Let me go back to the beginning, Foley, or a little
before,” Carmody said. (There was always laughter
just behind his voice, but it had no real mertiment in it.)
“You'll see that one man's deleteriousness is another
man's delectation. The world is for ourselves and not
we for the world. Anything we do to the world is
right, so long as it gives us pleasure. You believe you
have some sort of standards, and you haven't. Most of
the things that you believe are eternal are really very
recent. We of the older recension aren't bound by them.
We've been in combat with you for a long time. You
believe, in one of your theories, that we're in control
of the world. We aren't. But we have been, and we
will be whenever we wish. It's a day' you will fear to
see, that we come fully awake again. And we do come
awake now. We will regain the world. Certain later
interlopers have for some time ruled heaven and earth.
Now we come back-ruthlessly.”
>
176
"Are you
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Don't you believe the others also have rights?”
“The others have had the run of their rights long
enough. They are the interlopers, and it's time that the
ancient line is restored. -Oh, Foley, I misunderstand
you completely; that's always the difficulty of convers-
ing with infants. You mean people. You mean do peo-
ple have any rights? Oh no, I don't believe that people
have any rights."
"
and yours not people, Carmody?”
“No. Not in every sense. Our apotheosis was effected
very long ago.” Clear mad, this man with the edgy
eyes, with the complexion that was sometimes ghost-
lighted and sometimes dead-fish color, with the laugh-
ing tainted cruelty and the sick fear. If he was on top
of it all, why was he so scared?
"A man doesn't become a god, Carmody, except for
purposes of rhetoric,” Freddy said. “I assume that your
apotheosis was like that of the Caesars.”
“Foley, the next time you skim through the Lives of
the Twelve Caesars (for you will be allowed books
in your confinement) see if you can guess which three
of those emperors were of usfor three were. They
were already gods. Their confirmation in public god-
head was only that the public be appeased.”
“You're giving an ironic twist to the words, Carmody.
What real effect could your auto-apotheosis have?”
“It was an act, an utterance, a statement that became
true as it was uttered. Let me say simply that this is
always a possible development of man. Oh, 'not of
every man, but of many. Many more than you'd suppose.
There's the one man in a thousand, perhaps the one
man in a hundred, who is capable of turning into a
god. This is as true as that many bees could tum into
queen-bees, should the proper historic surge be present.
You find it extravagant that I should speak of historic
surge as applying to so small a thing as a swarm of
insects? But it's also extravagant that we should apply
177
>
22
FOURTH MANSIONS
it to so small a thing as a swarm of men. The point is
that a small hive of bees has more claim on you to
importance than you have on us. We're much further
above you than you are above the bees. You'd feel
no compunction in the destruction of the bees of a re-
gion if for some reason it worked to your profit or ease
--let's say that the bees of a region bore what seemed
to you to be a disease. And we would feel no compunc-
tion at destroying most or all of you, if it should be
necessary or convenient to us, and it
may
well be.”
“Yes, I do find your ideas a little extravagant, Car-
mody. When you speak of being gods you actually
mean an elite group of demagogues, a bunch of super-
men (in your own opinion)."
“You don't know what I speak of, Foley. I was once
a tribal deity, literally and actually. All of us were?
"How
many
is all of you?”
“The first clutch of us, the first dozen; and it was
many times that many millennia ago. I was a true tribal
deity, Foley. I exceeded even the rest. I was deified,
and as a deified one I had access to the several veins
of secret knowledge. We were all of us remarkably in-
telligent in what was a very intelligent age, one that
didn't yet hobble on the crutches of literacy and com-
pilation. What we knew' we knew directly. We formed
a confederacy and established Olympus. We destroyed
the Titans, and we ruled. I beg your pardon, Foley,
but I caught a country expression going through your
mind: something as a peach-orchard boar.' It seems
I've brushed this expression in minds of men talking
to me before. What is it? Even in our earliest mytholo-
gies there's nothing about a peach-orchard boar."
“You've forgotten your mythology then, Carmody,"
Fred Foley told him. “I assure you that the peach-
orchard boar is there strongly, early and late. But when
you speak of destroying the Titans and ruling, you
don't speak literally.”
>
178
>
2
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Oh, but I dol Olympus is actually a phonetic equiva-
lent of the name of our old high mountain lodge. We
were gods and we lived there as gods.”
“And you interfered in the affairs of men like the
Homeric gods?"
“We did, and we still do. We are the Homeric gods,
though much older and more crafty than Homer sup-
posed. We're also the gods of wilder epics. Like all
epic gods, we had our twilights and resurrections, and
we- Foley, I warn you! Don't do it! You're dead on
the spot if you do it."
And Carmody Overlark had risen to his feet in pale
fury.
“Don't do what?” Fred Foley protested. “I'm hon-
estly puzzled. I':n unarmed and completely without a
plan. I really don't know what you're talking about."
“Don't laugh at me, Foley! You're dead on the
spot if you do! I will not tolerate it. You laughed at
my poor wife, but I will not tolerate being so wounded.
You're brainless if you try it. I'll have you killed at once.
I mean it.”
"Continue, Mr. Overlark. You were telling me a good
story and I wouldn't break it up, even though I nearly
break up myself. I'm properly quelled by your threat;
I don't want to be killed on the spot. That's no laughing
matter for me. Continue.”
"I will. Perhaps you don't know that laughing at us
was the offense of the Titans themselves. For that we
slaughtered them, and no such battle has been seen
since. We're not only tribal deities, Foley, but also na-
tional heroes. There's one element common to all na-
tional heroes: that they disappear, and that they will
come back. We're the thing behind that archetype. It's
part of every national lore that the national hero will
awaken again and lead like a Messias. There's even a
variant Jewish belief that the Messias has lived before,
»
179
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
that his appearance will be a returning rather than
an advent.
“Now then, behind every legend is fact, and behind
these legends is solid fact. The national heroes, under
their own or other names, lived and seemed to die.
But they only slept. And they will return. Most of them,
most of us, have done it several times. I was such a
legend myself long ago, and the last written traces of
my own legend have now nearly disappeared.”
“Your ears twitch, Carmody," Foley said. “Is that a
property of archaic ears?”
“Foley, ours are the itching ears mentioned in scrip-
ture. They itch for novelty; we're not ashamed of that.
And they do twitch physically. Oh how seldom are
new things heard! So often they itch in vain! I was
saying, Foley, that the last written traces of my own
legend have nearly disappeared, so now I set about
renewing my own legend.”
"I'll have to take all this with a kilo of salt, Carmody,"
Fred Foley said, “being under death threat not to laugh
and all. But I simply don't accept it.'
“Why not? You had already convinced yourself that
I was a returnee.
“I had, Carmody, and you've just now unconvinced
me. You're a wraith that settles on a man and alters
him. You're an insane spirit with no real substance, an
influence flowing through. But you aren't a man, and
you never were.
“I am a returned man as you first believed. I and my
group are powerful enough to rule the world. Being so
powerful, would we not be in legend?”
"Possibly, Carmody, but not so neatly; not with all
the known names.
“The neatness is a modern accretion, Foley. Often
the legend-cloak is draped over an unworthy dummy.”
“Not as national heroes, not as pcoples' hcroes. You're
against the people.”
>
>
>
>
>
180
2
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“No. It's they, in their ingratitude, who sometimes
turn against us. We began as people of a sort, as men.
After we were men we were tribal gods. We each
have our tribe that we sometimes inspire and that
we follow with interest. My own is a diaspora tribe
that's older than the Jews and has forgotten its name;
sometimes it's called the Intelligentsia. This is a people
and a race, though it's forgotten that it is.
“It's no wonder that the Intelligentsia is inhibited from
becoming intelligent.”
“And when our tribes follow false gods, then we visit
our wrath on them-as did a certain neologist among
the tribal deities.”
“This is like something out of Freud or Jung, Car-
mody. It isn't real.”
“What is, Foley? We ourselves have always been
puz-
zled as to what constitutes reality. We even have a
sort of bet among ourselves as to who'll find the valid
answer.'
“But if you aren't real, what sort of visiting wraiths
are you? Are you like winds blowing on a man and
making him look a little bit like another man? Are you
thin spooks influencing by fear and yourselves fearful?”
"We do influence by fear, but we deny that we are
fearful. But how could you be if you had no-
had no— Oh, there
are some things that can't be explained! It's so much
easier to obliterate than to explain.
“And you really have no morality at all, Carmody,
and you regard all our ethic as man-made?”
“Certainly. And you have no morality, Foley. "You
have only the memory of a morality. There are so many
of these memories and nothing that is origin to them.
Where were these original things? I was there. Where
were they? It's always been in the past tense. Man has
never been moral, but he's always remembered that
he had been moral. It's a sort of backward aspiration.
But you wouldn't understand it, Foley."
181
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
“I begin to understand some things too well. But
when all is said and done, you're men only, or less than
nen, not more.
“But all isn't said and done yet, Foley. We are still
men, in a way, but we are not only men. It wasn't a
mere empty gesture, the rite of our assuming the god-
head. It meant something."
Carmody Overlark was no more than poltergeist or
plappergeist like the dog-ape of Bertigrew Bagley. He
was even inferior to that sometimes invisible creature.
He worked the fear trick; it was the only trick he knew.
He came out of nowhere, a wraith frozen with fear,
and he communicated that fear. By means of it, he
seemed to have his way, a little bit, over the fearful.
And there are always plenty of fearful.
“But you're not eternal or all-powerful or all-knowing
or all-kind,” said Freddy. “You're certainly not all-kind.
What does your godhead consist of?”
“But we are the nearest things to the eternal. We
are, at least, very powerful and very knowing. Oh,
there have been marches stolen on us, we don't deny
that. Here and there we weren't as astute as several
others. But we'll see how it finally comes out. And to
ourselves we are all-kind, Foley. We give ourselves all
precedence, as is right.”
“Who stole the marches on you, Carmody? You have
me curious there."
“Oh, once there was a traveling man from Ur, and
one made a promise to him at an oasis. The promise
wasn't strictly kept but the memory of the promise
abides. There was the Galilean thing. There was, what
partly combined with it, the Grecian thing. We'd seen
many come and go, and we were too complacent. But
we're not content to run behind for long. We've bled it
near to death in half a dozen drawn battles; it can't
get even a draw any longer. Our old enemies are all
>
182
22
will go.
you believe
FOURTH MANSIONS
dead, and it's only the parasites growing out of their
bodies that we must subdue now.”
“And you really regard us as no more than bees, or
perhaps ants, Carmody?”
"Oh, as a little more. But if our planned ecology de-
mands that you must go, then most of you
“And
you can't be prevented?”
“Of course you can't prevent us. You could no more
prevent us in anything than bees could prevent the re-
moval of one small hive where men wished to build
a building. Oh, it's possible that some of us may be
stung a little, but that won't prevent your removal.”
“Why are you so scared, Carmody, if you're so
powerful?”
“Why do you kcep referring to me as being scared?
Anyway, haven't you known men who were scared of
bees? But our planned ecology does demand that most
of you be removed, so you will be removed.” ”
“How you going to do it?”
"It isn't hard. Not after you've done it a few times.”
“Why do you keep rats, Carmody?”
“How do you know I do, Foley? I keep rats like I
keep people, to play with.”
“Do your rats have any connection with your plans
to remove most of mankind?”
“I don't know what you mean.
“Do you intend, by means of rats, to reintroduce
the plague for the destruction of mankind?"
“Oh yes, we'll use the rats, among other things, for
that introduction. And we'll use the plague, among other
things, for the destruction, but only as a sort of second-
ary tool. The plague is a dull weapon and not to be
depended on; it needs a very dry tinder and ideal
conditions for a sweeping spread. We don't have those
conditions now. You're a damnably antiseptic generation,
a seven-times-washed abomination. I don't know where
you get it-certainly not from us. The plague will be
a
"
183
«
FOURTH MANSIONS
only one of the secondary aids. We have a primary tool
that's never failed.”
“What's that, Carmody?”
“Hysteria. Fear.”
“My father used to say that if I repeated “This is only
a bad dream' three times the dream would go away.
My father was wrong there. When I said it three times
it always caused it to solidify into a very bad dream
indeed. I have most of your pieces now, Carmody. I
only need time to put them together.”
“You'll have plenty of time during your incarcera-
tion, Foley."
"I do have one more question, though, about a thing
both abrupt and silly.'
“Ask it then. But I warn you, if you laugh, you're dead.”
“Why do you
soak your head in a bucket, Carmody?”
“Ah, Foley, I'm glad you asked that, I really am.
Because, before I tell you about it, I must do it. It's
past my time for it, and I'm gasping like a fish out of
water, which is what I am in a way. I was afraid I'd
have to have you taken away before I was finished
playing with you, Foley. But now that you've mentioned
it, I'll do it. If you're looking for something grotesque
this is surely it. There's nothing so grotesque
as a fish out of water, and you may as well watch.”
Foley followed Carmody Overlark into the next room.
The “bucket" was a large crystal ewer or bowl, trans-
parent, and the water in it was still astir as though
it was freshly poured. Foley recalled the sound of
gushing water in the background as he had talked to
Overlark. Well, let the toads have their fountains tool
Even the patricks have fountains.
When Carmody Overlark took off his shirt, Foley was
surprised at his remarkable musculature, for he had
seemed a slight man. He was tanned, but there was
something else. There was a very fine graining to his
skin that reminded a little of fish skin-though that
about me,
184
FOURTH MANSIONS
thought would not have come if fish had not just been
mentioned.
Overlark breathed out deeply, emptying chest and
collapsing his whole upper body in the expelling. Then
he plunged his head and neck and shoulders into the
large bowl and began to breathe the water deeply. If
this was fakery it was good fakery, and it hadn't been
rigged just to impress Freddy Foley.
The man, if he was a man, was breathing very deeply
under water-if it was water. His eyes were open
and
they had a new snap to them. He grinned, a not alto-
gether man grin, a not altogether fish grin. It was the
grin of a tribal deity full of rogue power and eternal
youth, one at home in all the elements. Something false
about both the power and the youth, though.
Fred Foley scooped water and tasted. It was half
salt-brackish, like tide-turning estuary water, or water
from the sea very near the mouth of a great river. Or it
was like water from an ancient ocean, one with less
salt in it than have the oceans now. But why did Fred
Foley think of that?
There were minute plants in the water, and small
fish. It was not tap water. It was either drawn from a
particular source, or carefully mixed. Foley had a sud-
den belief that there might be an upwelling of that
water in that room, even though it was an upper-floor
room, just as there was an upwelling of water on Au-
claire's mountain, though there were dry caves below.
Well then, this was something that did not explain
itself at all. Carmody Overlark had had his head under
water for more than five minutes, and the water itself
was in constant change or parade. There were schools
of small fish that passed through it laterally. They did
not follow around the curve of the bowl, they disap-
peared. And other sorts of fish appeared, all traveling
a parade in the same direction, coming out of the glass
itself (for all that could be discerned of them), travel-
185
FOURTH MANSIONS
ing across the bowl in a straight line and disappear-
ing into the glass wall again. There was optical illusion
or there was strong current flowing through that bowl.
Was the underwater breathing of Overlark somehow
the key to suspended animation? It was a funny key;
it didn't seem to fit any of the locks. It was plain that
an ordinary man would be dead, as it was now ten,
now fifteen minutes that Overlark had his head and
breathing below the surface. It was plain that he was
not an ordinary man.
Then the water went out of the bowl. It could not
be said that it drained out, for there was no drain. Air
followed water in the current-parade across the inside
of the bowl, and then the inside was dry. Overlark
pulled his head out. He was beaming and greatly re-
freshed.
“Wonderful, Foley, wonderful. You should try it.
There's nothing like it to set a man up.”
“You almost convince me that there's something to
you, Carmody,” Fred Foley told him. “It makes you
seem a little more than a man.'
“Oh, not on account of that am I more than a man.
It really makes me a little less, since I'm not a complete
master of the air element. At one time I was some-
what ashamed of my need to retum to water, but I've
since talked myself out of that shame.
“After all, a tribal deity has no need for shame.”
"Exactly, Foley. But you still don't understand, do
you? It isn't really a mystery. It's just that I go back a
very long time.
“Why doesn't your wife soak her head in a bucket,
Carmody? If she does it, I haven't heard of it.”
“She doesn't go back nearly as far as I do, Foley. She's
a recent acquisition, a recruit of only a few hundred
decades back. But we very old ones came from the sea
and we're not completely free from it."
“I don't understand it at all, Carmody. I had some
>
a
186
COURTH MANSIONS
theories worked out about this suspended animation
business, but this head soaking doesn't tie in with them
at all.”
“I was born in the deep sea, Foley, before there were
either monkeys or men upon the earth. I have the need
to return from time to time, as those boin on the land
do not. I was one of the first to come out onto land,
into the middle of that sky-beach, one of the first to
learn to live above the water. And our first Olympus
was in such sky, but still the ocean tide rose over its
floor. You won't find traces of it on mountaintops,
Fred Foley. Its palaces were sea-level caves (the top
of the sea was then our sky) and they're now below
the water. Ah, it was a long time ago, hundreds of thou-
sands of years."
Fred Foley had a sound grasp on time. He knew the
difference between hundreds of thousands of years and
hundreds of millions of years, as many laymen do not;
and he knew that the time before there were either
monkeys or men upon the earth was impossibly distant.
What then? Carmody Overlark apparently believed all
that he said about himself. But was he not an imposs-
ible poltergeist, visible only for his borrowed body?
And are not poltergeister really simpleminded crea-
tures, for all their oddments of knowledge and false
knowledge? Do they entertain superstitious beliefs, a-
bout the world, about themselves? Have they their own
ghostly mythology? “You think people are silly to be-
lieve in ghosts?" an old man had asked Fred Foley
a long time ago. “Boy, you should hear some of the
things that ghosts believe in!”
“Oh, I led them up onto the land, or up into the
sky,” said Overlark. “It's all a question of viewpoint.
We're sky-fish, all of us, and I was first.”
"You're insane, Overlark,” said Fred Foley, “but we'll
let that go for a while. You said when we started that
there was one condition (which I hadn't guessed) under
>
>
>
187
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
which you might be impelled to tell me everything.
And now you've told me almost everything. What is
the condition?”
“That we might want to recruit you. We do recruit,
now and then, to keep up our numbers.
“You have no idea how quickly I'd refuse, Overlark.”
“You have no idea how quickly you'd accept, Foley,
if it were finally offered to you. It hasn't been yet, but
it may be. In any case, you'd first have to serve your
period of incarceration. Then we'll have a look at your
state of mind. But no one ever refuses. We're sensi-
tive and we don't risk refusals. We ask only those sure
of accepting. I believe you'll be sure of accepting in
several days. Now I'll have them take you away.”
“But why, Carmody? Why are you afraid to let me
go? And you not of flimsy flesh to be so afraid?”
“I'm of flimsy flesh, yes, and now I need a quick
snack, and I'll be rid of
you
first.”
“And in this case you're still a little ashamed of being
seen? Do you eat them live, Carmody? The rats, do
you eat them live?”
“I do, yes, like kids eat popcorn.” (This gave Fred
Foley an uneasy turn, and the belief that Carmody was
reading him a little too deeply. Whatever had happened
to Popcom, his little dog? Had the Larker kids really
eaten him as they said they had?) “The second reason
for having them take you away, Foley,” Carmody
Overlark continued, “is that you're crazy.
“On what evidence?”
“On the evidence of a man in your own profession,
Foley, a man named Harry Hardcrow. He'll testify that
you talked insanely last night. On the evidence of
my
own wife, who's stated that you were like a man with
no mind at all. On the evidence of a certain doctor
of solid reputation; he's a true expert in the field. Or
on the evidence of myself.
“Or, if you don't really want to be taken away as a
>
188
FOURTH MANSIONS
lunatic, you can be taken away as a murderer. A man
was murdered last night. He was last seen in your com-
pany. This unfortunate man was traveling under the
name of Carlyle S. Crabtree, but that wasn't his true
name. Carlyle S. Crabtree is an eminent man well
known to us. The derelict who was cruelly murdered
was a poor deluded fellow who had somehow picked
up this name. The light was poor last night, in the door-
way of that shop, and perhaps it can't be proved di-
rectly that you killed the man. But it can be proved
that
you handled him dead, and that you
didn't report
it. A fairly tight case of murder could be made against
you. It was an especially cold blooded murder.”
It may not take too many of those spider-silk strands
to bind a man after all. And the spider never leaves
off working. Ah well, maybe Fred Foley was crazy.
He was talking on the upper floor of a building on a
sky-beach with a plappergeist, a mere troubling wind
or wraith, who was visible only because of occupying
a body not his own. The spook, with all his other dis-
abilities, was insane, and lived in terror. And yet by
transmitting part of that terror in which he lived, the
spook might just have enough leverage to affect the
world.
“Yes, that murder was a little cold blooded, Car-
mody. It made me mad then and it still makes me mad
when I think about it. Well, whistle up your buckoos- ,
but I'll chop a few of them down before they drag me
off."
“Curiously, my feelings are with you in this,” Overlark
said. “I don't love my buckoos; I enjoy seeing them
chopped down, so long as I have plenty of them left
to carry out the task. I tell you, Foley, when I am in
such a spot (and I have been), I take the first one
high, the second one low, and the third one dirty. After
that, it usually turns into a melee.”
Freddy's thoughts were along the same line. He didn't
a
>
>
189
FOURTH MANSIONS
hear any whistle, but Overlark had somehow given the
signal, and buckoos boiled into the room. Freddy took
the first one high and clean and sent him staggering.
He took the second one low. But there it ended. The
third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, came over him in
dead heat and near killed him. The melee had been
brief, and Fred Foley was trussed.
He raged and raved a little but they took him away.
They took him, and they buried him in old buildings.
This was the first day of that burial.
190
>
XI: “I DID NOT CALL YOU,” SAID THE LORD
-and one fears heights, and he shall be afraid
in the road ... before the silver cord is snapped
and the golden bowl is broken, and the pitcher
is shattered at the fountain ..
Ecclesiastes 12, 5-6
THEY WERE a very intelligent bunch at the Bug, but
Foley realized after a while that some of them had a
faulty orientation. It was in the emphasis they placed
on various things, in their center of interest which
seemed sometimes a little off-center, in their serious
treatment of the comic, in a distorted sense of propor-
tion. Yes, there was something a little wrong with many
of the inmates of the Bug.
The Bug was sometimes called Old Central, or The
School, or Little Eli, or The Chambers. It was called
Happy Hollow, and the Paddock. It was called the
Bat-Roost, the Bughouse, the Boobyhatch. One of the
inmates called it the Nutcracker Suite, and one of them
called it The Long House (“long and lazy” is “crazy” in
Australian rhyming slang, and you go to any nuttery
in the world and you will find one of those gentlemen
from the south). But those of Fred Foley's new circle
referred to Old Wanwit on the Potomac simply as the
Bug.
The Bug was the institution of old buildings to which
the buckoos of Carmody Overlark had taken Fred
191
,
FOURTH MANSIONS
Foley for his incarceration and burial. Here were kin-
dred souls, likewise buried: Bophry, Moyer, Framble,
Bryant, Sloan, others, very nice fellows, and each one
with a great jagged crack the whole length of him.
The first afternoon- of burial is always a time of loose
ends. Foley walked the lush lawns of the Bug and
talked to himself. There was nothing wrong with talk-
ing to oneself in the Bug, even with talking out loud to
oneself,
"Now here is the problem,” said Freddy. “Nobody has
examined me, and yet a complete report is filed on me
showing that I was minutely examined. The report was
already prepared before I was brought here. This is
known as efficiency. To how many of my companions
has the same thing been done?
“Many of my companions are disoriented. They have
a fine jargon but they've lost touch with reality. They
can seize on an isolated point and treat it interestingly
from many angles, but they can't relate that point to the
world. They can take a joke as the point of departure
of a thesis, but they can't understand that joke as a
joke. But I'm here as one of these, and the world can't
tell the difference between us.
“There are people here for the same reason I'm
here: because they believe there's a group possessed
of either very long life or returning life, and because
they believe that this group conspires against the world.
How do I differ from them?
“Is the only difference that I can recognize a joke
and they can't? But what if it's all a joke about the
returnees and I can't recognize it? Then am I also in-
sane?”
And Fred Foley walked straight into a tree.
"I'm at least getting careless with my wits,” Freddy
said. “Normal men don't get so preoccupied with their
thoughts that they walk into trees. But there's one
consoling thought: it may be that those of my type
192
FOURTH MANSIONS
weren't insane when they were committed here, that
they've become a little odd from the atmosphere of
the place, or from those constant shots they give us. But
that thought isn't as consoling as it might be. How am
I to avoid the atmosphere of the place? How am I to
avoid the constant shots? And how am I to avoid being
here a long time?”
And one other detail made Fred Foley doubt his
sanity a little. Leo Joe Larker might be there in the.
Bug. And he repeated an earlier warning:
"Whatever they tell you to do, Foley, don't do it.
Whatever they tell you not to do, do it. Be dumb,
blind, blundering, and silly, but stay on it. You may be
dumb enough to get to the core of it. You're on your
own with it all the way. I'm just telling you not to lay
off. If they can kill you, Foley, I can kill you worse. If
they can scare you, I can scare you double. Now, go
to your appointments. Oh, I forgot! You've already
been to your appointments. You're in here with us now.
A lot of good it did you to be dumb and blind and
silly. You didn't come any closer to whipping the thing
than us smart ones did.”
“Are you all right, Leo Joe?” Foley asked him. There
was a puzzle about this Leo Joe Larker. He was a
Negro now. There was no doubt about that. But he
hadn't been one as a boy. Mexican, Gypsy, Indian may-
be, or dirty-necked Irishman, but Negro, no. He didn't
grow up to look anything like himself as a boy, his
voice was not anything like that. He was, however, the
same man who had spoken to Freddy from the dark-
ened doorway one night. Yes, and he was Leo Joe Larker
who had raised a man from the dead when he was a
little boy. You're sure of some things, even after you're
crazy.
“Why do you call me by that name?” Leo Joe asked.
"That isn't the name I'm committed under.”
>
193
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Foley isn't the name I'm committed under," said
Fred, “but you called me by it immediately."
“I know it. But that Leo Joe stuff wasn't the name I
had been going by either. I'm not even sure that I re-
member it. Are you sure that's my name? I'm probably
not who you think I am. Say, why's that fellow so afraid
of heights all of a sudden? He didn't used to be like
that, did he?”
“What fellow, Leo Joe? Oh!” The fellow was James
Bauer. He wasn't there, of course. He was back at home
sitting on his own sometimes chilly patio. But a weaver,
a Harvester wouldn't mind a little thing like it being
chilly. In the lake down below, Wing Manion had been
swimming every evening, and very often Hondo and
Salzy Silverio swam with her. It doesn't get too chill for
Harvesters, not even in mid-winter.
Rather odd that Leo Joe Larker should follow Fred
Foley into the weave, though. Well, who can say what
was odd about Leo Joe Larker?
James Bauer, thirteen hundred miles away, was trem-
bling. He was the master of the weave and he was
trembling. He went to the edge of the patio, to the con-
crete and iron stairway that led down to the lake. He
put his hand on the iron rail and he shook.
“It isn't as high as all that, Foley,” Leo Joe said. “It's
only twelve easy steps down to the water, and the water
there isn't four foot deep. I never did see a fellow so
scared of heights as he is, though. You know it, he just
got that way. He wasn't scared of them before.”
This wasn't a projection like a viewing screen. It was
being there with a piece of each of the senses. Every
person brushed by the weave could read back into it,
and sharp persons who brushed those brushed-ones
could also read back into the whole apparatus.
“Arouet, Arouet Manion!" James Bauer was thunder-
ing from his far-away patio, and Arouet entered there
from the house, frightened also, but not of heights:
194 -
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“You compelled me so I'm here,” he said. “You're
in a passion. What are you going to do?”
(“The heavy one is going to kill the other one, Foley,"
Leo Joe Larker said in the Bug enclosure. “You know
that, don't you? Is there any way to stop it? Is it real?”
"It won't happen for hours, or days,” Fred Foley told
him. “No, I don't know any way to stop it. No, it isn't
completely real, Leo Joe, but it almost is. Pieces of it
are real.”)
"It's intolerable, Arouet," said big Jim Bauer. “The
heights! How can anyone abide such heights? The high-
est mountains of earth aren't even anthills before these
heights. One who falls here will fall through black space
for eons. Is there no protection?”
"Your fear is of depths, not of heights, James; and
like my fear of death it strengthens the weave,” Arouet
said. “You mock me for mine, I mock you for yours.
I
And our anger feeds the weave.
“There's one thing I must do while on this pinnacle,"
Bauer rumbled. “I kill you this time. Crawl on your
belly, Arouet. You'll grovel for many hours, and then
you'll die. Grovel, man! I compel you!”
And Arouet Manion was on the stone floor of the
patio. He was black with fear.
»
>
Foley caught something of a plappergeist just around
the corner of his several senses. So, there was a patrick
in the Bug! The creature-familiar was there.
“Can you change it to some other scene, Foley-Smith?”
Bryant asked as he joined them. (But Bryant was not
the patrick.) “That sure is a funny set you have. It
doesn't have any chassis, and you can see it with your
eyes closed. Why don't you let the fellow that's putting
the speech together come in? I like to put speeches to-
gether myself."
“All right, Bryant,” said Fred Foley, “if you're inter-
ested." These inmates of the Bug were some of them
>
"
195
FOURTH MANSIONS
very psychic people. One has to be very psychic to
hook in so easily on a brain-weave twice or thrice re-
moved,
This was Michael Fountain, a sixty-year-old lean and
lined man, craggy featured, with only a fringe of pink-
ish hair around his pate, with a hook in his nose like a
Plains Indian or an Armenian, and too pale to be either
Michael Fountain was lecturing into the dictaphone.
Such first-draft lectures were then transcribed for him,
and from them he prepared his fine final renditions.
He was dictating sequences for a superb lecture which
he would name The Golden Glass Bowl.
"I will posit a student questioner of the intelligent
but naïve sort,” Michael was dictating, “and I will an-
swer his questions. It is no matter that the questioner
is at the moment imaginary.” (That was in error, but
Michael did not understand it. A real questioner would
send a question into Michael's mind now by means that
Michael still did not accept. The first questioner was a
man named Greyhorse, who was intelligent but not in
in all ways naïve.) “Any lecturer worth his salt and
salary,” Michael Fountain was continuing, “can call up
whatever questions he wishes from the students sitting
before him. He can pick out the most unlikely student
for it, and he can elicit from that one just the question
he wishes. This is done by gesture, by expression of
expectation, and by the dropping of key phrases. It has
always been known that an intelligent lecturer or teach-
er could do this. I explain the tactic to you since you
here present are all destined to enter the intellectual
elite. One sign of that is simply that you are attend-
ing my lectures. Were you not of the potential elite,
you would not be here. But the students, even the stu-
dents of the elite, who speak and think entirely in the
prescribed catchwords (especially those who believe
themselves the most independent), will sometimes grow
angry at themselves for this, will sometimes feel them-
C
196
FOURTH MANSIONS
selves frustrated and insufficient. And yet they cannot
deny that the trends and the questions come out of their
own mouths and minds; out of the shallowness of their
minds, however, while leaving the depths troubled
but uncontributing.
"Ah, the questioner asks why there are still pockets
of poverty and misery in the Golden Glass Bowl that
is the world. There are these remaining pockets, my
young friend, because there are still pockets of stub-
bornness and pride. 'Is not a poor man still entitled
'
to his own measure of stubbornness? I hear my young
friend ask. No, he is not, I answer. Nobody is entitled
to even a small measure of stubbornness any longer.
Beasts may be stubborn; men may not be. 'And are not
the poor entitled to even the crumbs of pride?' my
phrase-mouthed questioner asks again. No, my friend,
they are not! Not even the crumbs of pride can be
allowed, not to the lowest of men, not to the highest.
This would be apparent to you if you considered words
in their real meaning. Birds and baboons have pride,
perhaps; men may not have. It has never been a part
of true men. The rich have had to give up all vestiges
of pride long ago. They stuttered and protested, but
they gave
it
up It was a good bargain for them. Wealth
and ease are better than the old vestige. And the stub-
born poor can also enter into wealth and ease if they
give up that old cumbersome burden. It were easier
for a camel (camelus camelops) to pass through the
eye of a needle than for a man burdened with pride
to enter into the golden heritage, as an old prophet
said. Ah, do we have another questioner?”
(“Let me have at him once, Foley,” said Loras who
claimed to be an alien. “Have at him, Loras," said Fred
Foley.)
"Ah, this questioner asks why we have given up the
stars and the outer space,” said Michael Fountain
,
easily. “I always smile when I receive this question.
197
FOURTH MANSIONS
We have given them up, and all plans of further study-
ing them, of ever visiting them, because we must set
a limit to ourselves. It is very curious the persons who
ask this question. So often it is those who might be
called moral. Is it not ironic that those who believe
that one wife is enough do not believe that one world
is enough? How is it possible to reverse things so? We
become free by a restriction. We restrict ourselves to
one world so that we may enjoy one world fully. Our
total freedom here is our compensation. Blot out the
skies! There is nothing beyond our one sun. There is
no world beyond our one world. The Golden Glass
Bowl which we hold in our hands is singular and unique.
Do not go whoring after strange worlds!”
(“Let me have him, Foley,” said the man who was
,
possibly Leo Joe Larker, or who was possibly not the
person they thought he was.)
“Ah, the questioner asks why we made it so small
and why we are throwing it away,” Michael Fountain
lectured into the dictaphone back there in the south
midlands of the country. "And I understand what he
means. And the answer to the second part is that we
are not throwing it away; at least I believe we are not,
not at this time.
“What we are talking about are the world and the
lives which we are given to fashion as our tasks. These
are in the form, as I see it, of a large, fine, precious,
crystal bowl, the Golden Glass Bowl, which we hold in
our hands. True, it is not nearly so large a bowl as we
once wished to fashion, but now we have come to under-
stand that it is as large and as heavy a bowl as we are
able to lift and hold.
“And here I have no patience with those fossilized
and unregenerate persons who accuse us of being 'anti-
life,' no patience at all. They point their grubby fin-
gers to the figures of older scientists showing that the
world could be brought to support one hundred billion
198
COURTH MANSIONS
persons (or, in extreme cases, double that), but they
do not point to the plain fact that special effort and
ingenuity might be required to bring the world to
such developments; and to the further plain fact that
special effort and ingenuity are no longer possible to
mankind as presently constituted.
“That these things were possible to mankind in the
past we acknowledge, but we have refined them out
of ourselves in our advancement. The world we have
built and which we hold in our hands is a world of
proper size and adjustment and enjoyment. The 'trou-
bling of giant effort has happily been left behind
us. We are not dinosaurs to aspire to great size, nor
yet swarming insects to aspire to great numbers. We
are people. We have now had fifteen consecutive years
of decrease in world population and we have or-
dained decreases for another fifty years. We will not
be crowded or pushed, we will not be stirred to unusual
effort for anything. We are the lords and we require
lordly room. Ah, and here is a thing that only we of
the elite know. We did not bring this about at all, though
we take the credit for it. We need credit standing to
our account. Perhaps we triggered it a little early,
but that also I doubt. There are these biological swings
and it swung. What we do now is set up safeguards
so that it may never swing back again in the other di-
rection,
"Nor have I any patience with those who speak of
the 'loss of nerve' of our world. 'Nerve,' in this sense,
is a property of animals or of animals in the process
of becoming men. It is not a property of finalized
man. Yes, we have lost our nerve, at least I hope we
have. Let it be buried with other prehistoric monsters.
Let it never trouble our world again. Does that answer
your question, young sir? Ah-he is a little confused, he
is a little resentful. These were not quite the questions
he meant to ask, and yet they are the questions that
199
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
came out of his mouth. There are questions that we of
the elite cannot allow to be asked, and they will not
be asked. The young have not the words for these ques-
tions yet. They have no words except the catchwords
we give them. And when they come to an age to
have the words they will have forgotten the questions.
(“Let me go at the old gaffer, Foley,” said one named
Cro]l. "Who are the monsters who still trouble the
world, now that you fine-haired dudes have it all fixed
up so fine?")
“Here is a question,” said Michael Fountain. “It's as
though it came from a live and not an imaginary lis-
tener. This is odd, that it is a real questioner but not
a real question. The thing to grasp about the monsters
of my questioner is that they are not exterior but in-
terior. They neither guard nor assault the world for the
reason that they are not there. They are but uncon-
scious remnants in some persons. It was once believed
that we had need of these symbols. If we had once,
we have not now. These were the four menaces that
stood on the four forbidden roads that pre-man has
already traversed. The Toad symbol is the loathsome
origin, and death, and rebirth. And the alternate and
sublimate of the Toad symbol is the Ox symbol (which
is also the Worricow), possibly because both the toad
and the ox have such bare staring faces (and possibly
there is a trope with the horned toad). The jewel in
the head of the Toad is the life-spark itself, which was
first generated in cold flesh.
“The Python symbol is illicit wisdom; the python is
a man-image as seen by pre-man (hairless, unnaturally
mobile-appearing man was somewhat snake-like to the
more hairy and less supple and less articulated pre-
men, even when pre-men and man were combined in
one person). Alternates to the Python symbol are the
Octopus and the Hydra symbols (free-walking and
tool- or weapon-handling man seemed, to pre-man,
200
FOURTH MANSIONS
possessed of extra members or arms); and also, unac-
countably, the Lion symbol is alternate to the Python.
"The Falcon symbol is the air-hunter, the bird-mur-
derer, the taller authority, the tyranny, the force-rule
of the first mounted men (man-on-horseback was, to
some extent, man given the power of flight, Falcon-
Man.)
“The Badger symbol is the cave or burrow symbol,
the stubborn holing into the earth, the rear-guard de-
fense of all rear-guard things. The alternates to the
Badger symbol are the Bear symbol, the Man-in-the-
Animal-Mask symbol, and finally the Man symbol. There
seemed no confusion, to primitives, between the Man
symbol and man himself.
"These four symbols are not proper symbols for mod-
ern men. They were symbols used by animals in the
process of becoming men. Some, however, believe that
these are valid symbols in our unconscious, and that
by them our unconscious is trying to tell us something:
as though we had cut some needed element out of our-
selves and these symbols were warning us to bring it
back in. I do not accept this view. Nor do I accept the
easy explanations: tentacled liberalism (the python-hy-
dra) opposing snap-jawed conservatism (the stubborn
badger); and each abetted by its preternatural under-
form, Communism, from underground (the toad with
the tantalizing jewel in its head) opposed by resur-
gent Fascism (the hunter-falcon, full-feathered, prey-
ing). There is polarity in the world, but it isn't so
storied and allegorical as that. No, my young question-
er, there can be no answer to no question. There are
no exterior monsters who trouble the world either in
attacking it or in defending it. They are not real."
(“Old Gaffer, we are real,” Croll said, giving the hiss-
ing growl of a very badger. "We are the abiding men,
we are the abiding monsters, and we are real.”)
Then Fred Foley knew that Croll was the patrick, a
201
FOURTH MANSIONS
more-than-a-patrick, a Croll: that he had been com-
mitted by his title, not his name. He knew, as a matter
of fact, that Croll was Patrick of Baltimore and Wash-
ington, that he was Over-Patrick or Croll of the entire
continent. He also understood that Croll was a little
bit simple and inept, for sign that the office was more
important than the man.
>
But a new force, a new man, entered the projected
play now, one who could enter anywhere that Fred
Foley could enter. The other inmates who had gath-
ered around the communication felt this new person
strongly.
(“Here's another of the monsters,” Croll bear-growled.
“Don't tell me he's not real.” The new-appearing mon-
ster was Miguel Fuentes and he was real.)
Michael Fountain, dictating privately in his own rooms
thirteen hundred miles away, had become highly nerv-
ous but he still composed brave words for his lecture:
“We come to apex, and it is no way elevated or out-
standing; we come to perfection, and to perfect simple
means to finish; we come to climax, and it is beauti-
fully flat and undistinguished. We have completed the
world. Behold it!"
And in some manner Michael Fountain was holding
a large, fine, precious, crystal bowl, The Golden Glass
Bowl, in his two hands. It was pretty. It was almost
substantial.
"This is the world,” Michael intoned in a self-induced
trance. “This is our lives, this is our final achievement.
Worry not that it is small: it is the largest world ever,
if we will not allow a larger one. Worry not that it is
flawed: we ourselves are the flaws: and if we say that
we are not flaws, then who is there to contradict us?
Worry not that it is fragile, so long as we are very care-
ful not to drop it."
“Drop itIl" the thunder-clap voice of Miguel Fuentes
202
FOURTH MANSIONS
exploded. Everybody in the entire communication jumped
at the cannon-barking violence of that command. And Mé
chael Fountain dropped his world.
It tinkled into a thousand tinny pieces. It shattered
and all the light flickered out of it. The face of Michael
Fountain also broke and shattered and the light went
out of it also. He cast himself down and was racked
by dry sobs.
“How did we go wrong? What did we forget?"
Michael moaned.
"You forgot that there is One who will not be mocked,"
Miguel Fuentes 'said in a voice like curling smoke.
The falcons, like the patricks, believe strongly in things
like that.
.
"That spik sure queered him," said Leo Joe Larker.
“Do you know that spik, Foley?”
,
"Yeah, I know him."
“I know him way on back," said Leo Joe. “I was a
Mexican one time myself.”
"That one was real,” said Croll. “He's as real as I
am. The old gaffer isn't quite real, though. He had a
good spiel going but he couldn't hold onto it. He came
right up to the still, past the grinders, and then dropped
his molasses jug."
"The funny thing about the old fellow," said Loras
who claimed to be an alien. “He had known where
the fountains were once. But the last time he went
to them he busted his pitcher.”
>
But there are also formalities in the life in the
Bug, in the tomb. There was interrogation after a while.
There was separation. There were more of those shots,
tranquilizers. But Foley had been tranquil ever since
he was buried here. There was even a little cleanliness
lecture. And there was supper.
There was supervised recreation. This is the original
203
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
contradiction of terms. It was for making suggestions
about supervised recreation that the devil was cast into
hell; any other account you have heard is false. The
inmates were crazy, but they weren't crazy enough
to like that stuff.
Then to the beds. Even the sleeping was supervised,
and honest darkness was not allowed in this tomb.
Stubborn sleep then, and appearances that were not
supervised.
The brain-weave was in tension and exhilarating un-
natural agony. James Bauer and Arouet Manion were
locked in lawless death passion, very much like snakes
trying to swallow each other. It was not absolutely cer-
tain that Bauer was the master, for all that Arouet
groveled before him. Bauer was in the grip of his own
terror, that of horrifying height (and he was sitting on
the ground-level patio of his own home), mind-blind-
ing height, and Arouet knew of the terror and knew
how to heighten it.
The arena became crumbling sand then, on the edge
of cliffs of immeasurable height, and James Bauer
and Arouet Manion were the two bulls who fought
to death. Bauer was the heavier and stronger, he was
the old king bull who had never been defeated: longer
and more massive of horn, more humped and knotted
of neck, bulkier of body, more iron of hoof, and alto-
gether fearsome. But Arouet became the challenger,
even though it was Bauer who had commanded him
to the battle. Arouet held the high ground and could
charge downward. He could regroup and charge again.
But Bauer was trapped on the very edge before it
started. He could not lunge without the sand further
crumbling and sending him over the edge. He was
hunched together, and all support began to slice out
from under him. He dug one great horn into the steep
turf for anchor, and dug more emptiness beneath him-
self as his sand base cascaded down the cliff-sides. He
204
.
.
FOURTH MANSIONS
bellowed, and it caved beneath him still more. Arouet
punished him from above, brought him to his knees,
raked him and slashed him, but he could not turn that
heavy armored head or come to the flank.
Bauer tangled horns with Arouet, hunched mightily,
and broke Arouet's neck. But now the lighter bull was
down on Bauer, twisted on his horns, quivering and
screaming, and Bauer had no firm stance to pitch the
thing away and back from his horns. Back legs pawing
air, catching sand again, crumbling it with the effort,
and pawing fearful empty air again. What great bull
can stand to all charge with a crumbling foothold?
Arouet dying . . . let him die then, but how to get
rid of him? And Arouet, though frantic with the fear
of death, would go if he could take Bauer with him.
The king bull feared no death except the falling death,
and bull Bauer with the burden on his horns began to
run like the sand itself over the edge of the cliff that
had no bottom.
The arena became a pit then, green rocks and green
shadows. Two great snakes, each trying to swallow the
other. Bauer was the stronger and more massive, but
Arouet Manion was perhaps the longer of jaw. Gaping
mouths spread, unhinged, and spread again, wider, more
mucous, now clinging and gaining like bird-lime, now
sliding and slavering like very snake oil. Arouet had
his longer jaws over the snout of Bauer, obliterating
nostrils and eyes, closing over the great gape with
extension that was drawn as thin as blue bubble, suf-
focating Bauer in the wide-spread translucent jaws.
Bauer grappled and won in the writhing snake-wrestle,
breaking Arouet's back again. But in death spasms Arou-
et gained and gulped, swallowing Bauer's head, inch-
ing down the length of him, blistering and murdering
him with blazing gastric and psychic juices, spreading
his own Arouet-death over Bauer like a clinging plastic
205
FOURTH MANSIONS
sheath. And, suffocatingly, Bauer knotted himself a-
gain and again to try to burst the killing sheath.
Bauer, on his own patio, was breathing with a rasp-
ing groan that would not leave him for the rest of his
life; and Arouet Manion writhed on the stone floor, fran-
tically afraid of death, frantically avid for killing.
The arena changed to-obscene interval—that is too
degrading to contemplate even in a brain-weave. The
arena changed again and again while the double death
battle tallied off all its aspects one by one. The other
members of the weave were brought to continuing psy-
chic orgasm by the strong and musky play of agony
and death. And it would be played out for many hours
yet.
Hondo Silverio was shaken with waves of disgust
and loathing. That noble snake found himself revolted
to his depth. It was then that he decided either to
master or to break the weave; but that isn't done in a
minute or an hour, nor even in a day.
Another arena, and another. The dead wife of Bauer
waited in agony in an uncontinented place for Bauer
to fall past her into hell: ashen anguish, ghostly torture.
The living-aspect wife, caught in deep catalepsy, waited
for the hypnosis over her to be broken by death, if
indeed even death would break it. A saintly sexpot and
a cinnamon cookie (the cookie for Cerberus) were
caught in the passion, the passion that would break
the weave.
Bedelia Bencher would come for Foley, either late
that night or early in the morning, either on bat-wings or
by commercial flight; but she would have a very deep
draft of this passion first.
So would they all. They were the psychic athletes
and this was their game, the sounding evil of it, before
they broke it in final disgust. But the horror-gulping
gusto would reign a long reign before the disgust over-
whelmed it.
206
FOURTH MANSIONS
In another place, a young man was having evil fun in
his grave in the caves underground. Miguel Fuentes
was the hunted there, but he also ran with the hunters.
Indeed, he was the bright young Mexican boy, guileless
and glib, who told certain army patrols that he knew
the caves better than anyone in the world, that he could
find anyone in them. And he led the patrols in to their
loss and murder, and them hunting for him all the
while. This young man would be a falcon full-feathered
when he finally came out from underground.
And in still another place (and it could be any one
of many, as they of that species are so much alike),
a patrick was experiencing a waking night-dream out
of Samuel, the saddest verses in scripture:
And the patrick answered: “Here I am, Lord.” And
again he said, “Here I am; for you called me.” But the
Lord answered him: “I did not call you. Go back and
sleep."
Well, why did the Lord never call the patricks? They
had been waiting, oh how they had been waiting for the
calll It was given to others. It was never given to the
patricks, and they waiting so ready for their thousands
of years.
"Smith, Foley, whatever your name is, turn that thing
off, whatever that thing is,” protested Loras who claimed
to be an alien. “We want to sleep. How can we sleep
with you dreaming that bright-colored stuff?”
207
XII: FOURTH MANSIONS
That I be one to catch the hard truth hurled
And fight soft lies that have the world for spanl
I know the Ox, the Eagle, and the Man,
The Lion-and the schism of the world.
I feed on elementals like a cloud
Though buried in constraining earthy room
Where now I harvest lightning in my
tomb
And integrate the monsters for a shroud.
a
a
Here in Fourth Mansions which is Death or Life
Is rooted world that it is worth to live:
The Giant Troubling and the Giant Brawn.
Though I be dead a while I bite the knifel
In monumented earth I grow and give
While I predict and manufacture dawn.
Broken Cisterns and Living Waters:
Endymion Ellenbogen
>
“THERE IS A holiness in a whole person or a whole
world,” the patrick Croll said. “The veriest monsters in-
side us may be sanctified. They were put there by Him
who is 'Father of Monsters' also. What right have we to
cut them out of us? Who are we to edit God? We cut
strong things out of ourselves and suppress them, and
the rocks and clouds will give birth to them again. We
dry up our interior fountains and they gush out again,
208
FOURTH MANSIONS exteriorly and menacingly. We cannot live without mon­ sters' blood coursing through us. Only to the whole per­ son is life worth living and death worth dying. Here in Fourth Mansions we must be whole or we must be nothing." "Where do you get those curious phrases, Croll?" Freddy Foley asked him. "From the manual. As patrick, I must recite certain passages every morning." "But aren't the patricks themselves monsters?" "Yes, I believe so. But we're the monsters under the man-symbol." This was the morning of the second day of the burial or incarceration of Foley. "A man and his daughter were here looking for you earlier this morning," an attendant told Foley now, "but they found no trace of you. They're nearly con­ vinced that you're not here. You aren't here, you know." "Well, but who is this here then?" asked Freddy. "You're in the records as Julius Smith." "That explains why so many call me Smith. Did you tell the man and his daughter that I was carried as Smith on the rolls?" "No. I just hinted enough that they might not be gone for good. They were very generous with me this morn­ ing. A little later they may be even more generous. They're wealthy, aren't they?" "They may be, but don't run it into the ground." "I'll have to be the judge of that, Foley-Smith. Oh, I miss out entirely some times when I shoot for too high a figure. But I make it up, I make it up, I often do quite well. I have a good judgment of what the traffic will bear. That girl-those eyes-are they real?" "Not entirely. But you saw her and I didn't." "I swear she has eyes like nobody has eyes. She has pictures painted on her eyeballs, weird pictures, snakes and monsters and fountains and upheavals. I never saw 209
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
anything like them. But she gets around all right. How
can she see with those pictures painted on her eyeballs?”
"She's a clown, but she's more than that. She's mutated
and she can see with every part of her. So can I. I just
now realized it. Who needs eyeballs? Is there a tattoo
artist here in the Bug? I'll have him tattoo my eyeballs.
I'll be the first one here with tattooed eyeballs.
“Yeah, there is one here. If you pay me-you have
money to your account here and you can release some
to me-I can tell you which one he is, and we can-
Nah, you're joking.
Oh well, what can one do in a grave except wait for
that last trumpet to blow, or perhaps an intermediate
trumpet in special cases? But for an inquiring mind there
are interesting questions cropping up everywhere, even
in the grave. Fred Foley asked one of the doctors
about one of the questions that was bothering him.
It wasn't that he was reconciled to the doctors here.
He believed that they also were tilted, though perhaps
not to such an angle as the boarders. Those doctors had
trouble with jokes too. For answer to a joke they were
likely to gaze at you with steely eyes, and then pull
your record and make cabalistic marks on it. Doctor
Decker was better than the others, but only a little.
“Doctor, what I wonder is whether group delusion
is common,” Fred Foley asked him.
“Quite common, Smith, quite common,” Doctor Deck-
er told him.
"Then there are other groups like us who share a
common delusion?”
“At least a dozen groups in this very hospital at the
moment, and there have been hundreds.”
“What were some of the more unusual-ah-obses-
sions?”
“A few years ago there was a group here that be-
lieved that very low musical notes caused their teeth
210
2
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
to loosen. They campaigned strenuously against all low-
down songs, they lobbied against them, and some of
them smashed and destroyed those coin-operated ma-
chines which I believe are called goop boxes. They also
tried to have the Army 'Taps' changed, to eliminate
several low notes.
“And what was the outcome?”
"Oh, the group split up. It had no real cohesion.
Some of the patients were finally released. Some went
on to other obsessions."
“No, I don't mean the outcome like that. I mean the
tests. Did it show that low musical notes caused their
teeth to loosen?”
"Sizzling sandburrs, Smith! What are you talking
about? There was no such test.”
"Then who was to say that it was an obsession? It
might have been a shrewd observation that wasn't
acted on. There was no test at all? What were some
of the other groups?"
”
"There was one quite small group, three. This is the
smallest possible group by our definition. All three of
these men were locomotive engineers, and they all
believed that their lonely night whistles were answered
by giant flying creatures. They believed these creatures
were not large enough to carry off an entire train, but
that a locomotive running alone might be carried off;
and they swore that this was the answer to several
disappearing locomotives. They said the giant flying
creatures believed the night whistles were mating calls.
"And were there actually cases of disappearing lo-
comotives? And were there any attempts made to pur-
sue this explanation?”
"Smith, are you kidding?”
"Not entirely. As a reporter I did hear of cases of
locomotives disappearing when running alone at night.
I'll follow this up when I get out and when I settle
other matters. What were some of the other groups?”
211
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Oh, there was a bunch who all believed there'd
be a terrible earthquake in the Great Lakes region on
the morning of June 19, 1979, that the southern shore-
lines would sink, and that thousands would be drowned.
“But that was the very date of it! They were right!
This proves that some of the groups can be right and
you can be wrong."
"Of course that was the date of it, Smith, and their
insistence that the area be cleared would have saved
thousands of lives if it had been timely. But the ob-
session occurred three years after the event. All the
afflicted believed themselves living several years in the
past, anterior to the happening. All had been eyewit-
nesses and near victims of it and it had deranged them.
Then there was the group that believed that all red-
headed women were creatures from outer space sent
here to intermingle with mankind to cause trouble and
destruction.”
"I could give you instances that would seem to prove
them right,” Freddy said.
“So could I, Smith,” said the doctor. “Some of the red-
heads do seem to come from way out. Then we had
a clutch of odd ducks here who believed that the
messages and mottoes in fortune cookies form a sinister
code of instructions sent by an evil mastermind in high
Tibet.
“And there was a clique with the belief that the
white oak tree is a man-eater, and that persons who
have unaccountably disappeared will invariably be
found to have disappeared in the neighborhood of a
white oak tree. They believed also that the wood of
the tree had certain dangerous properties, and that a
certain furniture factory that makes much use of the
wood should be enjoined from doing so. We still have
some of the white oaks here.
“The majority of the coteries, however, have beliefs
very similar to the group you belong to, Smith. This is
>
>
212
O
FOURTH MANSIONS
the belief that the world is ruled by a hidden-hand
group of men who may be known by such and such
marks, that these men plot against the world, and that
their plot against the world is about to succeed; they
maintain that it's absolutely necessary that their warn-
ings be hearkened to and acted upon. You're really a
variant of the world-is-ending societies."
“What if one of our groups is right, Doctor?”
"Why then, the plot against the world would succeed,
since your warnings are most certainly not going to
be acted upon.”
"Do you really believe I'm insane, Doctor Decker?”
"Yes, on one point you are, Smith. One point of
insanity is about par for the never-quite-normal human
race. I actually believe that it's a healthy sign for a
man to be clearly insane on one clear point; it gives
him balance and otherwise keeps him sane. The nor-
mally insane have a point of eccentricity that's minor,
private, and of no threat. That's where you go past it,
Smith. In an involved society the eccentricity must be
a minor one. It must not annoy or harm your neighbors.
And it plainly must not lead you to vicious slander
of persons in high places. Yours has led you to that.”
"Then you don't believe it possible that the world is
being plotted again?”
"Likely it is, Smith, and in thousands of plots. The
world is a fine apple and we all want a bite. But I
don't believe in an effective plot any more than I be-
lieve that the white oak tree is a man-eater.”
"What's the very latest thing here in group belief?”
Fred Foley asked.
“Your own was of yesterday and the day before,
Smith. There's a new one today. It's the belief in a new
disease. This is a death-wave to come and be charac-
terized first by nasal itching, then by a tiredness and
certain irritability, later by drowsiness, and eventually
by death.”
213
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“That sounds like the nornal life story to me, Doc-
tor.”
“Yes, but this is all to take place within five hours,
according to the addicts. And according to them it's
caused by germs carried by gossamer, or by drifting
fluff from cottonwood trees (but there aren't any of
them here, and this isn't the season for them to cotton),
or more probably by a drifting medium similar in ap-
pearance to these but which may come from outer
space. The warners give very clear and detailed de-
scription of the disease, considering that it hasn't yet
appeared.”
"Five hours isn't a lot of warning, but for what it's
worth I may as well take it," said Foley-Smith. “My
own nose itches. That should mean that I'll be dead
by dark.”
"You have a delusion of your own, Smith, yet you
can joke about the delusions of others. Oh that damn
drifting stuff, like spider silk, it's been settling on me
all day! Wonder what it is? But there is real terror
among the addicts, Smith, and it begins to spread. We've
had to isolate those of the cult.”
"I wasn't joking about it, Doctor,” Fred Foley-Smith
said. “I believe that a complex of sudden and fatal dis-
eases is part of the ordeal in store for us. And it does
itch, Doctor. And I'm a little tired and could become
irritable.”
“I wouldn't worry about it, Smith. You aren't the
sort to panic, though you may be the sort to cause
panic. Nasal itching can be brought about by suggestion
easier than almost any other phenomenon. But it's curi-
ous that the members of this group (we haven't been
able to establish any previous relationship among them
at all) should all come up with this odd notion at one
time. And they've all come up with it violently, calling
out loud in the streets for massive efforts to destroy
the floating cosmic stuff.
a
214
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
"But it's just as curious about your own and similar
groups. I've tried very diligently to discover how it
all comes about. It's part of my business to discover
how these things come about. Do you have any idea
how they might happen? I'm asking you, Smith, because
you might be able to give me a lead. You aren't the
most intelligent of your group, but you're the most open,
the most communicative."
“I don't know about the other groups, Doctor. But
with my own group I know exactly how it happened.”
“Then tell me, Smith. I've been studying it for years.”
"It's as though an elephant were standing in the mid-
dle of the street, Doctor. One man sees it and announces
it. Then another man sees it (and there's been no prev-
ious relationship between the two men at all) and the
second man likewise announces it. And a third man sees
it (and he's a total stranger to the other two men)
and he announces it in his own way. So the three are
locked up in the strong house for believing that they
see it. The reason that they all believe they see the ele-
phant at the same time is that the elephant is there at
the same time.”
“To follow your analogy, if there is one, Smith, why
can't the keepers see the elephant too?”
“Because they, you, are too stubbom to look out the
window, Doctor. Because they believe it's impossible
for an elephant to be standing in the street.”
"Then the facts of your delusion are really that ob-
vious to you, Smith?”
"The facts of the case are really that obvious to me,
Doctor. I finally saw the whole conspiracy standing
as plain as an elephant in the street: also the conspiracy
was admitted to me in great detail by one of the princes
of the conspiracy."
“Bad, Smith, very bad.”
"
"If one of the inmates should come to you right now,
Doctor, and tell you that it was raining outside, you'd
>
215
22
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
say 'Bad, very bad,' and make damning marks on his
record
“That's probably true. It's an automatic response with
me. I do wish you'd get over this, though, Smith. You're
a likable young man.
"Why was the name Smith hung onto me, Doctor?
And Julius? There hasn't been a Julius in our family
since two generations before Adam. Why wasn't I com-
mitted under my own name?"
“You were. Your own name is Julius Smith. You
were wandering and amnesiac when picked up, and
you were proclaiming that men long dead had returned
to plague the world. We solved your identity by routine
methods, and we hope you'll soon remember your own
past life. That would be an important step to your cure.
"Are
you in on this cover job, Doctor Decker?”
“No, I'm not in on any cover job, Smith. I'm not at
all related to the political angle of this place, though
there is one. I accept the data that's passed on to me
and I work sincerely with the patients on the basis of it.”
"But
my name isn't Smith.”
"Oh well, neither is mine. And stop rubbing your nose.
If this keeps on it will become a national pastime. I
believe it will really be à disappointment to you you
don't die tonight from this nonexistent new disease.
Damn that drifting fluff anyhow! It's everywhere.
You'd go through with it, I know, Smith, just to prove
that one of the alarm groups was right.”
Doctor Decker had been rubbing his own nose, and
Foley-Smith left him then.
if
The disease was not imaginary. It had appeared. So
had half a dozen other new diseases. Though still un-
recognized, this nonexistent disease had already gone
into its second and third stages with many that day;
and by nightfall about thirty persons in the capital city
would have died quietly of it.
216
FOURTH MANSIONS
And then the first tremor of the hysteria would come.
It was a curious day. Things were shaping up, just
as the clouds were shaping and tumbling overhead.
It was a warm day for the season, but the sign of chill
had appeared on the edge of those clouds. Familiar
things looked unfamiliar. Unfamiliar things looked fam-
iliar. The ice cream man looked familiar,
The ice cream man, selling ice cream bars to the in-
mates through the iron fence, was Leo Joe Larker. But
wasn't Leo Joe Larker still an inmate of the Bug? No
he wasn't. He had escaped that very morning, they
said, and he would be recaptured within an hour, they
said. And nobody else should try the thing, to break
out into the world from the safe place where they were
understood.
Well, why didn't they recapture Leo Joe then, since
he was right outside the Bug? Since they were looking
for him everywhere? They didn't capture him because
they didn't recognize him. He did not look anything
like what he had looked like inside the Bug. He was
a different man entirely in appearance; he had been
several such different men; only Freddy Foley could
recognize him. And Leo Joe had turned into an ice cream
man to pass a message to Fred Foley. Why had he not
given him the message when he was inside, when
they could talk freely? He had not because that would
not have been grotesque enough for him. Freddy did
not know what the words or details of the message
would be, and yet he already knew their meaning. It
was “Goof gloriously, Freddy. Goof gloriously again.
It is required that one man should goof gloriously for
the people.
Leo Joe Larker was humming the old tune What
Kind of Fool Am I? when Freddy Foley came up to
him on the other side of the fence.
“You, Leo Joe, or I?” Foley asked him.
"You, Foley, you're the fool. Little Freddy Foley who
217
>
>
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
can see in the dark and was trapped like a coney in
broad daylight. Even a coney has a hole or a rockpile
he can get to. He isn't taken in the open as easy as
that.”
“Little Leo Joe, the man who changes faces and never
gets a very good one. What are you doing with an ice
cream pokey?” (But this Leo Joe wasn't a clown. He
had told Foley. “If they can kill you, I can kill you worse.
,
.
Whatever they tell you to do, don't do it. Whatever
they tell you not to do, do it.” This was Leo Joe Larker
who had perhaps raised a man from the dead when
he was only a boy.)
"I'm not Leo Joe. I'm no one you ever saw before.
The ice cream pokey gives me certain vantage points.”
"So does this Bug give me,” said Freddy.
“Just exactly what good can you do on that side of
the fence, Foley?”
"I'm not sure.
Leo Joe Larker sold a French lime bar to one of the
inmates, and a strawberry revel bar to another one.
Then a keeper was coming to the fence to chase him
away.
"Here's a grape sherbert bar for you, Foley,” said Leo
Joe. “Digest it well.”
"I'd rather have a French lime.
"I'm telling you not to get cute. Take it. And digest it.
Freddy Foley took the grape sherbert bar, thrust it
quickly into his pocket, and disassociated himself from
Larker. The guard came and chased the ice cream man
away, to the whimpering of inmates who were coming
with their allowances in their hands.
This was ridiculous, to be trapped with a melting
sherbert bar in the pocket, to know that it contained a
message, and to know that it was all grotesque. How
low and laughable must a man be brought before he
is born again? This was ignominy beyond even death
and burial.
22
218
FOURTH MANSIONS
And immediately there was a summons for Foley.
Grown now very suspicious, he was sure that his short
rendezvous with Larker had somehow been discovered
and reported, and he was embarrassed as to what to
do with the melting grape sherbert bar in his pocket.
It wasn't a dignified place to carry it. It was cold
there, but he didn't want it to get warm. And suspecting
that there was more to it than grape sherbert, he didn't
want to throw it away. Still less did he want to have
it in his pocket if he was subject to any sort of inter-
view.
>
It was Bedelia Bencher and her father, and Fred
Foley was allowed to visit with them, though guards
and attendants were present.
“Poor little sour pickle,” said Biddy. “Have they
treated you all right?” That Biddy and the eyes of her!
Landscapes, hellscapes, monsterscapes painted on her
eyeballs, and she laughing all the while.
“With every care of my body, Biddy, and none at all
of my soul,” Freddy said.
“Just what is this nonsense, Foley?” Mr. Bencher
asked sharply. His name was Richard but nobody ever
called him anything but mister. But he was looking at
Foley on two levels and understanding quite a bit.
“Part of the nonsense, Mr. Bencher, is that I'm Smith
and not Foley," Freddy said.
"You persist in that, Freddy? We very nearly didn't
find you under the name of Smith. But Biddy was
certain you were here, and she wouldn't leave town
without you. You do remember us, don't you?”
“Remember you? Certainly. I'm not crazy. It's the
people here who are crazy.”
“And what was your name when you knew us back
home?"
“My name has been Fred Foley all my life except for
the first two hours when it hung in the balance between
219
CC
FOURTH MANSIONS
Fred and Ronald. I've never been sure I got the best
of that deal.”
“Then why the Smith now? I'm trying to ask you
clear questions,” said Mr. Bencher. But Bencher was
reading Foley while he played this game with the
guards. Perhaps he had even read the message in the
sherbert bar.
"I'm trying to give some clear answers, Mr. Bencher,”
Freddy said. “I don't know why the Smith now."
"You mean that you don't know why you told the
authorities your name was Smith?”
“No, Mr. Bencher, I mean that I don't know why
the authorities told me my name was Smith. I guess
they've tried to hide me here.”
"Freddy, it's in your record that you insisted your
name was Julius Smith,” Mr. Bencher said evenly, and
that you don't know any Fred Foley nor remember ever
being such a person.”
But really Mr. Bencher was talking all of this for
the benefit of the long-eared attendants and guards.
His eyes were saying other things.
“Papa, don't press him so hard,” said Biddy. "He's
sick.” But what were the landscapes on her eyeballs
saying? There was lots of evil laughter still there, and
perhaps a little concem.
“Mr. Bencher, if that's in the record, then it's in the
record wrong," Freddy said. “There's some dirty work
here. Get me out of this place, will you? You have in-
fluence.
"Freddy, what's that leaking out of your pocket?”
Biddy asked.
“A sherbert bar, Biddy. A grape sherbert bar.”
.
"But why, Freddy? Why do you carry it melting in
your pocket?”
“Where else?"
"Do you often carry them there, honey?"
“Quite often. All the time, Biddy.”
220
22
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
Freddy felt that he had slipped with them, and he
had no idea how to recoup. He was compelled not
only to goof gloriously but to goof grovelingly, Some-
thing had hold of his mind and it would force him into
this insanity role. But Freddy did not want an attend-
ant to get that sherbert bar, though he hated to look
like a total fool when the possibility of his really being
a total fool was under discussion.
“Well, take it out and throw it away, Freddy,” Bid-
dy was saying, “and then let me clean you up.
“No, Biddy. I couldn't possibly throw it away. I'll just
keep it there. I could never find a better place for it,
and it keeps me cool.”
“Ah, Foley, I have been trying to get to the bottom of
this," said Bencher. “I heard a little from Biddy of the
crazy jag of a story that you seemed to be on. I thought
it was just something you told her to put her off and
that you were working on something confidential that
couldn't be discussed prematurely. Biddy thought so
too. But now I find you actually have been trying to
prove that five-hundred-year-dead men have come back
alive and are meddling with our lives. Is that true?”
“Yes sir. It's quite true that they've come back. I
have most convincing evidence, which somehow doesn't
convince anybody. If I could persaude you of it, Mr.
Bencher, then you might have more weight than I at
getting the warning taken seriously.”
"Foley, I always liked you. I felt rather safe for Biddy
when she became attached to you. I still feel safe for
her with you in that way. But, Freddy, you're quite sick.
"I believe I'm the only one here who isn't.”
"I'll see that you get everything you need,” said Bench-
a
er.
>
“I need out,” Freddy Foley insisted,
“No, not that, Freddy,” Bencher said. “You're in no
state to be out.”
221
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Please let me throw that melted bar away, Freddy,"
Biddy begged. “It isn't nice to have it in your pocket.”
“No, I'll keep the bar there, Biddy. I feel somehow
that it contains the key to the whole world difficulty.
Besides, I like it there."
Biddy began to cry. Or did she? There was a lot
of suppressed hilarity behind that crying, but with eyes
like hers who could tell?
"Oh, Freddy,” she said, “you never knew how much
I liked you. We never did anything but kid. Oh, Freddy,
I hope you get well.”
“Then
you
think I'm sick too?"
“Oh, Freddy!”
"You really should take that mess out of his pocket,”
Bencher said to an attendant.
"It might upset him," said the man. “They become
attached to things and notions. It could set him back.
Besides, they get fresh-laundered clothes tomorrow.”
“Goodbye, Foley,” said Bencher, “and if there's any.
thing at all you want-"
"I want out.”
“God willing, and soon, as quickly as you're well,”
said Bencher.
“Be real good, honey,” said Biddy, “and you'll never
know how much.”
“But you don't believe in me?"
"
“Oh, Freddy!”
The Benchers went away and left Fred Foley-Smith
there with the attendants. He felt like a fool with the
melted sherbert running down his leg and his pants,
and his girl not believing in him, and gone. And the
world about to be taken over and frustrated by the
returnees.
And yet he had been brought strangely up to date
by the pictures painted on Bedelia's eyeballs. They
changed, you know, they changed. And they conveyed
messages.
>
222
>
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
Loras (who was alien), Croll (who was patrick),
and a man called Boneface by all, came up to Fred
Foley when he was ready to inspect the lavender de-
cay that was the sherbert bar.
“You're standing in the way, Foley-Smith,” Boneface
said. “There's two shows going on and we can't watch
either of them with you standing in the way.”
Oh! Michael Fountain was dictating lectures again
this day. And James Bauer and Arouet Manion were
still locked in death ordeal. The men wanted to watch
these shows, but they were not yet adept enough to
watch them apart from Foley. He had brushed the
weave. They had only brushed him.
The highly refined Michael Fountain seemed a little
shriveled today in his ultra-refinement. There was not
as much to him as there had once been, or it had turned
inward on him. His fine voice had become a little
cracked and thin, his fine features a little masklike and
amateurish. But had his fine words changed?
“Are there events in the world?” he was lecturing
into the dictaphone. “Are there events in the world at
the present time? We hear rumor, we see signs; surely
there is some shadow play going on which one might
call 'Events in the World. We of the elite, however,
do not need to be overly concerned with these. What
we do desire is a refinement still more refined, a
nobility still more noble, an elite still more elect. We
draw in on ourselves. There is a vulgarity of numbers.
We reduce the vulgarity and the thing. A thousand
gross units goes into one essence. And then we refine
the essence again and again.”
(“This man is wrong,” said Loras who was alien.
"It's been tried in other places; it doesn't work. You
reduce it and it dies, it dies every time. You narrow
the grove too much and even the noble trees die.” Lor-
as the alien had sought for his Earth visit a place like
the Bug, knowing that his sanity was not the sanity of
223
FOURTH MANSIONS
this strange world. He had had no real trouble gaining
admittance. He had simply gone to the attendance offi-
cial, declared that he was a visitor from the stars, and
after less than half an hour of lively discussion he had
been accepted as a member of the Bug. He wasn't a
handsome creature, but he had a pleasant and out-
going personality. And such little physical peculiarities
as he possessed-a slight caudal appendage, a triple
Adam's apple, opposable great toes-were not held a-
gainst him. He was intelligent and he adjusted well.
Only once had he eaten his plate after eating his food.
Only once had he given the astral caress on being
introduced to another. Only once-)
And Michael Fountain lectured on. “We will, of
course, abandon large sections of the world as soon as
we can phase them out. The entire old world, I believe,
can well be abandoned in the present century. There is
no need of it, really. The new world is ample for the
people. 'Is it not well that all the members of one
family should dwell in one house?' And many attitudes
and mythologies of the old world will likewise be al-
lowed to die. In a way, the old world has already be-
come something like the disordered unconscious of the
new. Discard it, I say! And then the southern conti-
nent of the new world may well be abandoned in a
further generation. One continent is enough for man-
kind. For a refined and elect mankind it is more than
ample."
(The sherbert had melted and dried in Freddy's
pocket now, leaving only a stain, a slight stickiness, and
a tightly rolled piece of paper. Freddy took it out and
read it as he listened with exterior ears to the distant
voice of Michael Fountain. You aren't a whole lot of
good in there, it said. Don't you know that things have
already begun? The day before yesterday there were
twenty deaths of the new diseases. Yesterday there
were fifty. Today there will be two hundred when the
224
FOURTH MANSIONS
count is in. And tomorrow three still newer diseases
will appear, one of them being the old disease named
panic. I know that you haven't any plan, and I haven't
I
much of one. I have a few men. I need a few more.
At sundown you will take three good men and go
over the fence. That was the sticky scribbling of Leo
Joe Larker on the lavender-stained paper.)
“Ultimately, all mankind will be lodged in a single
town,” Michael Fountain lectured on. “The dross will
have disappeared. Only the many-times refined gold
will remain. And more finally still, all of mankind will
be lodged in a single house. This is most important
to the closing and diminishing of the circle. We support,
as expedient, all cyclic Orphism; and so we must sup-
port the effort of the retumees. But they were only
shadows of ourselves. Their concern that the cycle of
birth, death, and rebirth be repeated has been a good
one up to this time. The returnees must at all cost keep
the world in this cycle. They cannot permit the world to
ascend. They cannot even permit the cycle to become
a helix, a spiral. We support them in the one direction,
but we do not support them in another. The cycle, of
course, cannot be permitted to become an ascending or
outgrowing spiral. Neither can it be permitted to re-
main a simple cycle forever. It must become a dimin-
ished concentric with each turn of it smaller and more
refined than the last. We will diminish to a point. We
will concentrate in one point.”
(“The patricks and their castles will stand against
him in that,” said Croll who was a patrick. “We've
stood for the open way even when it was stagnant;
we won't accept the closed way even when it's in move-
ment. Theirs isn't the eternal symbol of the snake with
his tail in his mouth, forever repeating. That snake eats
a little of his own tail every time he goes around, and
he becomes a much smaller snake. We'll stand against
them and their diminishment!")
>
225
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
“The final human race, at its finest hour (and I see it
as an hour not more than ten seconds long) will surely
have diminished to no more than three or four excep-
tional men,” Michael Fountain lectured on. “And then
is the synthesis, the diminished finale: the world will
one day dissolve into the original Great Man. Is it not
a most quieting and peaceful concept? But what is that
silence? The roaring had gone down to a gurgling in
the last few years. The gurgling had softened to a
mere dripping in these later days. Now it no longer
drips. How has it become so shallow and dry?”
("Hal The old man's fountain ran dry,” said Bone-
face. “I knew it would.” This boney-faced man was a
madman. He was intensely mad, a killer. If he ever
said something that seemed to make sense–and often
he did-it was a slip. He was mad. He always insisted
on that point.)
(But will you be ready for it? asked the note from
Leo Joe Larker that Freddy had taken from his sticky
pocket. Ready or not, you will have to come. I am pre-
pared to visit some plagues of my own; but only on
the returnees, not on the world. You may already have
guessed that I once joined their company. But I was a
very recent recruit of theirs and I have broken away.
To make up for the part I have had in it I will try to
stop the thing. Now, here is what you will do,)
(“Let's look at the other two, Foley-Smith,” said the
patrick Croll. “There's a lot better stuff in them than
in this dried-up old man. Sure, he knew where the
fountain itself was once. He went to it with his pitcher.
But that's all gone with him now. Let's get the other
bunch. Those two have a real fight going on, and some
of the sideplay from the others in the show is so strong
that it takes you right up into it.”)
James Bauer and Arouet Manion still continued their
teetering on the edge of the world battle. They fought
through arena after arena. Bauer still sat, ponderous
226
FOURTH MANSIONS
and purple-swollen and glassy-eyed, breathing like thun-
der. Arouet still stretched dragonlike on the stone floor,
shuddering with final sickness, poisonous to the last.
They were two arms of the deadly hydra, tearing and
killing each other. It is only for this reason that the
abominable creature, recreated so many times, has never
demolished the world: it mistakes its own tentacles
for other things and battles them to the death.
Hondo Silverio had come in. He was breaking the
brain-weave, tearing it loose, slicing it up. His green
mottled humor had become death gray with the new
concern, but he moved easily, helped himself to a drink
from the sideboard and flung himself onto one of the
scatter-couches.
Wing Manion came in, wrinkled her fish-nose in many-
layered disgust, and stood over her sick-dragon hus-
band Arouet. She also had sworn to break the weave.
The Harvester mark was still livid on her forehead but
she would no longer be a Harvester. She picked Arouet
up in her arms ("This fish gets pretty strong, after a
couple of days out of the old pond,” she had once said
of herself), carried the awkward length and lug of
him over to the most distant chair, and deposited him
there with worried concern. But Arouet, still showing
no more life than a dank quivering, poured himself
like quicksilver out of the chair and slithered the width
of the patio to lie again before Bauer in his attitude
of mocking adoration. They still had several arenas to
battle through. Letitia Bauer (the dead one) came and
stood wraithlike and worried. Bedelia Bencher also
came and watched a moment in her wraith-extension.
And Salzy was there. Ah, she was revolted and fasci-
nated at the same time by the struggle. It was as pas-
sionate as she could have wished it, but it was not at
all the right shape. She had so hoped that it would
be helicall
227
FOURTH MANSIONS
Meanwhile, back in our main context, Foley-Smith
had finished reading the note from Leo Joe Larker. There
were some straight specifics in it. That Larker was a
real strategist, a poor man's general. He knew how to
go about a street fight, a town fight. And the last words
of the note: Now eat it. Chew it up and eat it. It should
have a pleasant sherbert flavor. A determined man can
swallow paper. It does not really bulk larger for the
chewing. It only seems to. Now swallow it.
And Fred Foley swallowed it.
Foley was to take three of the inmates over the
fence with him. Larker had written that more would
be useless. Foley thought that the three would be use-
less. They were Loras who was alien, Croll who was
patrick, and O'Mara who was Irish. But the boney-faced
man insisted that he would go also. He knew every
word that was in the note, though he had not read it
with his eyes. Boneface had spooky powers. It was
better to have him on your side than against you.
In town people had begun to die like flies. They
became drowsy and died, without really being sick.
Actually most of them weren't sick, but the suggestion
to die was implanted in them.
Overhead the clouds were gathering and tumbling.
They were touched with sudden silver and (now that
it came near sunset) they were also touched with that
color that is called morada which is a mulberry or
violet or purple. Foley gathered his four men. There
was no leaving Boneface behind. That man had sensed
and entered his element.
"I used to be a pathological killer,” Boneface said.
"They say they've cured me of that and I'm no longer
dangerous. They think they've cured me! Men, just
give me a target and I'm a butcher all over again. Oh,
you can't shake me. You have to take me along. And for
one of your squeamish jobs I'm just the man.
There were events in the world and the city that
>
228
a
FOURTH MANSIONS
afternoon and evening. The plague itself appeared.
There was a clear case of it truly verified. But a curi-
ous aspect of the appearance was that it was widely
reported on the air and on paper several hours before
it came. Manipulated panic was all the thing.
And at almost the identical time two men were mur-
dered. One of them was a Great Liberal Statesman
who was actually a shoddy phony, and one was a
Well-Beloved Conservative Leader whose own family
couldn't stand him. There was a further distortion. The
reports of both murders were out slightly before they
happened, and partisans of both men had begun to
gather.
And just previous to the riots, an army detachment
had crossed over from Virginia to put down the riots.
The military could not find the reported corpses strew-
ing the sidewalks. Wisely they waited. They were only
a little bit early.
In other sections, students attacked soldiers. The
students always averaged about ten years older than
the soldiers. Embassies were burned. Small private ar-
mies moved through the streets. They were distin-
guished only by armbands or not distinguished at all.
The transit workers announced a one hour strike for the
following morning as evidence of their solidarity.
Fred Foley heard a chuckle in his mind. It was the
brittle chuckle of Carmody Overlark. Carmody and his
would cause the disturbances to succeed (while seem-
ing to fail) or to fail (while seeming to succeed); any-
how they would have their sort of value out of them,
and the world would be further shackled.
“It's time to get moving,” Fred Foley told his four
men. “Only one target inside the Bug, according to
Larker. I'd have thought there'd be more."
Foley sent Croll to kill Doctor Millhouse. Croll
the patrick seemed a little timid about going and kill-
>
229
FOURTH MANSIONS
ing a man, and Boneface wanted to do it, but Foley
repeated the command, and Croll went.
Meanwhile, Foley briefed them again rapidly, armed
them from the cache that Leo Joe Larker had hidden
and told of in the note, waited. Croll came back
twitching; he said that he couldn't kill Doctor Millhouse,
that Doctor Millhouse had already been dead when he
got to him. Foley looked around for Boneface, then
saw him deep in the shadows. “Who, me?” was the
look that Boneface gave him. Well, it was done, and
Boneface had done it; but Foley had rather wanted to
test the patrick Croll on an easy one first. They went
over the fence to begin what Larker had called the
Night of the Long Knives in his notes. Like all unstarred
generals, Larker was something of a ham.
230
XIII: AND ALL TALL MONSTERS STAND
The psychological rule says that when the inner
situation is not made conscious, it happens outside
as fate. That is to say, when the individual remains
undivided and does not become conscious of his
inner contradictions, the world must perforce act
out the conflict and be torn into opposite halves.
Aion: C. G. Jung
TARGETS! Larker had tagged many of the prominent
returnees for Foley and his group to get. But another
unstarred general was mocking in Foley's mind.
"It doesn't make any difference, Frederick,” Miguel
Fuentes was saying from his distant underground. “It
is just a little diversion, a little fun. Do it if you want
to do it. But the first phase has already happened, and
the next will not begin till I and others (and especially
you) come out tomorrow. This doesn't matter."
“This does matter.” Foley swore. “You battle your
monsters and I'll battle minel There will be dimensions
-in me, or in the world.”
Some very prominent people were on the list, but
who would have suspected that they were returned
people? Lee, Twitchell, Cramms, Rowell, Goodfoot,
Munsey, Napier, Nash, Cabot, Bottoms, Miss Cora
Addamson. Well, how does one go about killing leading
people, those of a station above one? The "etiquette
of murder is incomplete. It may be that the intent and
231
a
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
the act itself carry the basis of an introduction. There
should be a certain fluidity of the rules, murder being
partly a social and partly a business thing. There is
need of a small rule book on the manners of it.
Lee was the first on the list and the first ticked off.
Foley knew him on sight, knew where he lived, knew
his shuffling figure now going back and forth in front
of his own luxury apartment building. In fact, Lee
seemed to be waiting for Foley or for the event. Foley
killed him quickly, the first man he ever slew.
He shot him suddenly. A lady gasped nearby, and
there were other sounds of shock in the street. But
many things as rude were going on. Foley quickly re-
joined his group.
On Constitution Avenue, one group of soldiers had
scattered a gaggle of “students” and there was a little
clatter of quick death on each side. Some very respect-
able fighting was going on around the circles and up
and down Massachusetts and New York Avenues. “It
is all for nothing, Freddy,” Miguel Fuentes was mocking.
"This isn't the real thing. It is only little theatricals."
"They want to tum the world into little theatricals,"
Freddy said. "I want to make it real again.” Freddy
went after Twitchell.
Twitchell had a permanent hotel suite right in the
way and Fred Foley went boldly in. It was a red-eyed
woman who answered and came to the door.
“I must see Mr. Twitchell at once,” Freddy said and
began to push in.
“That will be quite impossible,” said the red-eyed
lady. “Please go. I haven't time to explain.”
“
”
“Neither have I-I'll just come in. What I have to do
will only take an instant.”
“No, no, God nol Not at a time like this.” The lady
was suddenly strong, and Foley had pushed his way
in only with great difficulty.
>
>
>
232
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
"Be quiet, lady,” he said. “My business will be brief
and to the point, if my hand is steady."
“My husband has no more business at all to transact.
He is dead.”
“But can we be sure? I'll make sure, lady.”
“You monsterl He has just died. How is it possible for
one to be so heartless?” But Foley had forced his way
into the inner room.
“He does look pretty dead. What was it?”
“One of the new diseases of today. He was tired and
he lay down for a little. When I went to wake him just
now he was dead.”
"There's no harm at all in making sure.”
“The doctor will make sure. He's on his way here now.”
"The doctors are going to be very overworked to-
night. I'll make it easier for them. I'll leave no doubt
that this man is dead.”
Mrs. Twitchell uttered a series of short little screams
or yelps, and Foley made sure that Twitchell was dead.
“I bet I'm as good with the short knife as Boneface
says that he is,” Freddy growled in a sort of sordid
trance as he did it. The man bled hardly at all when
Foley gave him the blade. It was as if the blood had
been frozen. From this, and from other signs, Foley
knew that the man had been suspended, not dead. But
now he was dead.
Mrs. Twitchell was making such a fuss about it that
Foley was glad to get out of there, back to his group
and to the peace and quiet of the riotous streets.
Loras was explaining that he had not been able to
kill Cramms, that Cramms was already dead when he
got there. “Well, all right, so long as you made sure,”
said Foley.
“Of course I made sure,” Loras stated. “It was a little
embarrassing for me to do it, me a stranger with no
proper explanation of myself, and his family all around
him, but I made sure.
>
>
233
FOURTH MANSIONS
"How?" asked Boneface.
"Why, I held a small mirror to his mouth. It wasn't
clouded as it would be if he had the slightest breath.
And he had no pulse or body warmth. He was dead.”
“No, let me," said Boneface. “I'll make sure.” Bone-
face went up to kill Cramms, and Loras was puzzled.
“But what other test will he use?” this peculiar Loras
asked. It wasn't just that Loras was an alien. Beyond
that, he seemed uncomprehending at times.
“Oh, he'll have a sure test," Foley said. “I thought
you understood the nature of the men we're combatting."
“I begin to see,” Loras mused. “It's possible that he
was not dead at all. That would fool anybody not in
the secret, wouldn't it? But I haven't a lot of enthusiasm
for this killing. I am terminating my relationship with
this group
Loras didn't fully understand people. Or else he was
faking; possibly he was no alien, but something else.
“You'll either kill or be killed," Foley told him. “I'll
leave no loose ends."
The lights of the town went out then. It gave a
chilly effect to Foley's words.
“No, no, I don't believe you'd do it,” Loras protested.
"A
person can quit any time he wants to quit. I'll stay
right here by the bonfire till you're gone. You wouldn't
dare do it here in the light.”
Boneface was back already. Say, that man was fast!
He was fast in understanding a situation also. He did
Loras in. He did it in an offhand way, with a rapid and
deadly wrist-flick that he used. “I was wrong," Foley
said to himself. “I'm not near as good with the short
knife as Boneface is.”
After that, luck turned against them. They couldn't
find Rowell; they realized that Rowell would see to
it that they didn't find him. And Goodfoot, Munsey,
Napier, Nash, Cabot, Bottoms were not only said to be
dead but they were aggressively dead; they were un-
234
FOURTH MANSIONS
alterably dead, watchfully dead, and with their min-
ions about them. They were making a great thing
about being dead. There was no getting to them; they
were guarded, they were inviolable. They had not made
the mistake of Twitchell and Cramms, or it may be
that the word travels very fast in their set. They were
safely dead so that they could live again, or they had
already entered other persons and were living there.
Perhaps one of them could be crashed to. Boneface
was eager to try it. It mattered not at all to him if his
own destruction was part of the bargain. Boneface dis-
appeared rather suddenly from the group, and he may
have gotten one of the Suspendeds. But none of the
rest of Foley's band could get at any of the enemies at
all.
“Forget it, Fred, forget it,” Miguel Fuentes was say-
ing from distant underground. “They are only toys now.
But tomorrow you yourself may turr.. into something
more than a toy."
It had become very difficult to move about now.
Everyone was out of his lightless house and into the
streets to watch the crowds and the fires. There is
no one who doesn't like to watch fires. There was a
great amount of breaking glass, and much fighting, but
now it was more and more confused.
The New Prophets began to preach by torchlight as
though the latter days had come. It was the younger
Pliny, those many centuries ago, who mentioned that in
times of turmoil men with beards will appear instantly,
when in all Rome there had not been bearded men
before the moment of strife. The younger Pliny had
lived in a shaved age; he believed that the bearded
men who appear suddenly are wraiths or portents, and
not men at all.
It was a bearded portent who appeared now at one
of the circles, further clogging traffic; and there were
others of them about town. This one talked with a rum-
>
235
FOURTH MANSIONS
ble touched with both irony and hysteria, and he seemed
to have found his proper setting there in the torchlight:
“The pact is broken. The compromise has revealed
itself as no deeper than spiderwebs on the grass. Did
you really believe that the peace would be longer than
a long breath? Did you imagine that the thin earth on
which you trod did not have another earth under it?
Did you really believe that these brittle buildings were
the houses of the mighty? Did you actually suppose that
this white town on the river would endure longer than
three long lifetimes? Did you imagine that the sickly
hum you heard vas truly the speech of men? Or that
the mechanical wound-up toys would never run down?”
You have heard of fiery-eyed prophets, and this
man was one indeed. There were many bonfires and
torches going now and their fire seemed to dance in
his huge eyes. And yet the fire images there were not
reflections; they were originals.
“Whoever promised you peace? Who promised you
ease? Did you really believe that you could live your
whole life without spilling blood? Could you have
dreamed that it is in the natural order for a man to die
in bed? You fancied that the day would be so long
that the dark would never come? That the earth would
lie still and no more riffle its hide? But the weak
interval is over with, and we come now to life itself,
or to death."
“He's a prophet like one of the prophets,” Croll told
Foley. “As patrick, I will extend my aegis over him."
“Who told you that your house was meant to keep
out the elements?” the prophet still prophesied. “Who
gave the promise that one should live clean and dry?
What mad seer said that a man should live long enough
to see the faces of his grandchildren? Who told you that
you had the right to go in shoes, or fed? Did you not
know that the steep earth would break through this
smooth clutter you have placed upon it? Who told you
236
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
to quit growing fangs and claws? What actuary prom-
ised you life till morning?”
Not direful, no, no. This was the most joyous prophet
anyone ever heard. It was all high expectation about to
be fulfilled for him now. Like snow on deserts, like
crowning fire in dead wood, like violence and eruption
giving the answer to satiety, this was an addled prophet
of new life, not of death.
"It has been said that a man must lose his soul at least
once if only for the pleasure of finding it again. I say
that a man who has died without seeing the end of
the world has lived in vain! But many of us here will
not have lived in vain. The corral is open and the
beasts are loose. Do not look back. The world isn't there
any more. Ah, but look back then, if only to raise a little
salt. There has never been enough salt in the earth.
Unless your salt exceeds that of the saltimbanques it
were no matter if you ever lived or not. Why do you
fear to die who have never lived? But I am sure of
my
new life, I am sure of my new desire, though it is bom
out of ashes. What, is it not a wonder that I was dead
and that now I live?”
"Let's be about our business, Croll,” Foley said.
“I have his words anyhow, as coming from the weave.”
“And I have them anyhow, as patrick,” Croll said.
It was hard to tell which of the night screams were
genuine, as the teenagers were on the jag of screaming
in dark places for the fun of it. A genuine scream will
always sound false, just as real terror always appears
comical and contemptible to those without compassion.
But there was more noise than blood that night. An
effete generation does not return to massive rapine
and murder all at once, even though it has long lost all
moral objection to them. It will take a while for new
energy to grow toward real action.
The amateur town-criers were having a field night of
it with stories of rockets only ninety seconds away, and
237
FOURTH MANSIONS
Baltimore and Philadelphia already obliterated; and
corpses piled deep in the streets of New York with no
one to bury them.
It was only those who believed in an incredible plot
who understood that it might already have succeeded.
For, if the Suspendeds had already decided to die,
it meant that they had the situation under control, or
that they had entered other hosts. It was not their idea
to waste time in watching these death agonies of a
civilization, a dreary interval that would surely take
the greater part of a generation.
And their job had not been too difficult: to bump the
world at one critical point, to ensure that it dropped once
more into its old repeating cycle, that it did not break
out of the cycle into ascending spiral. Three cities, each
more advanced in artifact and building and spirit: these
had been. Then the fourth city, the city of destruction.
And then let it repeat. This was the essence of real
order, to maintain the sequence of birth, growth, de-
struction and death, and rebirth: the closed cycle. Let
it never be broken or opened!
And (like the old Oriental wrestlers) you could let the
world throw itself by its own strength. The stodgy old
watchers, they would overwatch now. The reactors would
overreact. The Lawful-Lawless Hydra-Weave would
absorb psychic energy and turn it back on itself. The
monsters defeat each other and the world and bring
about the destruction plateau.
“We'll see if their plot works, Fred,” young Miguel
Fuentes was communicating from far underground.
“Yes, the watchers will overwatch. The old patrick
here is shaking their invisible net. The reactors will
overreact. I myself will overreact most strenuously in
the morning. And that hydra that brushed myself and
yourself, it is sending out electric poison that I can
see like the borealis lights even here in my underground.
But there is something else, little Freddy. You are
238
FOURTH MANSIONS the something else. You are the simple man, the inno­ cent, you are the virgin who charms the unicorn. Hey, is that not jazzy talk, little Freddy? I don't know what you will do, how you will alter it. But there is some­ thing. Do you know what you willdo, Freddy?" "No," said Fred Foley shortly to the voice that was coming from underground seventeen hundred miles away. "This patrick does not overwatch, but he watches," said Croll. "We need no more than the desire to break to a higher life," the prophet was still sounding in the dis­ tance. "If we are sure of this, then we cannot be leveled." Yet it would seem as if the stimums of the Sus­ pendeds was working. Throughout the boondocks and waste places of the world, a hundred or so groups had gotten the whiff of the change, of the vacuum needing to be filled, and had begun to move. There was a strong group in Anatolia, one in Bas Pyrenees, one in Circassia, one in Sierra Leone, one on the Rio Grande River which was led by Miguel Fuentes. Some of these sudden armies, after they had eaten their surroundings and their near rivals, would be of real effect. And tin­ der had been torched everywhere. Double assassinations of men of opposite parties had happened in a dozen parts of the world. Soon there would be risings by the minorities and the abused, and the abusing. The acute could already hear those stir­ rings like a. giant hornets' nest. "That phase is unstoppable, Freddy," Miguel Fuentes called again from the distance. "But tomorrow you will start a different thing. Freddy, you are the difference."
Then they spoiled the night. They turned on the lights again. A few maintenance workers had got past the tepid terrorists and turned on the lights of the city again. It made a disappointing difference. There had been a
239
FOURTH MANSIONS certain rightness of setting in the torchlights and bon­ fires. Now that was gone. There was a dead girl lying in the gutter. Nobody went to her. All went past with eyes averted as thougli she had been nothing. She remained there; she may still be there. But otherwise it was only night-time in the city, and people going home. Foley, Croll, O'Mara and the honey-faced man went to Proviant's, which was still open, or opened again. Well, perhaps it was a different world already, but it looked about the same. They sat across from Larker (or a man who was just possibly Larker; he had still another appearance now) , who was with some people Foley didn't know. Foley and Larker exchanged glances and maintained the fie: tion of not knowing each other. "It didn't go off so well, even for a show," Foley told his group. "I imagine they planned it to misfire. Except for the grotesqueness and confusion of it all, it might have provoked some sort of heroic reaction; and their point is to prove that there's nothing heroic left. With that, our ruin is already assured, and they've won it in their sleep." "This is the way the world ends," said Larker at the table across. "The lights go on and it's revealed that it was all a play-act. There wasn't any world. There was only the fiction of a world." "There was a Byzantine legend," s aid Bencher, "to the effect that God made the world only for the grand effect of ending it. But the effect never came off quite right. He couldn't get the thing to climax properly. It was bad and he knew it. He'd set it back a few days or years from the ending and try again. It would be even worse. There were conflagrations that failed to con­ vince, thunderbolts that sounded as if a boy were throw­ ing them, doom-cracking that went off like a toy pistol. He'd set it back a few days and try the ending again,
240
FOURTH MANSIONS
and again, and again. And it developed that the ending
would ultimately be only that Byzantine one, to live
the latter days futilely over and over again.”
Bencher? What was Bencher doing here? And why
hadn't Foley known him when he had looked right at
him? Foley went over the man now, and he was Bench-
er in every point. But Foley hadn't known him before.
And how come he was with Larker and that com-
pany? How come he knew them?
“Mr. Bencher, what are you doing here?” Fred Foley
demanded.
“Drinking twice-heated bad coffee and observing an
unsatisfactory end of a world. Oh no, I didn't think that
you were crazy, Freddy. It was necessary at the time
that I appeared to. Biddy had come to me with your
story some time ago. I found it too wild to have been
invented. I looked into it and found that it was quite
true. I put my resources to it and discovered many of
its ramifications. I find now that I've come too late
on the scene; the damage is done. It's to be snake-bit
finally, to watch the snake slither out of reach of even
revenge. They're secure somewhere as though frozen
in ice and they can laugh at us out of the frost. There's
nothing we can do.
"Oh, we'll live with it for a while. We may even seem
for that while to regain part of our footing. But the
world has already worked itself into too precarious a
position. It's gone down before. I don't see how we
can keep it from going down again. It's the old cycle,
'
“I still hope to break that cycle, somehow," said Fred
Foley.
"Why, Freddy? To break it means there may be an
end to the temporality, I see that now. I'm not brave
enough to face that end, no matter how distant, and I'm
the bravest man I know. The repeating cycle is, after
all, the best. It means that someone will still be going
you know."
241
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
on, over and over. I'm afraid to break out of the cycle,
even out of the top side of it. And it will do no good
to warn the world. There'll be no belief in the nature
of the disaster, not even after the disaster has hap-
pened. And we'd certainly be madmen to talk of the
old dead men reappearing and frustrating at intervals.
"Can't we at least hunt down the remnants of them?"
the boney-faced man asked. “Now, yet tonight.”
“We will, some of them, and you'll have more adven-
ture tonight, man. But we can't even guess where most
of them have gone. We have one microscopic triumph
though, Freddy, Carmody Overlark, one of their real
leaders, the one who first attracted your attention, is
really dead and not gone to his state.
"That nearly makes me happy, Mr. Bencher. How?"
“Drowned. We went for him out at his estate. He
went into his lake at quite a deep point to escape us.
There's a local legend that the lake is bottomless. We
shot at him when he surfaced, and we watched for his
reappearance long enough to be sure that he wouldn't
reappear. He's drowned for good. He, at least, will
not be returning."
It is no good to warn the world of disaster, even after
it has happened. It is no good to tell your associates
that they hadn't made good even in this. Whatever had
happened to Carmody Overlark, he wasn't drowned, not
that oldest of the survivors, he who soaked his head in
a bucket. It was unlikely that he had been shot. It was
very likely that he was denned up underwater till he
should decide to waken again.
Had there been the veriest flick of mockery in
Bencher's telling Freddy of this? And why hadn't
Freddy known Bencher at first sight here, when he was
surely that man in every point of him?
"Where's Biddy?” Fred Foley asked.
"She should be here in a moment, Freddy,” Bencher
said. “She went after Miss Cora Addamson, that perni-
>
242
>
FOURTH MANSIONS
cious female of the returnees. And she got her. I felt it.”
“I thought that Addamson was on our list.”
"She was on several lists, Freddy; we wanted to make
sure of her. She'd try her escape by the back door of
her warren, and Biddy was at the back door. Biddy
wanted the job. She was as avid as Boneface here. The
report of Miss Addamson's death is already out. And
here comes Biddy now!” Biddy! That? Oh yeah, it
was Biddy.
"I'd go with her if I were you." (Why was Bencher
being a little oily about all this?) “Two young people
can still salvage something even from a sinking world.”
Why now, at the appearance of Biddy Bencher, did
it seem to Foley that things had gone irrevocably wrong?
For him, she should be the one right thing left in the
world. What was this new horror?
“There's something very wrong about all this,” Foley
said, rising. “All the warings are screaming at me but
I can't tell what they say."
"There are a lot of things wrong,” Bencher said, “but
this is one thing that can still be right. Be off, you two.
We'll bury the world without your help for the rest of
the night.”
"Come along, Freddy, little poodle-tooth," said Bid-
dy Bencher. “We have so many things to make up for.”
And Freddy went with her. Emptyl Biddy had never
seemed empty before.
“There's still something wrong with this,” Fred Foley
said to himself. “All the wamings are screaming at me.
Even from the weave. Why isn't she in the weave now?”
"Wait, sir, wait!” Croll called. He rushed to Foley,
caught him at the door, and held his two hands. No-
body in his life had ever called Freddy "sir” before.
The patrick seemed really possessed now and he ema-
nated another sort of weave.
“Sir, Your Magnanimous, know you that the Congre-
gation of Patricks, Larkers and Crolls, and Autocrats
243
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
and Exarchs, and Aloysii and Metropolitans, meet-
ing in convocation of the mind, have filled the Office
that has been vacant for a thousand years,” Croll in-
toned. He was pathetic in his derangement.
"I've heard of the office," Foley said. “Good luck to
all patricks this night! Who fills the office now, Croll?”
“You, sir, Your Simplicitas, Your Innocentia, Your
Laetitia, you are the Elect.” Then the Croll gave Foley
a sort of accolade-embrace, and Foley returned it in a
special form that he had been ignorant of till that mo-
ment. Croll also laid a narrow stole about the neck and
shoulders of Foley.
“But this isn't the purple of the ruler,” Freddy smiled.
"It's the lavender of the fool.”
"I know,” said Croll. “But it is so ordered.”
Biddy dragged Fred Foley out of the place. “What
was all that?” she asked him. “What did he do?”
“Made me Emperor,” said Freddy.
They walked in the parkways. It was all Biddy then,
Biddy chatter, Biddy lapses of logic, Biddy high spirits
as they walked about the mall. It seemed a little as if
she were walking him in a direction he didn't want to
go. But she'd always done that.
Oh, but why wasn't she in the weave? The weave
had now come to the point of explosion and this girl
who was essential to it wasn't in it at all. Cinnamon
cookie with her eyeballs painted with landscapes and
dragon-scapes, what had gone out from her? She seemed
unfamiliar inside herself. It was almost as if she didn't
know that the pictures on her eyeballs changed, as
if she couldn't see with every part of her, as if she
were using little peepholes through the painted scenes.
Now this was funny: Biddy's eyeballs were a part
of the weave, and her eyeballs were the painted-on
part of her. But otherwise, this girl here was not in
the swelling weave at all. Serpents and patricks in the
scenes on her eyeballs, the rooms of the patrick Bag-
244
a
OURTH MANSIONS
ley back home and the ape-dog plappergeist who served
himl The plappergeist picked up a small sign and
showed it and words flashed themselves across it. Fred-
dy, this is Biddy in the words. They moved in on me,
they took me over, she crowded me out. That's not me
Biddy in her. I go back to the weave now. We're going
to break it and throw it.
This girl here with him didn't even know that the
pictures on her eyeballs changed, but she was chatter-
ing Biddy chatter and leading Fred Foley in a direc-
tion he didn't seem to want to go. And then there was
the overpowering business of the breaking of the weave.
Hondo Silverio (that big, healing snake of a man) was
into the weave very powerfully to throw it. Foley had
the feeling and fear that Hondo would throw the weave
to him. Even so, the weave was cleaner now. And Biddy
Bencher was into the weave; dead, but not at all spirit-
less. The most overrated member of the weave, Baubo
the demon indeed, was being broken out of it by Hondo
and Salzy and Wing Manion; he began to lose his hold
and to fall, whimpering and gibbering.
Arouet Manion, the writhing reticulatus on the stone
floor, had been to his last arena. He died now with a
flickering blue and orange glow about him; the glow
gathered itself into a little ball-lightning that hung in
the air a moment. It decayed with hissing and noisome
odor, exploded with a weak poof, and was gone. And
that was all the soul that Arouet Manion had had.
Jim Bauer, purpled and choking on his own tongue,
staggered from the patio and reeled groaning down
the iron-railed stairway to the lake. His own soul gulped
out of his mouth in garish globs as he diminished and
dimmed. A crackling purple light fell past him and
plunged through the lake, falling down into interior in-
finity. It was the demon named Baubo who had been
broken out of the weave and finally let go.
And Bauer was letting go, though his fingers throbbed
245
FOURTH MANSIONS
out blood from the intensity of his grip on the iron rail-
ing. One by one, the members broke him out of the
weave. Letitia Alive arose from a couch in an interior
room, the hypnosis over her broken. She walked out
of the house Morada and into the road. She had no re-
semblance to Letitia Bauer now, and no remembrance
of the several days she had spent in Morada. Complete-
ly confused, back as the girl she had been before she
was mind-napped, she walked away down the front
road. She left the weave. She had never been in it
strongly.
Letitia Dead found release in the cleansing of the
weave and felt the first joy since she had died. And
Hondo (why such a thing, why such a thing?) was
throwing the weave to Fred Foley, as soon as Bauer
should be completely broken out of it.
Biddy Bencher was dead, but still strong and in com-
munication. And this girl here with Foley, who looked
like Biddy and was not, was aware of many outre
things, but she was completely blind and deaf to the
weave itself. And her painted eyeballs ceased to change
now; they were no more than dead paint. No, one last
flick, one final material message from Biddy herself in
words across the painted eyeballs.
Fooled her, Freddy, one last trick. The Harvester
mark on the forehead is cancerous. It's a short-term
body she's stolen from me.
Then the eyes were dead paint for an end, and this
girl was someone else.
“What happened to Biddy Bencher?” Freddy asked
her sullenly. Powerful men from the dark gripped
each of Foley's arms. He would go in the direction this
girl wished.
“But I'm Biddy Bencher,” she said. “How could there
be another?”
“Then what happened to Miss Cora Addamson the
beautiful and evergreen harpy?”
246
2
FOURTH MANSIONS
"I'm still beautiful, don't you think so? It's nice to
be several persons, and you yourself will sample that
pleasure. When did you know?”
“When you called me little poodle-tooth' Biddy had
several hundred pet names for me, but they followed
a pattern known only to the two of us. 'Poodle-tooth'
couldn't be among them. Why are we going back to the
Bug? And what did you do with Biddy?” Those men
were hustling Foley along at a pretty good clip now.
"I became Biddy, what else?” said the Beautiful Ad-
damson harpy. “You already know that. And you be-
gin to doubt your sanity now when you were so sure of
it before? Oh, you'll have a period of that, Freddy,
but when you come through on the other side you'll be
sound. We don't make mistakes in those we select to
join us."
“Dammit, Addamson, at least tell me where is her
body, or yours, or the other.
“When the lights came on in the town you saw it ly-
ing in the gutter and you passed it by without a second
look. An empty body doesn't have much meaning
when the personality has been drained out of it. Our
beloved Carmody Overlark (now enjoying a well-earned
sleep) told you that we were superb mimics, but I'm
afraid he didn't tell you all that's involved in our very
ancient art of mimicry. So now you don't know whether
this is her body or mine."
"Why Biddy? She wasn't prominent in the world.”
“In her potential she was staggering. Never in my lives
did I move into such a house. And her father was
prominent and rich and powerful, with a lifelong slum-
bering powerhouse of a mind. My own father, who is
still my father and who has now become Bencher, se-
lected him and her. My own father hadn't appeared in
the world in quite some centuries and there are reasons
why he can't be recognized even now. He rather over-
stepped himself the last time around and became one
247
>
22
FOURTH MANSIONS
of the permanent legends of evil. Quite a good fellow,
though. In not too long a time you'll appreciate him as
a father-in-law.”
"Had Bencher been taken over by your father when
I saw him last?"
“Yes. Just minutes before.”
They were back at the Bug. Two strong men dragged
Fred Foley in. Doctor Millhouse was presiding.
“Ah, Smith-Foley, you wandered off to see your girl,”
he purred. “Fortunately she had the good sense to have
you brought back here. You've guessed, haven't you,
that the Bug is more than the Bug? It's one of our Cen-
ters."
“I thought you were dead.”
"So did Croll. And Boneface, coming suddenly, killed
another man whom I put up as a shield and gave my
appearance (in the bone-face mind). And now things
will go on as before.”
“But the world is going to pieces," Foley protested.
"So it is,” agreed Doctor Millhouse. “Exactly as be-
fore. We keep it going to pieces. And it'll be a smaller
world when we put the pieces together again some-
time hence. We have to shrink it periodically; that's
part of the cycle. You also become part of it. You'll
be one of us now. Foley. Your catharsis will begin
now. Oh yes, you really will lose your mind, but only
for a while. It'll be a much more amenable mind when
it's restored to you. These things are so predictable.”
But one thing not at all predictable was suffering
terrible spasm and alteration.
>
>
In one context, James Bauer had lurched down to the
bottom of the iron stairway and was standing ankle-deep
in the waters of his lake, hanging on with the last
skin of his life and moaning that he should fall. But in
another context he had gone down the world cliff that
is the side of Morada. This cliff has no bottom, and
248
FOURTH MANSIONS
nobody has even been more than a dozen steps down
that broken stairway from the top. Concrete steps break-
ing off from the everlasting stone; the iron railing, which
had been built by giants, now swinging loose over the
void; steeper and more pitchful steps and a great gap
in them, and also the disappearance above of those
steps that were already climbed down.
Bauer leapt the first gap, clawed stone, found the
remnant of a step and even a last rusty length of an
iron rail, slid purposefully toward a ledge, hung there
a moment with bleeding fingers. He saw a continuance
of the steps below, back in under the cliff at a dizzy
angle. He swung himself in under, let go, scraped rough-
er rock in search of a foothold, missed his footing and
hold in a sudden dampness and slickness (that was the
lake in the mundane aspect) and fell downward, and
down, and down, screaming hoarsely forever.
“It's a new weave now," said Hondo Silverio. Even that
strong one, growing stronger, was shaken by Bauer's
fall like black lightning. “A new weave. Here, Freddy,
catch the tangle of it! We give you the Mastery!”
All his life people gave valuable things to Freddy
unasked-powers, lives, worlds.
It beat the other thing into him. Hondo and Salzy Sil-
verio, Wing Manion, the dead Letitia Bauer and the
dead Bedelia Bencher, all were tangled up in him and
they were stronger than the new intruder.
But a tired spirit was intruded into Foley then while
men held him fast and other men plunged needles into
him and Doctor Millhouse presided.
“He takes you over, Foley," the doctor said, “but he's
old and he's incomplete. It's necessary that a lot of you
survive along with him. You'll make your arrangements.
Go mad now! But when your long madness passes
you'll be one of us, what's left of you.” And Doctor Mill-
house held a watch in his hand, studying it.
"What are you looking at? Dammit, what are you
a
249
»
FOURTH MANSIONS
watching?” Fred Foley demanded as the darkness be-
gan to gulp him down.
"The second hand,” said the doctor. “These things are
so predictable.”
“Why? Why? Nothing is going to happen to me,” Fred-
dy declared. “I have strengths that you don't know
about.” (Pride of patricks, monstrous harvest of the
brain-weave, flight of falcons.) “Biddy-Oh, dammit!
Cora Addamson, what's he waiting for?”
Cora-Biddy had the curious old shell-form ears, the
itching ears of Scripture. She had them from both her
components, for the people of the weave are as evilly
avid for novelty as are the returning people.
"The stridor vesanus, Freddy,” said Cora-Biddy. "Be
patient. It comes.
"The what?” Fred Foley asked, but he already knew.
The second night in the tomb is always the most hide-
ous one. What comes forth, comes forth from that de-
lirium. And the last floating spider-silk had now settled
on him. He was caught in the spiderweb.
"The screaming, Freddy,” Cora the beautiful and ever-
green harpy said. “It always comes on schedule.”
Then, as Doctor Millhouse looked up from his watch,
Foley's mind gave way. He began to scream. The old,
returning Other entered and mingled with his mind and
body. He continued the screaming (the final tomb
humiliation) as they laced him into the jacket to take
him away. And that was the end of Fred Foley as he
.
had been.
>
But it wasn't the end of him as he would be. He did
have strengths that they didn't know about.
He was Master of the weave, and now the weave need
not remain anarchic.
With a word he could become Master of the falcon.
He could fly the falcon, or he could ground it.
He was companion of patricks, and now he was him-
250
FOURTH MANSIONS
self more than a patrick. He was more than a Croll or
Aloysius. He was Emperor.
He now had a retuming lightning-toad intruded into
his head and his body, and in the toad was the wisdom-
jewel.
He was Everyman. He was Everylout.
Nobody else, coming in simplicity, had ever partaken
of all four Monsters. Nobody else had had such good
eyes, had ever been able to see on all the levels and
into all the worlds. No person else had ever integrated
all his archetypes and become fully conscious-even
while tumbling into needle-induced unconsciousness.
He had been called, as the patricks had not been,
as the Harvesters themselves had not been, as none
of the exterior creatures had been of themselves. The
Harvesters, the persons of the weave, had not them-
selves truly mutated. They couldn't have done it; they
hadn't the holy simplicity for it. Theirs was a false
and premature mutation. It was Fred Foley who now
became the first of the new mutation, the special sort
of man.
And in the morning-
(Green-mottled humor in him, helical passion, saintly
sex-fish, ashen death-joy, cinnamon cookie for Cerberus-
Pride of patricks in him, Black Patricks of New
York and Nairobi, Yellow Patricks of Moscow and
Lhasa, Brown Patricks of Batangas and Tongareva, No-
bility of Metropolitans and Simplicity of Crolls, the
Exarch of Yerevan and the Aloysius of Dublin in him,
Oceanic ages in him, insane flitting reptilian wraiths
that have a random gift that isn't given to proper crea-
tures, and a new interior guest from that returning
jewel-headed toad people-
Flight of falcons in him. “You can command the fal-
con, Freddy, when you wake to it,” came the under-
251
>
-
FOURTH MANSIONS
ground voice of Miguel. “You can even command the
falcon to furl its wings again.”-
Unweaponed simplicity in him that could burst every
bond. Every under-thing rooted in him now,
The ashen Letitia herself had just borne a child who
was truly beautiful and full of light, somehow, in a
manner and place that we do not know the names of.
Som
Letitia-gladness in him. Gobbled devils in him,)
-and in the morning he would come out of it all: a
new element that the returnees had not calculated in
adjusting the cyclic trajectory. (Returnees also in him.)
On so small a new module it might depend. What
would be the shape and direction of it now: still the
repeating cycle, or the ascending spiral?
Would the next Mansions be the First again? Or the
Fifth?
252
get higher and higher and never have to come down from it, if you want the good-time town and the crowd that goes with it for a long haul (and it's going to be a very long haul), then howl it out so they'll know that you're interested. If you want anything at all added, tell them now, and they'll put it in. Contact them by regular mail, or phone or voxo. Or tear out a sheet of this screed, scribble your wants in the margin, and drop it in any mail box. It will get there. The address is:
That's all you need, but get with it. They're building our place now.
"Bureau of Wonderful Cities. Old Earth."
Maybe Jones and the City
191
Mean Men
Seven Story Dream
la
G ILFORD GADBERRY had a contempt for dawns badly
>
a
done. He knew how blatant and stylized the outdoor world can be
in its pristine moments: the contrived shagginess of grass, the
stupidity of trees, the falsity of flowers, the oafishness of the birds
and their inept melody. These scratched the smooth surface of his
soul. “Bad work, very bad work,” Gadberry would opine, for he
was an artist.
Yet there were times when these sorry units arranged them-
selves with striking effect. On this very carly dawn they made an
almost perfect harnony, and Gadberry gracefully acknowledged
it. There it was: the old oaks, and the new firs and hedges, the
ragged Bermuda on the vacant lot in the new sun, the thin rye
grass that held to the shade of the building, the corpse on the
lawn, the row of hollyhocks and the lone aster in the middle of
them, the drooping mimosa full of driveling birds, the even rank of
garbage cans standing chalky in the aluminum dawn, and that
damned dew over everything.
In spite of the elements that went into the composition the
effect was near perfect—and yet there was one clashing entity in
that aubade scene. Gadberry reviewed it in his mind, for the artist
is satisfied with nothing but perfection.
The firs, the hedges, the corpse, the mimosa, the garbage cans,
195
Mean Men
the lawn, the hollyhocks with their lone aster—something was in
that peaceful morning scene that simply did not belong there.
Gadberry strode over and savagely struck down the aster with
its white flower. The harmony of the scene was now perfect. He
walked
away,
his artist's soul satisfied.
On his way to find an early eating place, he met a policeman
named Embree and told him that Minnie Jo Merry was lying dead
on that little lawn behind the apartment where she lived, and
perhaps it should be looked into.
CAPTAINS Keil and Gold were there quickly and in charge.
Minnie Jo was bruised about the throat and dried blood framed
her mouth, but her death may have been caused by a violent
concussion. Keil and Gold left her to Dr. Sanderson and their men.
There was no crowd. This was very early on a Saturday morning,
the apartment was on a quiet street, and the small rear lawn was
secluded.
Orders were given for all the residents of the apartment
building to remain in the building, and Captain Keil sent for
Gilford Gadberry, the only one who had left. Gadberry told the
patrolman who came for him that he would come as soon as he
had finished his breakfast, and not a moment before. He finished it
leisurely, drinking coffee and sketching while the policeman
fumed. He was sketching a fuming policeman.
196
Seven Story Dream
a
>
“MRS. RAFFEL,” Captain Keil said, "you are the owner and
operator of this apartment. I assume that
you know something of
your renters. Who lives here?”
“Minnie Jo lived here, and how will I get her rent now? She
used to say, 'You worry too much about my rent. I'm not much
“
further back than some of the others. You should know that I'm
good for it. As long as I live I will always be good for what I owe.'
But now who will be good for what she owes?”
“Your problem, Mrs. Raffel. Who else lived—lives here?”
“Dillahunty, Gadberry, Handle, Izzard, Lamprey, Nazworthy,
all in a permanent or temporary state of single ss.”
“Six living and one dead tenant. Is that all?”
“It's a small place, but I do have two other empty units—three
it will be now. I doubt if this will help me rent them.”
“It may not make a difference. The girl was murdered in her
own room, we believe, and she seems to have made no outcry. She
was either taken very suddenly, or she knew the intruder well.”
“Not necessarily, Captain. Minnie Jo was a very open person.
If
Jack the Ripper himself had come in, red from his trade, she'd
have said, 'Hi, honey, sit down and talk to me.' But it was
probably someone she knew.”
“What are your feelings on hearing of the death of Miss
Merry?"
“Satisfaction—though I'll miss her—and relief and thankfulness
that it has finally turned out all right.”
“Turned out all right? Do you call it turning out all right that
she was murdered?” he asked her.
“Oh yes. There were many worse things that could have
.
happened to her. How lucky that Minnie Jo was killed before they
happened!”
“You will have to explain that. Did you
hate her?”
>
197
Mean Men
a
“No, I loved her—and I will explain. Minnie Jo was quite a
good girl, but she was on the edge of becoming quite a bad girl. I
have seen it happen to so many of the young ones who are loose in
the world. Every time I know one, and notice her nearing the
change, I pray that something will intervene and prevent it. This
is the first time my prayers have been answered, and I'm
thankful.”
“Could you yourself have done anything to bring about this, ah,
intervention, this preventative death?”
“I have just told you: I prayed. I didn't know it would be death,
but that's as good a solution as any."
Then they questioned her a little about other things.
Gadberry, now back from his breakfast, was questioned by
Captain Gold
“Gadberry, do you often get up so early?”
“Never. But I often stay up this late. I work at night and sleep
in the daytime.”
“Why?” Captain Gold inquired.
“It was originally a pose. Then I became used to it.”
"You seemed extraordinarily cool on discovering Miss Merry
dead. You did not make an outcry, or hurry to report it.”
“I reported it to the first person I met, a policeman. This
seemed the logical person, and the logical thing to do.”
“Almost too logical. What was your opinion of Miss Merry?”
“Alive, or dead? The girl was somehow completed in death. It
improves many people. So often we see only the outside of people,
but to look at her smeared with her own blood gives an added
dimension, a more total view.”
“Ah, what was your opinion of her alive?”
"Her hands and ankles were rather good; between, she was
“
198
Seven Story Dream
>
conventional. She hadn't eyes, no eyes at all. It isn't usual for a girl
her age to have eyes. A child will sometimes have eyes, a woman
after thirty may have them again, or a man after forty. I never saw
her hair, which is to say that it was doctored. I sketched her ears
sometimes, and her throat. I was not satisfied with either of them,
but then it isn't twice a year that I come on either that is really
good. Are you interested in these things?”
?
“We are somewhat interested in the throat of this girl, and other
matters. Since you work at night, you must have been awake. Did
.
you
hear any outcry or evidence of a struggle?”
“No. I could be throttled myself and not notice it. When I work
I am taken by the Holy Spirit of art. I am probably unable to help
you on the more mundane details you are seeking.”
“What is your opinion of the tenant George Handle? It is
reported that you sponge on him considerably.”
“The artist is worthy of his hire. George is an oaf, a fool; but do
not believe that a fool and his money are easily parted. I have to
work for every dollar I twist out of him. George has caught the
sickness of self-improvement. He learns at night. He has one of
those sets with an earphone for under the pillow. He's put quite a
bit of money into the recordings, money much better given to me.
He has his own recorder, reads into it things he wishes to learn,
then has them played back while he sleeps. Whatever he learns
while asleep, he is still a fool when awake.”
“You haven't any use for fools?”
“But I have! I often make use of fools.”
They questioned him a little more, then went on to Izzard.
“Mr. Izzard, what were your relations with Miss Merry?” Keil
asked.
“Avuncular-of the Dutch-uncle sort. Low Dutch, really, but
a
199
Mean Men
she hadn't come to realize that yet. I lavished gifts on her, and she
was friendly. I believe I would ultimately have been successful.
There was a change beginning in her.”
“Yes. Others have noticed the change. Were these expensive
gifts?”
“Not to me. The price tags don't matter. I run the A to Izzard
Variety Store. She was without discernment, and I have access to
bargains.”
“You wouldn't have been rebuffed by her, and been angry
enough to do her in?”
“I was rebuffed by her constantly, but she did it in a graceful
way-never so as to stop the flow of gifts. My timetable for her
was a long one and I am sorry to see it interrupted. No, I never
laid a hand on her, except sometimes in attempted affection.”
They questioned him a little about the others, a little more
about himself, and left him.
Next, they questioned Nazworthy, a large, sullen-appearing
,
man. He said that any of them might have done it: Handle, Izzard,
Lamprey, Gadberry, Dillahunty. “They are a bad bunch. All of
them always looking at the young girl. Any of them do it. Yes, I
am awake when it happen. I hear the shots ring out. I ‘
somebody have killed that pretty Miss Merry.' Whichever one you
I will positively identify him as the killer.”
“You are sure that you heard shots? She was not shot.”
“It was the knife I hear, then. I hear it go in loud. I say,
“Somebody have killed that pretty Miss Merry.'”
“She was not knifed.”
“How was it, then? What is the loud noise I heard? How did he
kill her?”
“We believe that she was strangled, and then thrown or pushed
from her window.”
say, 'Oh
decide on,
) )
200
Seven Story Dream
>
“My very thought. That is what I heard. The strangle noises and
the thrown-out-of-the-window noises. I hear everything. I know
everything. I will give testimony."
There was the look of arrogant laughter behind the hard eyes
of
Nazworthy. He was talking nonsense, either seriously or spe-
ciously. They would get nothing out of him.
Mr. Dillahunty told Keil and Gold, “My opinion of the lodgers
I cannot give as I would like, being opposed to profanity. You may
have to discount my opinion of them, however. I always have a
low opinion of those with whom I live; but when I have moved on
to other lodgings I remember them with affection. No, I heard
nothing in the night. I hear little without my aid, and I do not
sleep with it. My acquaintance with the aforesaid Minnie Jo was
sketchy. She would smile, and I would smile, but I am thrice her
age and a crippled man. Having second sight, I knew that this
would happen ... No, I haven't second sight to that extent; I
don't know who did it. You are sure it was one of the lodgers?”
“No. But she was apparently in her own room and in bed when
accosted. She seems to have been strangled there and thrown out
her own window. It was quite late, after the dew, and no feet left
the building after the dew and before her discovery-except those
of Gadberry, who reported her. At the moment we have no leads
to anyone except those who lived in this building. Tell us, what
about Mrs. Raffel?”
“A religious fanatic but a good woman. It is believed by the
others that I pay the regular rates here, but that is not so. I live
here partly on the charity of Mrs. Raffel.”
“And Gadberry, the artist?”
“In one word, selfish.”
“George Handle? He has been called a fool.”
“Only a half-fool. But easily led.”
>
a
201
Mean Men
>
>
a
“Izzard?”
“A merchant. He never spent a penny without a return."
“Nazworthy? Is he as crazy as he sounds?”
“No, he isn't. He's a sardonic kidder, with a dislike for all
authority. I can imagine a little the line he would take with the
police. The cat, the only other animal that indulges in straight-
faced sardonic humor, betrays itself by a fick of the tail.
Nazworthy has the same motion, but without the tail.”
“Could he kill?”
“I doubt he could kill Minnie Jo Merry. He hates only
pretentious people, and she wasn't. He could kill a policeman-or
her killer. If another is killed, then you
will know.”
“We'll watch for that. Lamprey?”
“Nothing there. A nothing man. Did you notice the girl well? A
beautiful thing and finely made, but there was plenty of strength
to her. That nothing man couldn't have strangled her. She'd have
strangled him and thrown him out the window. You'll have to look
to one of the others, not to him.”
Dillahunty was right. Lamprey was a nothing man, and he was
terrified of the police. “I didn't kill her. I didn't know her. I didn't
know anybody. I wash dishes at Webbers. I don't know nobody.
I'm in my room all night.”
“Well, did you hear noises in the night?"
“Noises I always hear, and some of them never happen. I'm a
nervous man, but I kill nobody, I hurt nobody. It is more I am
always afraid someone would kill me.”
Lamprey was a small man with small hands, a frightened man
on the edge of incompetency. They questioned him a little more
and left him.
“What do we have?” Captain Keil asked. “A heavy old woman
who is a religious fanatic and also a good woman, and is glad that
>
202
Seven Story Dream
a
the girl was killed before something bad happened to her. An
artist who is selfish. A sardonic kidder who is not as stupid as he
acts. A half-fool who is easily led. A nothing man. A merchant who
does not spend without a return. An old Irishman who is thrice her
age, but can we be sure that all the sap is dead in him? Seven, and
one of them is crazy, but which? Let's go talk to the half-fool.”
“Handle,” Captain Gold said, "did you sleep well last night?”
"No. I have never slept well any night of my life. I dream a lot
and worry a lot. I'm totally alive when I sleep.”
“Was it because of your restlessness at night that you
decided to
try the learn-while-you-sleep systems?”
“Yes. I want to know things, so I decided to tap my nocturnal
energy, as the advertisement said.”
“What is your relationship with Gilford Gadberry?”
“Oh, he takes me for quite a bit, but he knows all the things I
want to know. He can talk about music and funny paintings and
the new dirty novels and psychology and things like that.
Sometimes I turn him on when he talks, and play him back at
night. Sometimes when I lend him money he'll make recordings
for me—Gaelic furniture design, and things like that. He arranges
the things I'll hear at night so I'll get a well-rounded liberal
education.'
“I see. Did
you
hear
any
noises last night?”
“I hear noises every night, though I sleep with the earphones
on, and all outside noise is supposed to be cut out. It must be that
I dream the noises.”
“Did you dream last night? Did you dream anything about a
murder or a dead person?” Gold asked.
“Yes. About seven dreams like that."
“Tell us one of them.”
“Which one?”
203
Mean Men
>
“Hell, I don't know. We're shooting blind. Tell us one.”
“Well, this one, it's kind of silly. This was a long time ago, or
,
anyhow it took place in a cabin and by candlelight. We sat wake
over a corpse. We cracked and ate walnuts, but someone objected
when we threw the shells in with the corpse, though that was a
good place to throw them. Then someone else—"
“Oh Judas!” said Captain Keil.
“I believe that is enough of that one,” Captain Gold said.
“Were all of the seven dreams like that?”
“All of them about murder or corpses, yes. All of them kind of
silly.”
“Seven story dreams we have yet,” Keil said. “We're getting
nowhere.”
“Then we'll get somewhere,” Gold said. “Handle, have you any
idea who killed Minnie Jo Merry?”
“I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie Jo Merry.”
“What?”
“I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie-'
“You are talking for the record?”
“Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed Minnie
Jo Merry. I killed—”
So they took him downtown, but first they gave orders for a new
lock to be put on George Handle's door and they left a guard at
the apartment building.
NATURALLY they didn't leave it at that. The confession of the
half-fool was complete enough. There were odd elements in it, but
he was an odd man. He said that he had killed the girl in a dream;
204
Seven Story Dream
I
that he had risen and gone to her room and strangled her and
thrown her out of the open window because he was jealous. Then
he had gone back to his bed, to other dreams.
Yet there were points about that murder that hadn't been given
out, that only the killer could have known; George Handle knew
them
Nevertheless, the two captains continued to check during that
morning. They found that Minnie Jo was an inefficient but
promising worker for a stationery company. Her particular
girlfriend believed that Minnie Jo ran around only with the men
where she lived. They checked the places she frequented, and she
had been seen with all the men.
She had been out with Gadberry and with Handle often, and
with Izzard nearly as often. She had even been seen dining with
the sardonic Nazworthy at a sardonic place run by two Bulgarian
brothers. She often went to Webbers, and sometimes drank coffee
in the kitchen with the dishwasher Lamprey. It was believed by
them at Webbers, though, that this was mere kindness on her part.
Minnie Jo had even been seen drinking Irish coffee with
Dillahunty in the after-midnight hours at Maddigan's. Nor was she
the only girl a third his age that he brought in. The sap was not all
dead in him yet.
They found that Dillahunty was well liked, Handle was liked,
and even poor Lamprey was liked.
Izzard was not liked, Gadberry was not liked, Nazworthy was
not liked.
“We can tell nothing by that,” Keil said. “Handle has confessed,
and it makes no difference that the people who know him like him.
There is nothing to tie onto the others, even if Gadberry is selfish,
Izzard is demanding, and Nazworthy is sardonic. We still have the
fact that Handle has confessed.”
>
>
205
Mean Men
“Yes. Repetitiously. But to be sure, let's go hear him again.”
”
Again, George Handle told them, “I killed Minnie Jo Merry.
Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed Minnie
Jo”
"He sounds like_”
“Yes, doesn't he?” Keil interrupted Gold. “Let's go look for it.”
“HAS anybody been trying to get into Handle's room?” they
asked the guard at the apartment.
“Gadberry has. Says Handle owes him money. Says he was to go
in and get it. Says he wears Handle's shirts, and this locking out
puts him to grave inconvenience. Handle never locked his door,
according to him. Gadberry was disappointed to find the new lock
on it; he seems pretty nervous now.”
They found Gadberry.
“Come on with us. We'll go to his room and get it.”
“What? Get what?"
“What you were trying to get. What is making you nervous that
you couldn't get? It will be here, somewhere with the bunch of
them. Quite a few of them here, aren't there, Gadberry?"
They were in Handle's room now.
“I don't know what you mean,” Gadberry protested.
“The tapes, the wires, the records. How long would it take to
play them all?”
"I don't know."
“You know pretty well. It would take about forty hours or
more, wouldn't it? Will you find it for us, or must we play them
?
all? And you will listen.”
”
>
>
206
Seven Story Dream
>
.
>
>
“I won't listen to forty hours of that drivel. I'll find it for you.
I'd have said that nothing could break me down, but that surely
could.”
“Why did you kill the girl, Gadberry?”
“Jealousy, frustration, curiosity ..
“I can understand the jealousy. She was an attractive girl. What
was the frustration?"
“She was almost perfect, but not quite, and it is that which is
just short of a masterpiece that infuriates. It is so near—yet it
misses. I'm always in anger to destroy a near-masterpiece.”
“So you destroyed her. And the third element was your
curiosity, like when you said “The girl was somehow completed in
death.' You had to see how she would look dead.”
“Yes. That knowledge was necessary to my work.”
Gadberry had located the tape for them, and Captain Keil was
threading it into the machine.
“I suspect that
you weren't accurate in your appraisal to us of
Miss Merry, Gadberry. You said that she hadn't eyes, and other
things.”
“I lied. She had eyes, and she wasn't conventional. She was near
perfect, gentlemen. So near.”
“And in preparation for the murder it was only necessary for
you to condition the easily led George Handle to a confession?”
“Astute of me, was it not, Captains?”
The machine played now in the compelling voice of Gilford
Gadberry, as it had night after night played to George Handle, in
his sleep, till he had learned to answer on cue; and the cue, of
course, was the question: "Who killed Minnie Jo Merry?”
“Pretty uninspired,” Gadberry had to admit, “but I had to
assume uninspired questioners, to whom the cliché would come
naturally.”
207
Mean Men
The machine went on to recount certain abominations that only
the killer knew he would commit, but the voice of that most
polished madman returned again and again to the command:
“Say, 'I killed Minnie Jo Merry. I killed Minnie Jo Merry.
Strangled her and threw her out the window. I killed-
208
Secret Places
Adam Had
Three Brothers
IN THE TOWN there are many races living, each in its own
enclave, some of many square miles, some of a few acres only,
some of but one or two streets. Its geographers say that it has
more Italians than Rome, more Irish than Dublin, more Jews
than Israel, more Armenians than Yerevan.
But this overlooks the most important race of all.
There is the further fact (known only to the more intense
geographers): it has more Rrequesenians than any town in
the world. There are more than a hundred of them.
By the vulgar the Rrequesenians are called Wrecks, and
their quarter is Wreckville. And there is this that can be said
of them that cannot be said of any other race on earth: Every
one of them is a genius.
These people are unique. They are not Gypsies, though they
are often taken for them. They are not Semites. They are not
even children of Adam.
3
WILLY MCGILLEY, the oldest of the Wrecks (they now use
Gentile names) has an old baked tablet made of straw and
pressed sheep dung that is eight thousand years old and gives
211
Secret Places
the true story of their origin. Adam had three brothers:
Etienne, Yancy, and Rreq. Etienne and Yancy were bache-
lors. Rreq had a small family and all his issue have had small
families; until now there are about two hundred of them in
all, the most who have ever been in the world at one time.
They have never intermarried with the children of Adam
except once. And not being of the same recension they are not
under the same curse to work for a living.
So they do not.
Instead they batten on the children of Adam by clever
devices that are known in police court as swindles.
Catherine O'Conneley by ordinary standards would be
reckoned as the most beautiful of the Wrecks. By at least
three dozen men she was considered the most beautiful girl in
the world. But by Wreckian standards she was plain. Her
nose was too small, only a little larger than that of ordinary
women; and she was skinny as a crow, being on the slight side
of a hundred and sixty. Being beautiful only by worldly
standards she was reduced even more than the rest of them to
living by her wits and charms.
She was a show girl and a bar girl. She gave piano lessons
and drawing lessons and tap-dancing lessons. She told for-
tunes and sold oriental rugs and junk jewelry, and kept
company with lonely old rich men. She was able to do all
these things because she was one bundle of energy.
She had no family except a number of unmarried uncles,
the six Petapolis brothers, the three Petersens, the five
Calderons, the four Oskanians, and Charley O'Malley, nine-
teen in all.
212
Adam Had Three Brothers
NOW it was early morning and a lady knocked at her door.
“The oil stock is no good. I checked and the place would be
three hundred miles out to sea and three miles down. My
brother says I've been took."
"Possibly your brother isn't up on the latest developments
in offshore drilling. We have the richest undeveloped field in
the world and virtually no competition. I can promise we will
have any number of gushers within a week. And if your
brother has any money I can still let him have stock till noon
today at a hundred and seventy-five dollars a share.”
“But I only paid twenty-five a share for mine."
"See how fast it has gone up in only two days. What other
stock rises so fast?"
"Well all right, I'll go tell him.”
THERE was another knock on the door.
"My little girl take piano lessons for six weeks and all she
can play is da da da."
“Good. It is better to learn one note thoroughly than just a
little bit of all of them. She is not ready for the other notes
yet. But I can tell you this: she is the most intelligent little
girl I have ever seen in my life and I believe she has a positive
genius for the piano. I truly believe she will blossom all at
once and one of these days she will be playing complete
symphonies.”
“You really think so?"
"I do indeed.”
213
Secret Places
“Well then I will pay you for six more weeks, but I do wish
she could play more than da da da.”
THERE was another knock at the door.
“Honey Bun, there was something wrong. I give you ten
dollars to bet on Summertime in the first race at Marine
Park; you say it's a sure thing and fifty to one. But now I find
there isn't any such track as Marine Park and nobody ever
heard of the horse. Huh, Honey Bun? What you do to your
best boy friend?"
“O, we use code names. What if all these hot tips ever got
out? Summertime of course was Long Day and Marine Park
was Jamaica. And he only lost by about six noses. Wasn't that
good for a fifty to one? And now I have an even better tip. It's
so hot I can't even tell you the name of the horse, but I feel
sure that twenty would get you a thousand.”
“All the time I give you money but never I win yet, Honey
Bun. Now you give a little kiss and we talk about another
bet.”
“I had surely thought our attachment was on a higher
plane."
“Words, Honey Bun, always words. But you give, um, um,
um, that's good. Now I bet again, but I bet I better win
someday.”
214
Adam Had Three Brothers
THERE was another knock on the door.
“How come you let my brother-in-law in on a good thing
and never tell me? For a hundred he'll have two hundred and
fifty in a week, and you never tell me, and I'm your friend
and never persecute you when you don't pay your bill."
So she had to give her caller the same deal she had given
his brother-in-law.
a
AFTER that she went out to take the game out of her traps.
She had set and baited them some days before. She had gone
to see five hundred people, which took quite a while even for
one with her excess of energy. And to each she said this:
“I have just discovered that I have an infallible gift of
picking winners. Now I want you to give it a test. Here is a
sure winner I have picked. I ask you bet it, not with me, not
with one of my uncles, but with a bookie of your own choice. I
prefer not to know with whom you bet.”
Of the five hundred there were a hundred and forty-four
winners, very good. So the next day she went to the hundred
and forty-four with even more assurance and offered them
the same proposition again. And of the hundred and forty-
four there were fifty-six winners. Very good, for she really
could pick them.
To these fifty-six she went the third day and offered them
the third sure bet free. And incredibly of the fifty-six there
were nineteen winners.
This was repeated the next day, and of the nineteen there
were seven winners.
215
Secret Places
Now she went to talk money. The seven lucky clients could
not deny that she indeed had the gift of picking winners. She
had given them all four straight in four days and her secret
should surely be worth money. Besides, they had all let their
bets ride and they had won a lot, an average of more than six
hundred dollars.
But she would give no more free tips. She would only sell
her complete and exclusive secret for a thousand dollars. And
she collected from six of them. The seventh was Mazuma
O'Shaunessey.
“I have given you four straight winners, but I cannot give
you any more free tips. We will now talk cold turkey."
“O, put it in a basket, Katie."
“Why, what do you mean, sir?”
”
“I learned it in my cradle. The Inverted Pyramid. You
tapped five hundred, and you got besides me how many?
Five?"
“Six besides you, seven in all.”
“Very good. You pick them nice for a little girl. But isn't
that a lot of work for no more than a hatful of money?"
“Six thousand dollars is a large hatful. And there is always
one smart alec like you who knows it all.”
"Now Kate dear, let's look at it this way. I can really pick
all the winners, not seven straights in five hundred, but all
five hundred if I wished.”
“O bah, you can't fool this little goose."
“O, I could prove it easily enough, but that's showy and I
hate to be a show-off. So I suggest that
you
take
my
word for
it and share my secret with me and give up this penny ante
stuff.”
216
Adam Had Three Brothers
“And all you want for your sure thing secret is five
thousand dollars or so?”
“Why Kate, I don't want your money. I have so much that
it's a burden to me. I only want to marry you."
a
SHE looked at him and she was not sure. O, not about
marrying him, he was nice enough. She was not sure, she had
,
never been sure, that he was a Wreck.
“Are you?"
“Why Kate, does one Wreck have to ask another that
question?"
“I guess not. I'll go ask my uncles what they think. This is
something of a decision.”
She went to see all her bachelor uncles and asked them
what they knew about Mazuma O'Shaunessey.
He was known to all of them.
“He is a competent boy, Kate," said Demetrio Petapolis. “If
I do not miscount I once came out a little short on a deal with
him. He knows the Virginia City Version, he knows the old
Seven-Three-Three, he can do the Professor and His Dog, and
the Little Audrey. And he seems to be quite rich. But is he?"
He meant, not is he rich, but—is he a Wreck?
“Does one Wreck have to ask another that question?" said
Kate.
“No, I guess not."
I
a
217
Secret Places
HODL OSKANIAN knew him too.
“That boy is real cute. It seems in the last deal I had with
him he came out a little ahead. It seems that in every deal I
have with him he comes out a little ahead. He knows the
Denver Deal and the Chicago Cut. He does the Little Old
Lady and the Blue Hat. He knows the Silver Lining and the
Doghouse and the Double Doghouse. And he seems quite
likeable. But is he?”
He meant, not was he likeable, but—was he a Wreck?
“Cannot one Wreck always tell another?" said Kate loftily.
LARS PETERSEN knew Mazuma too.
“He is a klog pog. He knows the Oslo Puds and the
Copenhagen Streg. He knows the Farmer's Wife and the
Little Black Dog. He can do the Seventy-Three and the Sup-
per Club. And he runs more tricks with the Sleepy River than
anyone I ever saw, and has three different versions of the
Raft and four of Down the Smoke Stack. And all the officers
on the bilk squad give him half their pay every week to invest
for them. He seems quite smart. But is he?"
He meant, not was he smart, but
is he a Wreck?
“Should one have to ask?” said Kate haughtily.
HER uncle Charley O'Malley also thought well of Mazuma.
"I am not sure but that at last count he was a raol or so
218
Adam Had Three Brothers
ahead of me. He knows the Blue Eyed Drover and the Black
Cow. He can do the Brandy Snifter with the best of them, and
he isn't bashful with the Snake Doctor. He does a neat
variation of the Bottom of the Barrel. He can work the
Yellow Glove and the Glastonburry Giveaway. And he seems
affable and urbane. But is he?”
He meant, not was he affable and urbane (he was), but—is
he a Wreck? Ah, that was the question.
“How can you even ask?” said Kate.
SO they were married and began one of the famous love
affairs of the century. It went on for four years and each day
brought new high adventure. They purged for the good of his
soul a Dayton industrialist of an excessive sum of cash and
thus restored his proper sense of values and taught him that
money isn't everything. They toured the world in gracious
fashion and took no more than their ample due for their
comfortable maintenance. They relaxed the grip of tight-
fisted Frenchmen and retaught them the stern virtues of
poverty. They enforced an austere regime of abstinence and
hard work on heretofore over-wealthy and over-weight
German burghers and possibly restored their health and
prolonged their lives. They had special stainless steel buckets
made to bury their money in, and these they scattered in
many countries and several continents. And they had as much
fun as it is allowed mortals to have.
219
Secret Places
ONE pleasant afternoon Mazuma O'Shaunessey was in jail in
a little town in Scotland. The jailer was gloomy and suspi-
cious and not given to joking.
“No tricks from you now. I will not be taken.”
"Just one to show I have the power. Stand back so I can't
reach you.”
“I'm not likely to let you."
“And hold up a pound note in one hand as tightly as you
can. I will only fick my handkerchief and the note will be in
my hand and no longer in yours."
“Man I defy you. You cannot do it.”
He held the note very tightly and closed his eyes with the
effort. Mazuma flicked his handkerchief, but the Scotsman
was right. He could not do it. This was the only time that
Mazuma ever failed. Though the world quivered on its axis
(and it did) yet the note was held so tightly that no power
could dislodge it. But when the world quivered on its axis the
effect was that Mazuma was now standing outside the cell
and the Scotsman was within. And when the Chief came some
minutes later Mazuma was gone and the Scotch jailer stood
locked in the cell, his eyes still closed and the pound note yet
held aloft in a grip of steel. So he was fired, or cashiered as
the Old Worlders call it, for taking a bribe and letting a
prisoner escape. And this is what usually comes as punish-
ment to overly suspicious persons.
KATIE still used the Inverted Pyramid and very effectively.
Mazuma did not really have an unfailing talent for picking
220
winners. He'd only said that to get Kate to marry him, and it was the best lie he ever told. But he did have an infallible talent for many things, and they thrived. The first little cloud in the sky came once when they passed a plowman in a field in the fat land of Belgium. "Ah, there is a happy man," said Mazuma. "H appy at work." "H appy at work? 0 my God, what did you say? What kind of words are these, my husband?" But in the months and years that followed, this frightening incident was forgotten. The couple became the pride of Wreckville when they returned as they did several times a year and told their stories. Like the time the state troopers ran them down and cornered them with drawn guns. "0, we don't want to take you in. We'll report that we couldn't catch you. Only tell us how you do it. We don't want to be troopers all our lives." And the time they ran a little house in Faro Town itself. It was a small upstairs place and Katie played the piano, and they had only one bartender, a faded little blonde girl with a cast in one eye, and only one table where Mazuma presided. And this where all the other Casinos were palaces that would make Buckingham look like a chicken coop. And the funny thing is that they took in no money at all. The barmaid would always say all drinks were ten dollars, or failing that they were on the house; as they used no coin and had trays in the register for only tens, fifties, hundreds and thousands. It was too much trouble to do business any other way. Katie would bait her money jar with several hundred dollar
Adam Had Three Brothers
221
222
Secret Places
bills and one or two larger, and demurely refuse anything smaller for selections as she didn't want the jar filled up with wrapping paper. So she would tinkle along all night and all drinks were on the house, which was not too many as only three could sit at the bar at once. And Mazurna never shook or dealt a game. He had only blue chips as he said any other color hurt his eyes. And no matter what the price of the chips, it was legendary and gained zeros as it was retold. Several of the larger sports carne up the stairs out of curiosity. And their feelings were hurt when they were told they were too little to play, for they weren't little at all. So Mazurna sat all night Monday through Friday and never cut a hand or shook a bone. Then on Saturday night the really big boys carne upstairs to see what it was about. They were the owners of the nine big Casinos in town, and six of these gentlemen had to sit on boxes. Their aggregate worth would total out a dollar and thirteen cents to every inhabitant of the U.S. Katie tinkled tunes all night for a hundred to five hundred dollars a selection, and Mazurna dealt on the little table. And when the sun carne up they owned a share of all nine of the big Casinos, and had acquired other assets besides. Of course these stories of Katie and Mazurna were topped, as about half the Wrecks went on the road, and they had some fancy narrations when they got back to Wreckville.
AND then the bottom fell out of the world. They had three beautiful children now. The oldest was
Adam Had Three Brothers
.
three years old and he could already shake, deal, shuffle, and
, ,
con with the best of them. He knew the Golden Gambit and
the Four Quarters and the Nine Dollar Dog and Three Fish
Out. And every evening he came in with a marble bag full of
half dollars and quarters that he had taken from the children
in the neighborhood. The middle child was two, but already
she could calculate odds like lightning, and she picked track
winners in her dreams. She ran sucker ads in the
papers
and
had set up a remunerative mail-order business. The youngest
was only one and could not yet talk. But he carried chalk and
a slate and marked up odds and made book, and was really
quite successful in a small way. He knew the Four Diamond
trick and the Two Story Chicken Coop, the Thimblerig
Reverse and the Canal Boat Cut. They were intelligent
children and theirs was a happy home.
ONE day Mazuma said, "We ought to get out of it, Kate.”
"Out of what?"
"Get out of the business. Raise the children in a more
wholesome atmosphere. Buy a farm and settle down.”
“You mean the Blue Valley Farmer trick? Is it old enough
to be new yet? And it takes nearly three weeks to set it up,
and it never did pay too well for all the trouble.”
“No, I do not mean the Blue Valley Farmer trick. I don't
mean any trick, swindle, or con. I think we should get out of
the whole grind and go to work like honest people.”
And when she heard these terrible words Katie fell into a
dead faint.
223
Secret Places
THAT is all of it. He was not a Wreck. He was a common
trickster and he had caught the sickness of repentance. The
bottom had fallen out of the world indeed. The three
unsolvable problems of the Greeks were squaring the circle,
trisecting the angle, and re-bottoming the world. They cannot
be done.
THEY have been separated for many years. The three
children were reared by their father under the recension and
curse of Adam. One is a professor of mathematics, but I
doubt if he can figure odds as rapidly as he could when he was
one year old. The middle one is now a grand lady, but she has
lost the facility of picking track winners in her dreams and
much else that made her charming. And the oldest one is a
senator from a state that I despise.
And Katie is now the wisest old witch in Wreckville. But
she has never quite been forgiven her youthful indiscretion
when she married an Adamite who fell like his ancient father
and deigned to work for a living.
224
Mean Men
Pig in a
in a PO
Pokey
24
ya
Trus
>
>
HIS was on Hippodamia. The name isn't important. There
were ten thousand asteroid-stations as undistinguished.
Netter settled back into the soft live-moss chair and prepared to
talk the Creature out of the impasse. Then he saw the big
moustached thing on the wall and he began to tremble.
After all, that was one of the things he had come to find—it was
part of it. It was the great beefy, bearded, moustached head of
Captain Kalbfleish mounted on the wall like a trophy, and amid
the other trophies of the room.
“Great God, Man!”—and it wasn't a man to whom he
spoke—“That's a human head you have mounted on the wall,”
Netter crackled.
“Which Great God, yours or mine?” Porcellus grunted. “They
aren't the same, or they have been described badly. Yes, a human
head. I had always wanted one. You notice that I have given it the
favored position in the center of the great wall. I now have at least
one of the heads of every species that interests me. Some of the
heads are much larger than that of your friend Kalbfleish and have
ornamentals that his lacks. It's a pity that humans don't have
sweeping horns; that would make them perfect. But even without
them, the head of Kalbfleish is the finest in my collection. It's a
truly magnificent head!”
It was. “Kalbfleish has a fine head on him,” they used to say,
227
Mean Men
a
>
a
and laugh. The big Captain, for all his remarkable courage and
spirit, had not been long on brains. It was a huge, wild, hairy head
with a stark and staring expression—as though Kalbfleish had died
in terror and agony.
“You killed him, of course,” said Netter dryly as he braided a
romal in his nervous hands. “So, one way or the other, I will have
to kill you, or you me.”
,
“Not I,” said Porcellus—a moist and hog-fat creature, “I
would not even kill an insect. Your friend had a violent heart and
it finally ruptured on him. He was uncommonly energetic,
especially so on the day of his death."
“Where is his body, you fat pig?”
“My translator has only a rough idea of pig, and I suppose you
intend it for an insult; but I have a tough hide. I couldn't do a
thing with his body, Netter, it was putrid in no time. It seems that
when
you humans know you are going to die you would begin to
give yourself the injections three or four basic days before the
time; then your bodies would not turn foul after death. I had no
idea he had neglected it, so I wasn't prepared. I was lucky to save
the head."
“We humans don't know when we are going to die,” said
Netter. “What is this you give me to eat? It's good.”
“Yes, I remember now Kalbfleish saying he didn't know when
he would die, but I supposed he spoke in humor. Since you
also
say it, it must be true of your species. The name of the food would
mean nothing to you, but you have a close parallel to its method of
preparation. I have read about geese in an Earth book of the
captains, though I overlooked pigs. You sometimes put live geese
to dance on hot griddles before they are killed. This excites and
alarms them, and enlarges their livers. The livers then become
delicacies. The creatures whose meat you are eating also died in
a
228
Pig in a Pokey
>
excitement and alarm, and they are delicious through and
through.”
Well, the meat was certainly delicious. That fat hog of a
creature knew how to live well. Netter finished the meal and set it
aside. Once more he braided the romal in his hands while he
grasped for words.
"I
suppose all the creatures whose heads you have here died by
accident, Porcellus?” he asked.
“Well, all but one of them died,” said Porcellus, “and I did not
kill them. One of them died at a great distance from here; he
willed me his head and had it sent to me because I had admired it.
And one of them, so far as I know, is still alive. He was a being of
multiplex heads. He hacked one of them off quite willingly when I
praised it, and he cured and mounted it himself. A queer chap. He
is staring down at you now and it will amuse you to guess which
he is.”
Porcellus didn't actually speak like that. He spoke in a series of
grunts, some verbal and some ventral. But the Console Translator
of Netter had a selector dial. Netter could dial translation in
pidgin, in cut and dry, in bombast, in diplomatic pleasantry, in old
southern U. S. soft-talk or Yiddish dialect if he wished, or in the
courtly manner. Whenever he encountered a creature who was
repulsive to him—as Porcellus was—he dialed the courtly manner
of speech. This was somehow easier on his ears and his nerves.
“We waste time,” Netter told the creature. “I have come to
pursue claim to this asteroid. We now need it for a way-station,
and it has never worked well for two such different species to share
a station. We had first claim here long ago; and we abandoned it.
Then you set up your station here; and you also abandoned it.”
“Never,” said Porcellus. “Would I abandon my cozy home and
my trophies? Would my masters wish the removal of so fine a
>
229
Mean Men
a
>
station-master as myself? I was called Home on urgent business. I
was gone but for a basic year, and the odds were very high against
,
any
other claimer coming while I was gone."
“The rules state that a live and competent agent must be in
residence at all times or the asteroid can be declared abandoned,”
Netter said. “The asteroid was plainly abandoned when Kalbfleish
arrived; you were gone. He so reported it, and he claimed it for us.
The claim was approved and accepted.”
“True," said the creature Porcellus. “What is that thing you
play with in your hands? But Captain Kalbfleish—following the
awkward interval after I had returned—also abandoned the
station by dying. I so reported his death, and claimed the station
for ourselves once more. The claim was approved and accepted.
Now you are here as my guest only and, I tell you in all kindness,
not a very welcome one.' ”
“But a proved murder will void your claim,” said Netter.
“So prove it, fine man,” said the creature Porcellus. “Yours is a
smaller head than Kalbfleish's but it has a certain distinction. I
could make room for it among my trophies. We have each of us
sent various reports, and the matter is under litigation. In the
meanwhile, the accidental death of either of us would void his
claim and settle the matter. We cannot kill directly. Investigators
are already on the way and we are both prime suspects; we are the
only ones here. What is the leather thing with which you play?"
“A romal, Porcellus. A short quirt braided onto a rein. They
made them in Old Mexico and in California and Texas, but they
were mostly ornamental.”
“Earth places all three, my translator says. Were they used with
a creature?"
"With a pony, a horse.”
>
230
Pig in a Pokey
"Haven't I stumbled onto the information that the horse is
extinct?”
>
“Yes. The braiding of the little thing is only a hobby of mine.”
“A hobby, according to my comprehensive translator, is a sort of
vicarious horse—a mental surrogate which one rides. Is that
correct?”
“Correct, Porcellus. Haven't
you a hobby?”
“My hobby is heads," said the thing.
Netter started to leave the creature then to go to his own camp.
“To the early and accidental death of one of us,” he toasted with
the last of the drink that Porcellus had given him.
“Shoals!” toasted Porcellus. “I believe that is your word. And a
” I
warning: stay away from the low dome which you will see on the
plain. It's dangerous.”
Netter went to his own camp.
>
NOW Porcellus wanted him to go to the curious dome—or he
would not have warned him away from it. Was it dangerous? Or
did the thing merely want to divert him? Porcellus must have
known that he would explore every feature of landscape on the
small asteroid. Perhaps it was only to worry him, as Porcellus
himself had seemed to be worried. And what in hog heaven can
worry a hog? Netter had it after a while. "He knows when he's
going to die. He's surprised that humans haven't that knowledge.
But can I depend on it? It's only a twice removed guess.” "
Netter left the dome till last. He circumnavigated the asteroid
in a brisk six-mile walk and found nothing of interest. He came
thoughtfully to the dome on the plain.
231
Mean Men
a
The dome rose to no more than the height of his head in the
center, was about sixty feet in diameter, was symmetrical in
general outline but with a slightly roughened surface, and was
probably artificial. “I believe it is an old direction beacon of the
Porcines,” he said. “Yes, this is certainly the top of an obsolete
beam sphere, and the most of it is under ground. They were no
good. I believe that we had them once.”
Netter stepped gingerly onto the sphere. It was certainly firm
enough. He knew a firn thing when he met one. There was no
danger of him crashing through. He climbed the steep, then the
less steep elevation of it and came to the center. “Nice,” he said,
“but nothing.” Then he felt it activated. “So Porcellus still uses
it,” he said, “I didn't realize that they were so backward.”
He walked around on it, and it rotated gently under him,
compensating for him. He strode down the side a little way, and it
quickly brought him back to the top. “This could be fun,” he said.
He could take three, four quick steps away from the top, and he
would still be on top. He could tense to jump sideways, and the
sphere would compensate before he left the surface; he'd still land
exactly on the center whichever way he jumped. The thing rolled
easily and noiselessly and anticipated or reacted immediately to
every movement. He walked, he ran, he laughed, he trotted half a
mile and stood where he had stood before.
“You know tricks and I know tricks, old sphere,” he shouted,
“Let's see who's the smarter.” He feinted, he broke, he dodged, he
ran crazy-legged as though he were broken-field dribbling at
Galactic-rules football. He shucked off tacklers, he scored count-
less goals in his mind, but he always ended on the very center top
of the dome.
He lay down and rolled, trying to go down the steep far slopes
as though they were grass banks. He stopped rolling and lay on his
232
Pig in a Pokey
back, and he was still on the top of the rotating compensating
sphere or dome.
“I haven't had so much fun since I was a boy in an amusement
park,” he said.
He hadn't? Then why did he suddenly begin to tremble? Why
did he begin to whistle so off-key if he wasn't scared? “Stone walls
do not a pokey make nor locks a—" it was the Cross-Bar Hotel
Blues he was whistling and he had to stop it.
He was locked tight in jail on a little hillock in the middle of a
plain, and there was no barrier in sight. There was no possible
way he could get off the compensating dome.
He was imprisoned in the highest most open spot on the
asteroid. In an hour of cavorting and hopping about he had not
got one full step from where he started, and there was no possible
way that he could.
He thought about it for a full Hippodamia day and night-
forty-five minutes basic time. He couldn't come up with a thing.
"If I had a rope and you had a stump,” he said talking to no
rope the stump-I'm good at that—and pull myself off
this thing.”
But he didn't have a rope and the plain sure didn't have a
stump. It had hardly a pebble as big as his thumb.
“This is where Kalbfleish died,” said Netter. “You said it right,
pig man, my friend had a violent heart and it finally ruptured on
him. You didn't have to murder him directly. You let him run
himself to death. He was uncommonly energetic, as you said, and
especially so on the day of his death. I can see it all now. He could
never stand to be confined. He would have gone wild when he
found himself confined in what seemed the most open space on the
asteroid. He'd have run till he ruptured every thing in him. It is no
wonder that he died with that look of horror.”
a
one, “I'd
a
233
Mean Men
This was a jail that nobody could break. Why try more tricks on
the sphere? It could compensate for every trick that was.
“Only a creature that could fy in zero atmosphere could get off
of this,” he mused. “Even a worm couldn't crawl off unless he
were too small to affect the compensators. If I had two cant hooks
I might be able to fool the thing, but it could no doubt
compensate for the resolution of forces. If I had a weight on a line
I might puzzle it a little, but not much. Porkey has it made. I'll die
either of starvation or exertion or insanity, but the investigation
will not show that I was murdered. “Why have two humans died of
heart attack here?' is the most they can ask him, and Porkey will
rub his hands and say 'Bad climate.'
‘
))
BUT what Porky Porcellus really said was:
“Fine man, why do you play like a boy on top of that thing? Is
that any way for a hopeful asteroid agent to conduct himself?”
“Porcellus, you think you've trapped me, do you?” Aared
,
Netter.
“I trap you? My hands are clean. Is it my fault that two humans
develop the strange mania of running themselves to death in a
weird game?”
How far away was Porcellus from the edge of the dome? Too
far. Too far by several yards.
“Porcellus, what is this thing?" Netter cried out.
“Once it was a beam sphere, as you have probably guessed, and
it is obsolete. I have altered it to something else. Now it is an
intelligence test. To fail it is to die.”
“Did anyone ever get off it?" Netter called. He had to get
>
234
Pig in a Pokey
а
Porcellus interested. He had to get him to come several feet closer
before he turned away.
“Only one passed the intelligence test,” said the creature, “and
he had unusual natural advantages. He was a peculiar fellow of
the species Larrik who visited me some basic years ago. He simply
broke himself into two pieces and walked off in opposite
directions. The globe couldn't compensate for both of them. One
got clear, obtained a line, pulled his other half off; both halves
laughed at me, and then they rejoined themselves. But
you
haven't
his advantage, Netter. You have failed the test.”
“I'll find a way," swore Netter. “I'll find a trick.” Just a little bit
closer now would do it.
“You lose, Netter,” said Porcellus. “There is no fixed thing on
the plain you could tie to even if you had a way of reaching it. The
longest thing you have with you is what you call the romal, and
it's no longer than your arm."
Porcellus was close enough. Right at the end of the dome.
When he turned it would be perfect—somewhere between
thirty-two and thirty-five feet. There was no fixed thing on the
plain, but there was a thing heavy enough to serve for a fixed
thing. The romal of Netter was no longer than his arın, but it was
a romal rey, a king romal.
Porcellus turned away in his triumph. The light-thin lariat flew
and dropped over his bulk. And Netter pulled himself off the dome
in less time than you can say Porky Porcellus.
The fat hulk was no match for Netter when he was on solid
non-compensating ground. He hog-tied the Hog-man with the thin
leather line and rolled him onto the dome. And Porcellus was
immediately on the center top of the dome to stay there till he
died of hunger or uncommon exertion or porcine apoplexy.
>
235
Mean Men
NETTER was moving things about in the fine Trophy Room
which he had recently inherited. He set a fine hard wood peg
into
the wall and hung on it the king romal for which he now had
especial affection. The king romal is so intricately braided that one
moment it will be a thick quirt no longer than your arm; but
;
unlace one keeper and it immediately becomes a thin strand lariat
forty foot long counting the loop. Hardly anyone knows how to
braid a romal rey nowadays.
He moved many things in the trophy room. He wanted the
setting to be just right. He knew just what
space
on that great wall. The investigation was over with and Netter's
claim had been accepted. He was now asteroid station-master—a
good job.
The head was ready. It had been cured out and tanned and
treated, and the eye-tushers were polished till they gleamed.
Porcellus had a truly magnificent head!
it should occupy
236
Lerrel Places
The Weirdest
World
I
A
S I am now utterly without hope, lost to my mission
and lost in the sight of my crew, I will record what petty
thoughts I may have for what benefit they may give some
other starfarer. Nine long days of bickering! But the decision
is sure. The crew will maroon me. I have lost all control over
them.
Who would have believed that I would show such weakness
when crossing the barrier? By all tests I should have been the
strongest. But the final test was the event itself. I failed.
I only hope that it is a pleasant and habitable planet where
they put me down .
Later. They have decided. I am no longer the captain even
in name. But they have compassion on me. They will do what
they can for my comfort. I believe that they have already
selected my desert island, so to speak, an out-of-the-way
globe where they will leave me to die. I will hope for the best.
I no longer have any voice in their councils ...
Later. I will be put down with only the basic survival kit:
the ejection mortar and sphere for my last testament to be
orbited into the Galactic drift; a small cosmoscope so that I
will at least have my bearings; one change of blood; an
239
Secret Places
-
abridged universal language correlator; a compendium of the
one thousand philosophic questions yet unsolved to exercise
my mind; a small vial of bug-kill.
Later. It has been selected. But my mind has grown so
demoralized that I do not even recognize the system, though
once this particular region was my specialty. The globe will
be habitable. There will be breathable atmosphere which will
allow me to dispense with much bothersome equipment. Here
the filler used is nitrogen, yet it will not matter. I have
breathed nitrogen before. There will be water, much of it
saline, but sufficient quantities of sweet. Food will be no
problem; before being marooned, I will receive injections that
should last me for the rest of my probably short life. Gravity
will be within the range of my constitution.
What will be lacking? Nothing, but the companionship of
my own kind, which is everything.
What a terrible thing it is to be marooned!
One of my teachers used to say that the only unforgivable
sin in the universe is ineptitude. That I should be the first to
succumb to space-ineptitude and be an awkward burden on
the rest of them! But it would be disastrous for them to try to
travel any longer with a sick man, particularly as their
nominal leader. I would be a shadow over them. I hold them
.
no rancor.
.
It will be today
Later. I am here. I have no real interest in defining where
“here” is, though I have my cosmoscope and could easily
determine it. I was anesthetized a few hours before, and put
down here in my sleep. The blasted half-acre of their landing
is near. No other trace of them is left.
Yet it is a good choice and not greatly unlike home. It is the
240
nearest resemblance I have seen on the entire voyage, which is to say that the pseudodendrons are enough like trees to remind me of trees, the herbage near enough to grass to satisfy one who had never known real grass. It is a green, somewhat waterlogged land of pleasant temperature. The only inhabitants I have encountered are a preoccupied race of hump-backed browsers who pay me scant notice. They are quadruped and myopic, and spend nearly their entire time at feeding. It may be that I am invisible to them. Yet they hear my voice and shy away somewhat from it. I am able to communicate with them only poorly. Their only vocalization is a sort of vibrant windy roar, but when I answer in kind they appear more puzzled than communicative. They have this peculiarity: when they come to an obstacle of terrain or thicket, they either go laboriously around it or force their way through it. It does not seem to occur to them to fly over it. They are as gravity-bound as a newborn baby. What air-traveling creatures I have met are of a consider­ ably smaller size. They are more vocal than the myopic quadrupeds, and I have had some success in conversing with them, but my results still await a more leisurely semantic interpretation. Such communications of theirs as I have analyzed are quite commonplace. They have no real philoso­ phy and are singularly lacking in aspiration; they are almost total extroverts and have no more than the rudiments of introspection. Yet they have managed to tell me some amusing anecdotes. They are quite good natured, though moronic. They say that neither they nor the myopic quadrupeds are the dominant race here, but rather a large grublike creature lacking a complete outer covering. From what they are able
The Weirdest World
241
Secret Places
а
to convey of this breed, it is a nightmarish kind of creation.
One of the flyers even told me that the giant grubs travel
upright on a bifurcated tail, but that is difficult to credit.
Besides, I believe that humor is at least a minor component of
the mentality of my airy friends. I will call them birds,
though they are but a sorry caricature of the birds at
home .
Later. I am being hunted. I am being hunted by the giant
grubs. Doubling back, I have seen them on my trail, examin-
ing it with great curiosity.
The birds had given me a very inadequate idea of these.
They are indeed unfinished—they do lack a complete outer
covering. Despite their giant size, I am convinced that they
are grubs, living under rocks and in masses of rotten wood.
Nothing in nature gives the impression of so lacking an outer
covering as the grub, that obese, unfinished worm.
These are, however, simple bipeds. They are wrapped in a
cocoon which they seem never to have shed, as though their
emergence from the larval state were incomplete. It is a loose
artificial sheath covering the central portion of the corpus.
They seem unable to divest themselves of it, though it is
definitely not a part of the body. When I have analyzed their
minds, I will know the reason for their carrying it. Now I can
only conjecture. It would seem a compulsion, some psycholog-
ical bond that dooms them in their apparent adult state to
carry their cocoons with them.
Later. I am captured by three of the giant grubs. I had
barely time to swallow my communication sphere. They
pinned me down and beat me with sticks. I was taken by
surprise and was not momentarily able to solve their lan-
guage, though it came to me after a short interval. It was
a
242
The Weirdest World
it
discordant and vocal and entirely gravity-bound, by which I
mean that its thoughts were chained to its words. There
seemed nothing in them above the vocal. In this the giant
grubs were less than the birds, even though they had a
practical power and cogency that the birds lacked.
“What'll we do with the blob?” asked one.
“Hy,” said the second, “you hit it on that end and I'll hit it
on this. We don't know which end is the head.”
“Let's try it for bait,” said the third. "Catfish might go for
it.”
“We could keep it alive till we're ready to use it. Then it
would stay fresh.”
“No, let's kill it. It doesn't look too fresh, even the way
is.”
“Gentlemen, you are making a mistake," I said. “I have
done nothing to merit death. And I am not without talent.
Besides, you have not considered the possibility that I may
be
forced to kill you three instead. I will not die willingly. And I
will thank you to stop pounding on me with those sticks. It
hurts.'
I was surprised and shocked at the sound of my own voice.
It was nearly as harsh as that of the grubs. But this was my
first attempt at their language, and musicality does not
become it.
“Hey fellows, did you hear that? Was that the blob talking?
Or was one of you playing a joke? Harry? Stanley? Have you
been practicing to be ventriloquists?"
“Not me.”
“Not me either. It sure sounded like it was it.”
"Hey blob, was that you? Can you talk, blob?"
“Certainly I can talk," I responded. "I am not an infant.
243
Secret Places
a
Nor am I a blob. I am a creature superior to your own kind, if
you are examples. Or it may be that you are only children.
Perhaps you are still in the pupa stage. Tell me, is yours an
early stage, or an arrested development, or are you indeed
adult?”
"Hey fellows, we don't have to take that from any blob. I'll
.
cave in his blasted head.”
“That isn't its head, it's its tail.”
"Gentlemen, perhaps I can set you straight," I said. “That
is my tail you are thwacking with those sticks, and I am
warning you to stop it. Of course I was talking with my tail. I
was only doing it in imitation of you. I am new at the
language and its manner of speaking. Yet it may be that I
have made a grotesque mistake. Is that
your
heads that
you
are waving in the air? Well, then, I will talk with my head, if
that is the custom. But I warn you again not to hit me on
either end with those sticks."
“Hey, fellows, I bet we could sell that thing. I bet we could
sell it to Billy Wilkins for his Reptile Farm.”
“How would we get it there?"
“Make it walk. Hey blob, can you walk?"
“I can travel, certainly, but I would not stagger along
precariously on a pair of flesh stilts with my head in the air,
as you do. When I travel, I do not travel upside down.”
"Well, let's go then. We're going to sell you to Billy Wilkins
for his Reptile Farm. If he can use a blob, he'll put you in one
of the tanks with the big turtles and alligators. You think
you'll like them?"
“I am lonesome in this lost world," I replied sadly, “and
even the
company
of you peeled grubs is better than nothing.
I am anxious to adopt a family and settle down here for what
244
The Weirdest World
years of life I have left. It may be that I will find
compatibility with the species you mention. I do not know
what they are.”
“Hey, fellows, this blob isn't a bad guy at all. I'd shake your
hands, blob, if I knew where they were. Let's go to Billy
Wilkins's place and sell him.”
)
II
We traveled to Billy Wilkins's place. My friends were
amazed when I took to the air and believed that I had
deserted them. They had no cause to distrust me. Without
them I would have had to rely on intuition to reach Billy
Wilkins, and even then I would lack the proper introductions.
"Hey, Billy," said my loudest friend whose name was Cecil,
"what will you give us for a blob? It lies and talks and isn't a
bad fellow at all. You'd get more tourists to come to your
reptile show if you had a talking blob in it. He could sing
songs and tell stories, and I bet he could play the guitar.”
“Well, Cecil, I'll just give you all ten dollars for it and try to
figure out what it is later. I'm a little ahead on my hunches
now, so I can afford to gamble on this one. I can always pickle
it and exhibit it as a genuine hippopotamus kidney.”
“Thank you, Billy. Take care of yourself, blob.”
“Good-bye for now, gentlemen,” I said. “I would like
you
to
visit me some evening as soon as I am acclimated to my new
surroundings. I will throw a whing-ding for you—as soon as I
find out what a whing-ding is."
“My God," said Billy Wilkins, “it talks, it really talks!”
"We told you it could talk and fly, Billy.”
a
245
Secret Places
1
1
“It talks, it talks,” said Billy. “Where's that blasted sign
painter? Eustace, come here. We got to paint a new sign."
The turtles in the tank I was put into did have a sound
basic philosophy which was absent in the walking grubs. But
they were slow and lacking inner fire. They would not be
obnoxious company, but neither would they give me excite-
ment and warmth. I was really more interested in the
walking grubs.
Eustace was a black grub, while the others had all been
white; but like them he had no outside casing of his own, and
like them he also staggered about on flesh stilts with his head
in the air.
It wasn't that I was naive or hadn't seen bipeds before. But
I don't believe anyone ever becomes entirely accustomed to
seeing a biped travel in its peculiar manner.
“Good afternoon, Eustace," I said pleasantly enough. The
eyes of Eustace were large and white. He was a more
handsome specimen than the other grubs.
“That you talking, bub? Say, you really can talk, can't you?
I thought Mr. Billy was fooling. Now just hold that expres-
sion a minute and let me get it set in my mind. I can paint
anything, once I get it set in my mind. What's your name,
blob? Have blobs names?”
“Not in your manner. With us the name and the soul, I
believe you call it, are the same thing and cannot be
vocalized. I will have to adopt a name of your sort. What
would be a good name?"
"Bub, I was always partial to George Albert Leroy Ellery.
That was my grandfather's name.”
“Should I also have a family name?"
"Sure."
1
246
The Weirdest World
2
“What would you suggest?"
"How about McIntosh?"
“That will be fine. I will use it.”
I talked to the turtles while Eustace was painting my
portrait on tent canvas.
“Is the name of this world Florida?" I asked one of them.
“The road signs said Florida.”
"World, world, world, water, water, water, glub, glug,
glub,” said one of them.
"Yes, but is this particular world we are on named
Florida?”
"World, world, water, water, glub," said another.
“Eustace, I can get nothing from these fellows," I called.
“Is this world named Florida?”
“Mr. George Albert, you are right in the middle of Florida,
the greatest state in the universe."
“Having traveled, Eustace, I have great reservations that
it is the greatest. But it is my new home and I must cultivate
a loyalty to it.'
I went up in a tree to give advice to two young birds trying
to construct a nest. This was obviously their first venture.
“You are going about it all wrong,” I told them. “First
consider that this will be your home, and then consider how
you can make your home most beautiful.”
“This is the way they've always built them,” said one of the
birds.
“There must be an element of utility, yes,” I told them.
“But the dominant motif should be beauty. The impression of
expanded vistas can be given by long low walls and para-
pets."
247
Secret Places
1
“This is the way they've always built them,” said the other
bird.
“Remember to embody all the new developments," I said.
"Just say to yourself 'This is the newest nest in the world.'
Always say that about any task you attempt. It inspires you."
“This is the way they've always built them,” said the birds.
“Go build your own nest."
“Mr. George Albert,” called Eustace. “Mr. Billy won't like
your flying around those trees. You're supposed to stay in
1)
your tank.”
“I was only getting a little air and talking to the birds," I
said.
“You can talk to the birds?” asked Eustace.
"Cannot anyone?”
“I can, a little,” said Eustace. “I didn't know anyone else
could.”
But when Billy Wilkins returned and heard the report that
I had been flying about, I was put in the snake house, in a
cage that was tightly meshed top and sides. My cell mate was
a surly python named Pete.
"See you stay on that side,” said Pete. “You're too big for
me to swallow. But I might try."
“There is something bothering you, Pete,” I said. “You
have a bad disposition. That can come only from bad digestion
or a bad conscience."
“I have both," said Pete. “The first because I bolt my food.
The second is because—well I forget the reason, but it's my
conscience.”
“Think hard, Pete," I said, “why have you a bad con-
science?”
a
248
The Weirdest World
1)
“Snakes always have bad consciences. We have forgotten
the crime, but we remember the guilt."
"Perhaps you should seek advice from someone, Pete.”
"I kind of think it was someone's smooth advice that
started us on all this. He talked the legs right off us.”
Billy Wilkins came to the cage with another “man" as
walking grubs call themselves.
“That it?" asked the other man. "And you say it can talk?”
?“
?
“Of course I can talk," I answered for Billy Wilkins. “I
have never known a creature who couldn't talk in some
manner. My name is George Albert Leroy Ellery McIntosh. I
don't believe that I heard yours, sir.”
”
“Bracken. Blackjack Bracken. I was telling Billy here that
if he really had a blob that could talk, that I might be able to
use it in my night club. We could have you here at the Snake
Ranch in the daytime for the tourists and kids. Then I could
have you at the club at night. We could work out an act. Do
you think you could learn to play the guitar?”
"
“Probably. But it would be much easier for me merely to
duplicate the sound."
“But then how could you sing and make guitar noises at the
same time?"
“You surely don't think that I am limited to one voice
box?”
“Oh, I didn't know. What's that big metal ball you have
there?"
“That's my communication sphere to record my thoughts. I
I
would not be without it. When in danger, I swallow it. When
in extreme danger, I will have to escape to a spot where I
have concealed my ejection mortar, and send my sphere into
the Galactic drift on a chance that it may be found.”
249
Secret Places
"That's no kind of gag to put in an act. What I have in
mind is something like this.”
Blackjack Bracken told a joke. It was a childish one and in
poor taste.
“I don't believe that is quite my style," I said.
“All right, what would you suggest?"
“I thought that I might lecture your patrons on the higher
ethic.”
“Look, George Albert, my patrons don't even have the
,
lower ethic.”
“And just what sort of recompense are we talking about?”
I asked.
“Billy and I had about settled on a hundred and fifty a
week.”
“A hundred and fifty for whom?"
"Why, for Billy."
“I say a hundred and fifty for myself, and ten percent for
Billy as my agent.'
“Say, this blob's real smart, isn't he, Billy?”
“Too smart.”
"Yes sir, George Albert, you're one smart blob. What kind
of contract have you signed with Billy here?"
"No contract.”
“Just a gentlemen's agreement?"
“No agreement."
"Billy, you can't hold him in a cage without a contract.
That's slavery. It's against the law.”
“But, Blackjack, a blob isn't people."
“Try proving that in court. Will you sign a contract with
me, George Albert?''
)
250
The Weirdest World
“I will not dump Billy. He befriended me and gave me a
home with the turtles and snakes. I will sign a joint contract
with the two of you. We will discuss terms tomorrow—after I
have estimated the attendance both here and at the night
club."
III
Of the walking grubs (who call themselves “people") there
are two kinds, and they place great emphasis on the dif-
ference. From this stems a large part of their difficulties. This
distinction, which is one of polarity, cuts quite across the
years and ability and station of life. It is not confined only to
the people, but also involves apparently all the beings on the
planet Florida.
It appears that a person is committed to one or the other
polarity at the beginning of life, maintaining that polarity
until death. The interlocking attraction-repulsion complex set
up by these two opposable types has deep emotional involve-
ments. It is the cause of considerable concern and disturb-
ance, as well as desire and inspiration. There is a sort of
poetic penumbra about the whole thing that tends to disguise
its basic simplicity, expressible as a simultaneous polarity
equation.
Complete segregation of the two types seems impossible. If
it has ever been tried, it has now been abandoned as
impractical.
There is indeed an intangible difference between the two
types, so that before that first day at the Reptile Ranch was
251
Secret Places
finished, I was able to differentiate between the two more
than ninety percent of the time. The knowledge of this
difference in polarity seems to be intuitive.
These two I will call the Beta and Gamma, or Boy and Girl
types. I began to see that this opposability of the two types
I
was one of the great driving forces of the people.
In the evening I was transported to the night club and I
was a success. I would not entertain them with blue jokes or
blue lyrics, but the patrons seemed fascinated by my simple
imitations of all the instruments of the orchestra and my
singing of comic ballads that Eustace had taught me in odd
moments that day. They were also interested in the way that
I drank gin, that is emptying the bottle without breaking the
seal. (It seems that the grub-people are unable to absorb a
liquid without making direct contact with it.)
And I met Margaret, one of the “girl" singers. I had been
wondering to which type of people I might show affinity. Now
I knew. I was definitely a Beta type, for I was attracted to
Margaret, who was unmistakably a Gamma. I began to
understand the queer effect that these types have on each
other.
She came over to my cage.
“I want to rub your head for luck before I go on,” she said.
“Thank you, Margaret," I replied, “but that is not my
head."
She sang with incomparable sadness, with all the sorrow
and sordidness that appear to be the lot of the unfortunate
Gammas. It was the essence of melancholy made into music.
It was a little bit like the ghost music of the asteroid Artemis,
a little like the death chants on Dolmena. Sex and sorrow.
Nostalgia. Regret.
252
The Weirdest World
Her singing shook me with a yearning that had no
precedent.
She came back to my cage.
"You were wonderful, Margaret," I said.
"I'm always wonderful when I'm singing for my supper.
I
am less wonderful in the rare times when I am well fed. But
are you happy, little buddy?”
"I had become almost so, till I heard you sing. Now I am
overcome with a sorrow and longing. Margaret, I am fasci-
nated with you."
“ “I go for you too, blob. You're my buddy. Isn't it funny that
the only buddy I have in the world is a blob. But if you'd seen
some of the guys I've been married to—boy! I wouldn't insult
you by calling them blobs. Have to go now. See you tomorrow
night if they keep us both on.”
»
a
NOW there was a problem to face. It was necessary that I
establish control over my environment, and at once. How else
could I aspire to Margaret?
I knew that the heart of the entire place here was neither
the bar nor the entertainment therein, nor the cuisine, nor
the dancing. The heart of the enterprise was the casino. Here
was the money that mattered; the rest was but garnish.
I had them bring me into the gambling rooms.
I had expected problems of complexity here where the
patrons worked for their gain or loss. Instead there was an
almost amazing simplicity. All the games were based on a
253
Secret Places
system of first aspect numbers. Indeed everything on the
Planet Florida seemed based on first aspect numbers.
Now it is an elemental fact that first aspect numbers do not
carry within them their own prediction. Nor were the people
even possessed of the prediction key that lies over the very
threshold of the second aspect series.
These people were actually wagering sums—the symbols of
prosperity-blindly, not knowing for sure whether they
would win or lose. They were selecting numbers by hunch or
at random with no assurance of profit. They were choosing a
hole for a ball to fall into without knowing whether that was
the right hole.
I do not believe that I was ever so amazed at anything in
my life.
a
game after
But here was an opportunity to establish control over my
environment.
I began to play the games. Usually I would watch a round
first, to be sure that I understood just what was going on.
Then I would play a few times ... as many as it took to
break the game.
I broke
game. When he could no longer pay me,
Blackjack closed the casino in exasperation.
Then we played poker, he and I and several others. This
was even more simple. I suddenly realized that the grub-peo-
ple could see only one side of the cards at a time.
I played and won.
I owned the casino now, and all of those people were now
working for me. Billy Wilkins also played with us, and in
short order I also owned the Reptile Ranch.
Before the evening was over, I owned a race-track, a beach
hotel, and a theatre in a place named New York.
254
The Weirdest World
I had, in sufficient extent for my purpose, established
control over my environment ...
1)
LATER. Now started the golden days. I increased my control
and did what I could for
my friends.
I got a good doctor for my old friend and roommate, Pete
the python, and he was now receiving treatment for his
indigestion. I got a jazzy sports car for my friend Eustace
imported from somewhere called Italy. And I buried Marga-
ret in mink, for she had a fix on the fur of that mysterious
animal. She enjoyed draping it about her in the form of coats,
capes, cloaks, mantles, and stoles, though the weather didn't
,
really require it.
I had now won several banks, a railroad, an airline, and a
casino in somewhere named Havana.
“You are somebody now," said Margaret. “You really
ought to dress better. Or are you dressed? I never know. I
don't know if part of that is clothes or if all of it is you. But at
least I've learned which is your head. I think we should be
married in May. It's so common to be married in June. Just
imagine me being Mrs. George Albert Leroy Ellery McIntosh!
You know, we have become quite an item. And do you know
there are three biographies of you out, Burgeoning Blob; The
Blob from Way Out; The Hidden Hand Behind the Blob, What
Does It Portend? And the Governor has invited us to dine
tomorrow. I do wish you would learn to eat. If
you weren't so
nice, you'd be creepy. I always say there's nothing wrong
with marrying a man, or a blob, with money. It shows
255
Secret Places
foresight on the part of a girl. You know you will have to get
a blood test? You had better get it tomorrow. You do have
blood, don't you?"
I did, but not, of course, of the color and viscosity of hers.
But I could give it that color and viscosity temporarily. And it
would react negative in all the tests.
She mused, “They are all jealous of me. They say they
wouldn't marry a blob. They mean they couldn't. Do you have
to carry that tin ball with you all the time?"
“Yes. It is my communication sphere. In it I record my
thoughts. I would be lost without it."
“Oh, like a diary. How quaint.”
Yes, those were the golden days. The grubs now appeared
to me in a new light, for was not Margaret also a grub? Yet
she seemed not so unfinished as the rest. Though lacking a
natural outer covering, yet she had not the appearance of
crawling out from under a rock. She was quite an attractive
"girl.” And she cared for me.
What more could I wish? I was affluent. I was respected. I
was in control of my environment. And I could aid my friends
of whom I had now acquired an astonishing number.
Moreover my old space-ineptitude sickness had left me. I
never felt better in my life. Ah, golden days, one after the
other like a pleasant dream. And soon I am to be married.
IV
a
There has been a sudden change. As on the Planet Hecube,
where full summer turns into the dead of winter in minutes,
256
The Weirdest World
to the destruction of many travelers, so was it here. My world
is threatened!
It is tottering, all that I have built up. I will fight. I will
fight. I will have the best lawyers on the planet. I am not
done. But I am threatened ..
Later. This may be the end. The appeal court has given its
decision. A blob may not own property in Florida. A blob is
not a person.
Of course I am not a person. I never pretended to be. But I
am a personage. I will yet fight this thing
Later. I have lost everything. The last appeal is gone. By
definition I am an animal of indeterminate origin, and my
property is being completely stripped from me.
I made an eloquent appeal—and it moved them greatly.
—
There were tears in their eyes. But there was greed in the set
of their mouths. They have a vested interest in stripping me.
Each will seize a little.
And I am left a pauper, a vassal, an animal, a slave. This is
always the last doom of the marooned, to be a despised alien
at the mercy of a strange world.
Yet it should not be hopeless. I will have Margaret. Since
my contract with Billy Wilkins and Blackjack Bracken, long
since bought up, is no longer in effect, Margaret should be
able to handle my affairs as a person. I believe that I have
great earning powers yet, and I can win as much as I wish by
gambling. We will treat this as only a technicality. We shall
acquire new fortune. I will re-establish control over my
environment. I will bring back the golden days. A few of my
old friends are still loyal to me, Margaret, Pete the python,
Eustace
a
257
Secret Places
Later. The world has caved in completely. Margaret has
thrown me over.
“I'm sorry, blobby,” she said, “but it just won't work.
You're still nice, but without money you are only a blob. How
would I marry a blob?”
“But we can earn more money. I am talented."
“No, you're box-office poison now. You were a fad, and fads
die quickly."
“But Margaret, I can win as much as I wish by gambling."
“Not a chance, blobby. Nobody will gamble with you any
more. You're through, blob. I will miss you, though. There
will be a new blue note in my ballads when I sing for my
supper, after the mink coats are all gone. Bye now."
“Margaret, do not leave me. What of all our golden days
together?"
But all she said was "bye now.”
And she was gone forever.
I AM desolate and my old space-ineptitude sickness has
returned. My recovery was an illusion. I am so ill with
awkwardness that I can no longer fly. I must crawl on the
ground like one of the giant grubs. A curse on this planet
Florida, and all its sister orbs! What a miserable world this is!
How could I have been taken in by a young Gamma type of
the walking grub? Let her crawl back under her ancestral
rocks with all the rest of her kind ... No, no, I do not mean
that. To me she will always remain a dream, a broken dream.
258
The Weirdest World
I am no longer welcome at the casino. They kicked me
down the front steps.
I no longer have a home at the Reptile Ranch.
“Mr. George Albert,” said Eustace, “I just can't afford to be
seen with you any more. I have my position to consider, with
a sport car and all that.”
And Pete the python was curt.
"Well, big shot, I guess you aren't so big after all. And you
were sure no friend of mine. When you had that doctor cure
me of my indigestion, you left me with nothing but my bad
conscience. I wish I could get my indigestion back.”
“A curse on this world,” I said.
"World, world, water, water, glug, glug," said the turtles in
their tanks, my only friends.
So I have gone back into the woods to die. I have located
my ejection mortar, and when I know that death is finally on
me, I will fire off my communication sphere and hope it will
reach the Galactic drift. Whoever finds it-friend, space
traveler, you who were too impatient to remain on your own
world—be you warned of this one! Here ingratitude is the
rule and cruelty the main sport. The unfinished grubs have
come out from under their rocks and they walk this world
upside down with their heads in the air. Their friendship is
fleeting, their promises are like the wind.
I am near my end.
259
Mean Men
The Ultimate Creature
I
THE
a
HE old Galaxy maps (imitating early Earth maps, partly in
humor and partly through intuition) pictured strong creatures in
the far arms of the system—Serpents bigger than Spaceships,
Ganymede-type Tigers, fish-tailed Maids, grand Dolphins, and
Island-sized Androids. We think particularly of the wry master-
pieces of Grobin. And at the end of the Far or Seventh arm of the
Galaxy is shown the Ultimate Creature.
The Ultimate Creature had the form of a Woman, and it bore
three signs in Chaldee: The Sign of Treasure; the Sign of
the Fish Mashur (the queerest fish of them all); and the Sign of
Restitution or of Floating Justice.
Floating Justice is the ethical equivalent of the Isostasis of the
Geologists. It states in principle that every unbalance will be
brought into new balance, sometimes gently, sometimes as by
planet-quake; that the most submerged may be elevated, by a
great sundering of strata, to the highest point, if such is required
for compensation. And there is a final tenet of this Floating
Justice, that some day, somewhere, the meanest man of all the
worlds will possess the ultimate treasure of the worlds. Without
.
this promise, the worlds would be out of balance forever.
263
Mean Men
THE MEANEST man of all the worlds was Peter Feeney-a
low-down sniveler, a weak man. In one thing only he was
exceptional—he had the finest eye for beauty in a woman of any
man anywhere: this, though of all men he was the least successful
with women. His purity of appraisal was not dulled by close
contact or possession. His judgments of beauty were sound and
uncompromised, though sometimes bitter.
And really, how many beautiful women are there in the
Universe?
Six,
Only six? Are you sure? All that noise has been about only six of
them?
PETER FEENEY was sure. His rapid eyes—the only rapid things
about him—had scanned millions of women in his random travels.
And only six of the women could be called beautiful.
There was the lady on Mellionella, seen only once in a crowd,
followed and lost, and never seen again in a year's search.
There was the girl in a small town on East Continent of Hokey
Planet. About this girl there was something that caused agony to
Peter: he had heard her speak; she spoke like a girl in a small town
on East Continent of Hokey Planet. He prayed that she might be
struck dumb; knowing that it was an evil prayer, knowing that she
was one of the really beautiful ones, whatever the sound of her.
There was the girl of shallow virtue on Leucite. She was perfect.
What else can you say after that?
There was the mother of six on Camiroi—no longer young, of
264
The Ultimate Creature
no particular repose or station or ease, hurried, impatient, and
quite likely the most beautiful woman who ever lived.
On Trader Planet there was a young Jewess of bewildering
kindness and frankness and of inextricably entangled life.
In San Juan, on old Earth, there was a fine creature who
combined the three main ethnic strains of old mankind. Peter
made a second journey there to see her; after first vision and
departure he had not been able to believe what he had seen.
Six in all the worlds? Somehow there should have been more
beautiful women than that.
Then Peter saw Teresa.
And she made the seventh?
No. She made the first. The six faded. There was only one. The
most beautiful woman ever, in the farthest arm of the Galaxy—the
Ultimate Creature.
II
This was on Groll's Planet. To get there, said the agent in
Electrum, you go to the end of the Galaxy, and turn left. It was a
shabby little world in the boondocks that are beyond the
boondocks, and only shabby people came there.
Peter Feeney was a salesman of a Universe-wide product. He
wasn't a good salesman. He was shuffled off to poorer and
poorer
territories. Now he had fallen to the poorest territory of all.
And on that day on Groll's Planet, he heard a sound as though a
swish of silk had passed over him, a thread, a mesh. It was the
invisible net.
“Oh how strange are the Fish of Far Ocean!” an ancient poet
exclaimed.
а
265
Mean Men
a
Peter had seen Teresa, and it was all over with him.
Peter was eating that day by peculiar arrangement. It was the
smallest of the towns of Groll's Planet and there was no public
eating place there. But a Grollian man raked clean sand and set a
mat for Peter to sit on, and served him a meal there on a crate or
box. The man also gave him coffee—good coffee, but not like the
-
coffee
you
know.
It was very like a sidewalk-café. It was in the
way
where people
came and went, though not properly a sidewalk. Teresa came and
sat down opposite Peter on the raked sand.
“Hari bagus," Peter said, which is all the words that a man
needs to get along in the Grollian language.
“Bagus," said Teresa. And that is all that they said to each other
a
that day.
Peter finished his meal and attempted to light a cigar. The
cigars of that world are not factory made. They are rolled by hand
of an oblong leaf for the filler and a triangular leaf for the
wrapper. Often they will keep their form for an hour or more, but
Peter had made his cigar badly and it was not stable.
Now it exploded into an unmanageable disarray of leaves and
pieces, and Peter was unable to cope with it. Teresa took the
pieces and rolled and folded them into a green cylinder that was
sheer art. She licked it with the most beautiful tongue in the world
and
gave the reconstituted cigar to Peter.
Then it was luxurious to sit there in the green shade and smoke
opposite the most beautiful woman ever. When he had finished,
Peter rose awkwardly and left. But he was pleased.
He watched from a distance. Teresa with quick competence ate
up all that he had left. “She was very hungry," Peter said, and
admired her quickness about things. She rose with flowing grace,
retrieved the smoldering remnants of Peter's cigar, and went
266
The Ultimate Creature
toward the beach, trailing smoke from the green-leaf stogie and
moving like a queen.
THE next day Peter again sat on the mat on the raked sand and
ate the food that the Grollian man sold him. Once more he felt the
swish of the invisible net over him, and again Teresa sat opposite
him on the sand.
“A senhora tem grande beleze," said Peter, which is all the
words that a man needs to get along in the Galactic Brazilian
language.
“Noa em nossos dias,” said Teresa, “porem outrora.” And that
is all that they said to each other that day.
But he had told her that she was beautiful. And she had
answered: No, she was not so now, but in a former time she had
been.
>
WHEN he had finished the meal and pulled the cigar from his
pocket he was pleased when it exploded into its constituent parts.
Teresa rescued it, reassembled it, and licked it. Her tongue had a
tripart curve in it, more extensible, more Aexible, more beautiful
than other tongues. Then Peter rose and left as he had the day
before. And again Teresa cleaned up
the remnantsravenously
and beautifully. He watched her till she finally went toward the
beach haloed in blue smoke from the stub of the cigar.
Peter wrote up an order that day. It was not a good order, not
267
Mean Men
sufficient to pay expenses, but something. Grolls Planet had
acquired a glow for him, just as if it was a good order he had
written up
>
ON the third day, Peter again sat on the mat that was very like a
sidewalk-café, and Teresa was opposite him. Peter told the
Grollian man that he should also bring food for the woman. He
brought it, but angrily.
“You are the most beautiful woman I have ever seen,” said
Peter, which is all the words that a man needs to get along in the
English language.
“I have told you that I am not now beautiful, but that once I
was,” Teresa told him. “Through the grace of God, I may again
regain my lost beauty.”
“How is it that
you
know English?”
“I was the school-teach."
“And now?”
“Now it goes bad for our world. There is no longer schools. I am
nothing."
“What are you, girl? Old human? Groll's Troll? That isn't
possible. What?”
“Who can say? A book-man has said that the biology of our
planet goes from the odd to the incredible. Was that not nice thing
to say about us? My father was old human, a traveling man, a
bum.”
“And your mother?”
?
“A queer fish, mama. Of this world, though.”
A
"
268
The Ultimate Creature
>
>
you not fish?"
>
“And you were once even more beautiful than you are now,
Teresa? How could
you
have looked?”
“How I looked then? As in English–Wow!—a colloquialism.”
“To me you are perfect.”
“No. I am a poor wasted bird now. But once I was beautiful.”
“There must be some livelihood for
you. What did your father
do?”
“Outside of bum, he was fisherman.”
“Then why do
“In my own way, I fish.”
Peter heard again the swish of the invisible net, but he was very
willing to be taken by it. After this, things went famously between
them.
But two days later there came a shame to Peter. He and Teresa
were sitting and eating together on the mat, and the Grollian man
came out.
“Are you near finished?” he asked Peter.
“Yes, I am near finished. Why do
”
“Are
you
finished with the fork yet?”
“No, not quite finished with it.”
“I must have the fork,” the Grollian man said. “There is another
human man here, of the better sort. I must have the fork for him
to eat with.”
"Have
you
but one?”
“Am I a millionaire that I should have a multiplicity of forks in
my house? He is a man with an important look, and I will not have
him wait."
“This is humiliating," said Peter.
“I don't know what that is. I want my
fork.”
Peter
gave
the fork back to the Grollian man, and that man took
you ask??"
>
269
Mean Men
>
it in and set it before the human man of the better sort as a sign of
the modernity of his house.
"Were I not the meanest and weakest of men, he would not
have abused me so," Peter said.
“Do you not feel it at all,” Teresa said. “Somebody has to be the
meanest and the weakest. The worlds are full of humiliating
things. This brings us close together.”
This would have to be the final day for Peter Feeney on Groll's
Planet. He had already garnered all the insufficient orders possible
for his product. He walked with Teresa and said the difficult
things.
“When
you have caught one, Teresa, you must do something
with it. Even turn it loose if you do not mean to keep it.”
“Do you want I should turn you loose, Peter?”
“No. I want you to go with me on the ship when it goes
tonight."
“There is only one way I will go.”
“I have never thought of any
other way.”
“You will never have cause to be ashamed of me, Peter. I can
dress, where I have the means for it. I can play the lady, I
understand how it is done. I have even learned to walk in shoes.
Were we in some more lucky place, it might be that I would
regain my beauty. It is the grinding hard times that took it from
me. I could change your luck. I have the languages, and the sense
of things, and I am much more intelligent than you are. With me,
I
you could attain a degree of success in even your miserable trade.
It can be a good life we make.”
There is a sound when the invisible net is cast over one. There is
another sound when it is pulled in—the faint clicking of the floats,
the tugging whisper of the weights, the squeaking of the lines
when pulled taut. Teresa was a fisherman's daughter, and she
>
>
a
270
knew how to do it. The Peter-fish was not a large nor a fat one, but she knew that he was the best she could take in these waters.
THEY were married. They left in the ship for a happier place, a
better planet in a more amenable location where Teresa might
regain her lost beauty.
Floating Justice was achieved. All inequities were compensated. The meanest and weakest man in the universe now possessed the
Ultimate Treasure of the universe.
Naturally they were happy. And naturally their happiness endured.
"There wasn't a catch to it?" you ask out of a crooked face. "There is always a catch to it. It always goes sour at the end." No. There was not a catch to it. It was perfect, and forever. It is
only in perverted fables that things go wrong at the end.
and were no longer mean and inconsequential. Only one man can
be married to the most beautiful woman in the universe, and it
They grew in understanding of each other, received the glad news of coming progeny, waxed (by former standards) in wealth,
passes all understanding that that one man should be Peter Feeney.
"former beauty" and now weighed well over two hundred pounds.
Peter liked that part of it.
This was perfection. It wasn't just that Teresa had regained her
But is it possible for perfection to become too perfect?
The Ultimate Creature
271
Mean Men
III
For this was perfection. They lived on a kindred but larger and
better world, one of richer resources and even more varied
biology. They had a love so many-sided and deep that there is no
accounting for it, and children so rare and different!
Floating Justice had been achieved. The least man in all the
worlds did possess the Ultimate Creature. The balance was
consummated. But Floating Justice had a grin on his face; there is
something a little fishy about anything, even justice, that floats.
You understand that there wasn't really a catch to this, nor any
deficiency. It was rather a richness almost beyond handling. It was
still better for Peter Feeney than for anyone else anywhere. That
must be understood.
BUT, for all that, there was a small adjustment after the great
compensation; a proportion must be re-established in all things,
even happiness. It was the joke that the old Interior Ocean always
cast
up, and it must be taken in the salty humor that is intended.
Children so rare and so different—and so many of them! No
couple was ever so blessed as were Peter and Teresa with a rich
variety of children. Some of them were playing and leaping in the
hills and rocks behind Peter, and some of them were sporting in
the Ocean before him.
Peter whistled some of these sea children up now as he
pondered things in the marina. Some of them broke water,
splashed, and waved to him. So many of the kids there were, and
such good ones!
272
The Ultimate Creature
>
“Whistle about four of them to come in for dinner!” Teresa
called, and Peter did so. It had been an odd business about the
children, not unpleasant certainly, but not what he had expected
either. And even yet, every possibility was still open to them.
“I'd like to have a people-kid sometime,” Teresa said. “After all,
mama had me. A people kid have fun playing with the fish kids,
and they like him, too. And he could climb in the rocks with the
Groll's Trolls. He would sort of knit our family together. You
think about it, Peter, and I think about it too, and we see what we
come up with at the next milting time.”
PETER FEENEY gazed out at his children in the pools of the sea,
and at his other sort of children climbing in the rocks, and he felt
an uneasy pride in them all. One comes quickly to love Fish Kids
and Grolls Trolls when they are the product of one's own loins.
There was ever hope, there would ever be hope to the last, of
children of Peter's own kind. But he loved his present progeny not
the less for it. The four kids that he had whistled in came now,
“Oh, four such pretty kids of ours!" Teresa said. “Fry them,
Peter,”
And Peter took the pretty fish kids that came from the water
and began to fix them for the pan.
.
This had taken the longest to get used to. But when you have so
many of them—more than ten thousand, and more coming all the
time—and when they are so good; and when, moreover, they are
already Aesh of
Peter Feeney fixed the fish kids for the pan. And out of his
fullness and mingled emotions, salt tears rolled down his shining
face to the salt sea.
your flesh.
273
Anteros worked that day with a soft sullenness, and Magdalen brooded with a sort of lightning about her. “Beads, glass beads!” Terrence Burdock exploded angrily. “All right! Who is the hoaxer in our midst? I will not tolerate this at all.” Terrence had been angry of face all day. He was clawed deeply, as Steinleser had been the day before, and he was sour on the world. “There have been glass-bead caches before, Terrence, hundreds of them,” Robert Derby said softly. “There have been hoaxers before, hundreds of them,” Terrence howled. “These have ‘Hong Kong Contemporary’ written all over them, damn cheap glass beads sold by the pound. They have no business in a stratum of around the year seven hundred. All right, who is guilty?” “I don’t believe that any one of us is guilty, Terrence,” Ethyl put in mildly. “They are found four feet in from the slant surface of the mound. Why, we’ve cut through three hundred years of vegetable loam to get to them, and certainly the surface was eroded beyond that.” “We are scientists,” said Steinleser. “We find these. Others have found such. Let us consider the improbabilities of it.” It was noon, so they ate and rested and considered the improbabilities. Anteros had brought them a great joint of white pork, and they made sandwiches and drank beer and ate pickles. “You know,” said Robert Derby, “that beyond the rank impossibility of glass beads found so many times where they could not be found, there is a real mystery about all early Indian beads, whether of bone, stone, or antler. There are millions and millions of these fine beads with pierced holes finer than any piercer ever found. There are residues, there are centers of every other Indian industry, and there is evolution of every other tool. Why have there been these millions of pierced beads, and never one piercer? There was no technique to make so fine a piercer. How were they done?” Magdalen giggled. “Bead-spitter,” she said. “Bead-spitter! You’re out of your fuzzy mind,” Terrence erupted. “That’s the silliest and least sophisticated of all Indian legends.” “But it is the legend,” said Robert Derby, “the legend of more than thirty separate tribes. The Carib Indians of Cuba said that they got their beads from Bead-spitters. The Indians of Panama told Balboa the same thing. The Indians of the pueblos told the same story to Coronado. Every Indian
community had an Indian who was its Bead-spitter. There are Creek and Alabama and Koasati stories of Bead-spitter; see Swanton’s collections. And his stories were taken down within living memory. “More than that, when European trade-beads were first introduced, there is one account of an Indian receiving some and saying, ‘I will take some to Bead-spitter. If he sees them, he can spit them too.’ And that Bead-spitter did then spit them by the bushel. There was never any other Indian account of the origin of their beads. All were spit by a Bead-spitter.” “Really, this is very unreal,” Ethyl said. Really it was. “Hog hokey! A Bead-spitter of around the year seven hundred could not spit future beads, he could not spit cheap Hong Kong glass beads of the present time!” Terrence was very angry. “Pardon me, yes sir, he could,” said Anteros. “A Bead-spitter can spit future beads, if he faces north when he spits. That has always been known.” Terrence was angry, he fumed and poisoned the day for them, and the claw marks on his face stood out livid purple. He was angrier yet when he said that the curious dark capping rock on top of the chimney was dangerous, that it would fall and kill someone; and Anteros said that there was no such capping rock on the chimney, that Terrence’s eyes were deceiving him, that Terrence should go sit in the shade and rest. And Terrence became excessively angry when he discovered that Magdalen was trying to hide something that she had discovered in the fluted core of the chimney. It was a large and heavy shale-stone, too heavy even for Magdalen’s puzzling strength. She had dragged it out of the chimney flute, tumbled it down to the bottom, and was trying to cover it with rocks and scarp. “Robert, mark the extraction point!” Terrence called loudly. “It’s quite plain yet. Magdalen, stop that! Whatever it is, it must be examined now.” “Oh, it’s just more of the damned same thing! I wish he’d let me alone. With his kind of money he can get plenty of girls. Besides, it’s private, Terrence. You don’t have any business reading it.” “You are hysterical, Magdalen, and you may have to leave the digging site.” “I wish I could leave. I can’t. I wish I could love. I can’t. Why isn’t it enough that I die?” “Howard, spend the afternoon on this,” Terrence ordered. “It has writing
of a sort on it. If it's what I think it is, it scares me. It's too recent to be in any
eroded chimney rock formation, Howard, and it comes from far below the
top. Read it.”
“A few hours on it and I may come up with something. I never saw
anything like it either. What did you think it was, Terrence?”
"What do you think I think it is? It's much later than the other, and that
one was impossible. I'll not be the one to confess myself crazy first.”
>
Howard Steinleser went to work on the incised stone; and two hours before
sundown they brought him another one, a gray soap-stone block from higher
up. Whatever this was covered with, it was not at all the same thing that
covered the shale-stone.
And elsewhere things went well, too well. The old fishiness was back on
it. No series of finds could be so perfect, no petrification could be so well
ordered.
“Robert,” Magdalen called down to Robert Derby just at sunset, "in the
high meadow above the shore, about four hundred yards down, just past the
old fence line,”
“—there is a badger hole, Magdalen. Now you have me doing it, seeing
invisible things at a distance. And if I take a carbine and stroll down there
quietly, the badger will stick his head out just as I get there (I being strongly
downwind of him), and I'll blam him between the eyes. He'll be a big one,
fifty pounds."
“Thirty. Bring him, Robert. You're showing a little understanding at last.”
“But, Magdalen, badger is rampant meat. It's seldom eaten."
“May not the condemned girl have what she wishes for her last meal? Go
get it, Robert.”
Robert went. The voice of the little carbine was barely heard at that
distance. Soon, Robert brought back the dead badger.
"Cook it, Ethyl,” Magdalen ordered.
“Yes, I know. And if I don't know how, Anteros will show me.” But
Anteros was gone. Robert found him on a sundown knoll with his shoulders
hunched. The old man was sobbing silently and his face seemed to be made
out of dull pumice stone. But he came back to aid Ethyl in preparing the
"
badger.
“If the first of today's stones scared you, the second should have lifted the
hair right off your head, Terrence,” Howard Steinleser said. “It does, it does.
All the stones are too recent to be in a chimney formation, but this last one is
an insult. It isn't two hundred years old, but there's a thousand years of strata
above it. What time is deposited here?”
They had eaten rampant badger meat and drunk inferior whiskey (which
Anteros, who had given it to them, didn't know was inferior), and the
muskiness was both inside them and around them. The campfire sometimes
spit angrily with small explosions, and its glare reached high when it did so.
By one such leaping glare, Terrence Burdock saw that the curious dark
capping rock was once more on top of the chimney. He thought he had seen it
there in the daytime; but it had not been there after he had sat in the shade
and rested, and it had absolutely not been there when he climbed the chimney
itself to be sure.
“Let's have the second chapter and then the third, Howard,” Ethyl said.
“It's neater that way.”
“Yes. Well, the second chapter (the first and lowest and apparently the
earliest rock we came on today) is written in a language that no one ever saw
written before; and yet it's no great trouble to read it. Even Terrence guessed
what it was and it scared him. It is Anadarko-Caddo hand-talk graven in
stone. It is what is called the Sign Language of the Plains Indians copied
down in formalized pictographs. And it has to be very recent, within the last
three hundred years. Hand-talk was fragmentary at the first coming of the
Spanish, and well developed at the first coming of the French. It was an
explosive development, as such things go, worked out within a hundred
years. This rock has to be younger than its situs, but it was absolutely found
in place.”
“Read it, Howard, read it,” Robert Derby called. Robert was feeling fine
and the rest of them were gloomy tonight.
"I own three hundred ponies,'” Steinleser read the rock out of his
memory. “I own two days' ride north and east and south, and one day's ride
west. I give you all. I blast out with a big voice like fire in tall trees, like the
explosion of crowning pine trees. I cry like closing-in wolves, like the high
voice of the lion, like the hoarse scream of torn calves. Do you not destroy
yourself again! You are the dew on crazy-weed in the morning. You are the
swift crooked wings of the nighthawk, the dainty feet of the skunk, you are
the juice of the sour squash. Why can you not take or give? I am the hump-
backed bull of the high plains, I am the river itself and the stagnant pools left
by the river, I am the raw earth and the rocks. Come to me, but do not come
so violently as to destroy yourself.'
"Ah, that was the text of the first rock of the day, the Anadarko-Caddo
hand-talk graven in stone. And final pictographs which I don't understand: a
shot-arrow sign, and a boulder beyond.”
“Continued on next rock' of course,” said Robert Derby. “Well, why
wasn't hand-talk ever written down? The signs are simple and easily stylized
and they were understood by many different tribes. It would have been
natural to write it.”
“Alphabetical writing was in the region before hand-talk was well
developed,” Terrence Burdock said. “In fact, it was the coming of the
Spanish that gave the impetus to hand-talk. It was really developed for
communication between Spanish and Indian, not between Indian and Indian.
And yet, I believe, hand-talk was written down once; it was the beginning of
the Chinese pictographs. And there also it had its beginning as
communication between differing peoples. Depend on it, if all mankind had
always been of a single language, there would never have been any written
language developed at all. Writing always began as a bridge, and there had to
be some chasm for it to bridge.”
“We have one to bridge here,” said Steinleser. “That whole chimney is full
of rotten smoke. The highest part of it should be older than the lowest part of
the mound, since the mound was built on a base eroded away from the
chimney formation. But in many ways they seem to be contemporary. We
must all be under a spell here. We've worked two days on this, parts of three
days, and the total impossibility of the situation hasn't struck us yet.
“The old Nahuatlan glyphs for Time are the Chimney glyphs. Present time
is a lower part of a chimney and fire burning at the base. Past time is black
smoke from a chimney, and future time is white smoke from a chimney.
There was a signature glyph running through our yesterday's stone which I
didn't and don't understand. It seemed to indicate something coming down
out of the chimney rather than going up it.”
“It really doesn't look much like a chimney,” Magdalen said.
“And a maiden doesn't look much like dew on crazy-weed in the morning,
Magdalen,” Robert Derby said, “but we recognize these identities.”
a
"
"
They talked a while about the impossibility of the whole business. “There are
scales on our eyes," Steinleser said. “The fluted core of the chimney is
wrong. I'm not even sure the rest of the chimney is right.”
“No, it isn't,” said Robert Derby. “We can identify most of the strata of
the chimney with known periods of the river and stream. I was above and
below today. There is one stretch where the sandstone was not eroded at all,
where it stands three hundred yards back from the shifted river and is
overlaid with a hundred years of loam and sod. There are other sections
where the stone is cut away variously. We can tell when most of the chimney
was laid down, we can find its correspondences up to a few hundred years
ago. But when were the top ten feet of it laid down? There were no
correspondences anywhere to that. The centuries represented by the strata of
the top of the chimney, people, those centuries haven't happened yet.”
“And when was the dark capping rock on top of it all formed—?”
Terrence began. "Ah, I'm out of my mind. It isn't there. I'm demented.”
“No more than the rest of us,” said Steinleser. “I saw it too, I thought,
today. And then I didn't see it again.”
“The rock-writing, it's like an old novel that I only half remember,” said
Ethyl.
"Oh, that's what it is, yes,” Magdalen murmured.
“But I don't remember what happened to the girl in it.”
“I remember what happened to her, Ethyl,” Magdalen said.
"Give us the third chapter, Howard,” Ethyl asked. “I want to see how it
comes out.”
"First you should all have whiskey for those colds," Anteros suggested
humbly.
“But none of us have colds,” Ethyl objected.
“You take your own medicinal advice, Ethyl, and I'll take mine,” Terrence
said. “I will have whiskey. My cold is not rheum but fear-chill.”
"
>
They all had whiskey. They talked a while, and some of them dozed.
“It's late, Howard,” Ethyl said after a while. “Let's have the next chapter.
Is it the last chapter? Then we'll sleep. We have honest digging to do
tomorrow.”
“Our third stone, our second stone of the day just past, is another and even
later form of writing, and it has never been seen in stone before. It is Kiowa
picture writing. The Kiowas did their out-turning spiral writing on buffalo
skins dressed almost as fine as vellum. In its more sophisticated form (and
this is a copy of that) it is quite late. The Kiowa picture writing probably did
not arrive at its excellence until influenced by white artists.”
“How late, Steinleser?” Robert Derby asked.
"Not more than a hundred and fifty years old. But I have never seen it
copied in stone before. It simply isn't stone-styled. There's a lot of things
around here lately that I haven't seen before.
"Well then, to the text, or should I say the pictography? 'You fear the
earth, you fear rough ground and rocks, you fear moister earth and rotting
flesh, you fear the flesh itself, all flesh is rotting flesh. If you love not rotting
flesh, you love not at all. You believe the bridge hanging in the sky, the
bridge hung by tendrils and woody vines that diminish as they go up and up
till they are no thicker than hairs. There is no sky-bridge, you cannot go up on
it. Did you believe that the roots of love grow upside down? They come out
of deep earth that is old flesh and brains and hearts and entrails, that is old
buffalo bowels and snakes' pizzles, that is black blood and rot and moaning
underground. This is old and worn-out and bloody Time, and the roots of
love grow out of its gore.””
“You seem to give remarkably detailed translations of the simple spiral
pictures, Steinleser, but I begin to get in the mood of it,” Terrence said.
"Ah, perhaps I cheat a little,” said Steinleser.
"You lie a lot,” Magdalen challenged.
“No I do not. There is some basis for every phrase I've used. It goes on: ‘I
own twenty-two trade rifles. I own ponies. I own Mexico silver, eight-bit
pieces. I am rich in all ways. I give all to you. I cry out with big voice like a
I
bear full of mad-weed, like a bullfrog in love, like a stallion rearing against a
puma. It is the earth that calls you. I am the earth, woolier than wolves and
rougher than rocks. I am the bog earth that sucks you in. You cannot give,
you cannot like, you cannot love, you think there is something else, you think
>
"
a
there is a sky-bridge you may loiter on without crashing down. I am bristled-
boar earth, there is no other. You will come to me in the morning. You will
come to me easy and with grace. Or you will come to me reluctant and you
be shattered in every bone and member of you. You be broken by our
encounter. You be shattered as by a lightning bolt striking up from the earth.
I am the red calf which is in the writings. I am the rotting red earth. Live in
the morning or die in the morning, but remember that love in death is better
than no love at all.””
"Oh brother! Nobody gets that stuff from such kid pictures, Steinleser,”
Robert Derby moaned.
“Ah well, that's the end of the spiral picture. And a Kiowa spiral
pictograph ends with either an in-sweep or an out-sweep line. This ends with
an out-sweep, which means—”
“Continued on next rock,' that's what it means," Terrence cried roughly.
"You won't find the next rocks," Magdalen said. “They're hidden, and
most of the time they're not there yet, but they will go on and on. But for all
that, you'll read it in the rocks tomorrow morning. I want it to be over with.
Oh, I don't know what I want!”
“I believe I know what you want tonight, Magdalen,” Robert Derby said.
But he didn't.
The talk trailed off, the fire burned down, they went to their sleeping
sacks.
Then it was long jagged night, and the morning of the fourth day. But
wait! In Nahuat-Tanoan legend, the world ends on the fourth morning. All
the lives we lived or thought we lived had been but dreams of third night. The
loin cloth that the sun wore on the fourth day's journey was not so valuable
as one has made out. It was worn for no more than an hour or so.
And, in fact, there was something terminal about fourth morning. Anteros
had disappeared. Magdalen had disappeared. The chimney rock looked
greatly diminished in its bulk (something had gone out of it) and much
crazier in its broken height. The sun had come up a garish gray-orange color
through fog. The signature-glyph of the first stone dominated the ambient. It
was as if something were coming down from the chimney, a horrifying
smoke; but it was only noisome morning fog.
No it wasn't. There was something else coming down from the chimney,
or from the hidden sky: pebbles, stones, indescribable bits of foul oozings,
the less fastidious pieces of sky; a light, nightmare rain had begun to fall
there; the chimney was apparently beginning to crumble.
"It's the damnedest thing I ever heard about,” Robert Derby growled. “Do
you think that Magdalen really went off with Anteros?” Derby was bitter and
fumatory this morning and his face was badly clawed.
“Who is Magdalen? Who is Anteros?” Ethyl Burdock risked.
Terrence Burdock was hooting from high on the mound. “All come up,” he
called. "Here is a find that will make it all worthwhile. We'll have to photo
and sketch and measure and record and witness. It's the finest basalt head
I've ever seen, man-sized, and I suspect that there's a man-sized body
attached to it. We'll soon clean it and clear it. Gah! What a weird fellow he
was!” But Howard Steinleser was studying a brightly colored something that
he held in his two hands.
“What is it, Howard? What are you doing?” Derby demanded.
“Ah, I believe this is the next stone in the sequence. The writing is
alphabetical but deformed—there is an element missing. I believe it is in
modern English, and I will solve the deformity and see it true in a minute.
The text of it seems to be”
Rocks and stones were coming down from the chimney, and fog, amnesic
and wit-stealing fog.
“Steinleser, are you all right?” Robert Derby asked with compassion.
“That isn't a stone that
you hold in your hand.”
"It isn't a stone? I thought it was. What is it then?”
“It is the fruit of the Osage orange tree, an American moraceous. It isn't a
stone, Howard.” And the thing was a tough, woody, wrinkled mock-orange,
as big as a small melon.
"You have to admit that the wrinkles look a little bit like writing, Robert."
“Yes, they look a little like writing, Howard. Let us go up where Terrence
is bawling for us. You've read too many stones. And it isn't safe here."
"Why go up, Robert? The other thing is coming down."
It was the bristled-boar earth reaching up with a rumble. It was a lightning
bolt struck upward out of the earth, and it got its prey. There was explosion
and roar. The dark capping rock was jerked from the top of the chimney and
a
slammed with terrible force to the earth, shattering with a great shock. And
something else that had been on that capping rock. And the whole chimney
collapsed about them.
She was broken by the encounter. She was shattered in every bone and
member of her. And she was dead.
"Who—Who is she?” Howard Steinleser stuttered.
“Oh God! Magdalen, of course!” Robert Derby cried.
“I remember her a little bit. Didn't understand her. She put out like an
evoking moth but she wouldn't be had. Near clawed the face off me the other
night when I misunderstood the signals. She believed there was a sky-bridge.
It's in a lot of the mythologies. But there isn't one, you know. Oh well.”
“The girl is dead! Damnation! What are you doing grubbing in those
stones?”
"Maybe she isn't dead in them yet, Robert. I'm going to read what's here
before something happens to them. This capping rock that fell and broke, it's
impossible, of course. It's a stratum that hasn't been laid down yet. I always
did want to read the future and I may never get another chance."
“You fool! The girl's dead! Does nobody care? Terrence, stop bellowing
about your find. Come down. The girl's dead."
"Come up, Robert and Howard,” Terrence insisted. “Leave that broken
stuff down there. It's worthless. But nobody ever saw anything like this.”
“Do come up, men," Ethyl sang. "Oh, it's a wonderful piece! I never saw
anything like it in my life.”
*
“Ethyl, is the whole morning mad?” Robert Derby demanded as he came up
to her. "She's dead. Don't you really remember her? Don't you remember
Magdalen?”
“I'm not sure. Is she the girl down there? Isn't she the same girl who's
been hanging around here a couple of days? She shouldn't have been playing
on that high rock. I'm sorry she's dead. But just look what we're uncovering
here!"
“Terrence. Don't you remember Magdalen?”
“The girl down there? She's a little bit like the girl that clawed the hell out
of me the other night. Next time someone goes to town they might mention to
the sheriff that there’s a dead girl here. Robert, did you ever see a face like this one? And it digs away to reveal the shoulders. I believe there’s a whole man-sized figure here. Wonderful, wonderful!” “Terrence, you’re off your head. Well, do you remember Anteros?” “Certainly, the twin of Eros, but nobody ever made much of the symbol of unsuccessful love. Thunder! That’s the name for him! It fits him perfectly. We’ll call him Anteros.” Well, it was Anteros, lifelike in basalt stone. His face was contorted. He was sobbing soundlessly and frozenly and his shoulders were hunched with emotion. The carving was fascinating in its miserable passion, his stony love unrequited. Perhaps he was more impressive now than he would be when he was cleaned. He was earth, he was earth itself. Whatever period the carving belonged to, it was outstanding in its power. “The live Anteros, Terrence. Don’t you remember our digging man, Anteros Manypenny?” “Sure. He didn’t show up for work this morning, did he? Tell him he’s fired.” “Magdalen is dead! She was one of us! Dammit, she was the main one of us!” Robert Derby cried. Terrence and Ethyl Burdock were earless to his outburst. They were busy uncovering the rest of the carving. And down below, Howard Steinleser was studying dark broken rocks before they would disappear, studying a stratum that hadn’t been laid down yet, reading a foggy future.
To ask how any story or tune or statue comes about is to ask “How is it done?”; “What does it take?” Have you heard of the Dutch boy in this country who was going to butcher school, whose schoolmates tried to mix him up? The heart, they told him, that is named the liver; the bladder is called the stomach; the tongue is the coccyx; the loin is known as the chuck; the brisket is the flank; the lungs are named the trotters; and so on. This Dutch kid was very smart, however; he figured out that they were having him, and he figured out the right names for everything, or for almost everything. And
How I Wrote “Continued on Next Rock” An Afterword by R. A. Lafferty
he passed his final examination with top grades both in meat-cutting and nomenclature. “How were you able to do it,” the instructor asked, “with so many things going against you?” “I’ve got it up there,” the Dutch kid said, and he tapped his head. “Kidneys.” It isn’t exactly that one should use kidneys for brains, but the sense of grotesque juxtaposition does come in handy. You can’t be sure you are looking at something from the right angle till you have looked at it from every angle. How did I write “Continued on Next Rock” then? Upside down and backward, of course. I started with a simple, but I believe novel, idea that had to do with time. Then I involuted the idea of time (making all things contemporary or at least repeating), and I turned the systems of values backward, trying to make the repulsive things appear poetic (“the nobility of badgers, the serenity of toads”) and trying to set anti-love up as comparable to love (the flattest thing you can imagine has to have at least two sides; it can have many more). I let the characters that had been generated by this action work out their own way then. After this, I subtracted the original simple but novel idea from the story, and finished things up. (The original idea was a catalyst which could be recovered practically unchanged at the end of the reaction.) The beginning idea, which I give to anyone who wants it, was simply to have archeologists digging upward through certain strata, for rather vague topographic reasons, come to deposits of the fairly recent past, or the very recent past, of the near future (a discarded license plate from fifteen years in the future, for instance), then the more distant future, then to realize that the strata still remaining above them had to contain the remnants of at least a hundred thousand years of unfaked future. So much for the genesis of one particular short story. Each one is different but each one is anomalous; and there is a reason for that. No normal or reasonable or balanced or well-adjusted person is going to attempt the making of a story or a tune or a statue or a poem; he’ll have no need for such abnormal activity. A person has to be somehow deficient or lacking in person or personality or he will not attempt these things. He must be very deficient or lacking if he will succeed at all in them. Every expression in art or pseudo- art is a crutch that a crippled person makes and donates to the healthy world for its use (the healthy world having only the vaguest idea that it even needs crutches).
There are, I know, many apparent glaring exceptions to the rule that only persons who are deficient or lacking in person or personality will contribute any creative content. Believe me, these exceptions are only apparent. There is something badly unbalanced in every one of them. Carry it one step further, though. One of the legends, unwritten from the beginning and maybe unwritten forever, is about a Quest for the Perfect Thing. But it is really the quest for the normal thing. Can you find, anywhere in the world, behind or before or present, even one person who is really normal and reasonable and balanced and well-adjusted? This is the Perfect Thing, if it or he or she is ever found, and if ever found there will be no further need of any art or attempted art, good or bad. Enough of such stuff, end of article, if this is an article. I am both facetious and serious in every written word here.
Reading an R. A. Lafferty story is always a bit of a trippy experience—a journey into the odder parts of experience, his perceptively askew perspective a looking glass all its own. But “Sky” is about an actual trip (or a few of them), with all the inspired psychedelia and questionable reality we expect— and desire—from a Lafferty story. The title’s Sky isn’t the airy horizon above us. No, it’s the unusual substance sold by the furry-handed “Sky-Seller” who can’t survive in sunlight (or thinks he can’t anyway) to ostensible main character Welkin Alauda. A 1972 Hugo nominee, “Sky” sits at the intersection of the absurd and the transcendental. There are deadpan assurances of fantastical dangers: “You will burn,” Welkin told him. “Nobody burns so as when sunning himself on a cloud.” There is the observational commentary of some unseen but nonetheless present narrator on both the characters and the grim world that surrounds them; of Welkin we’re told “it was said that her bones were hollow and filled with air.” The Sky-Diving friends of Welkin discuss time and the universe, existence and falls through it, in perfect rose-colored stoner parlance. We sense the end of a journey coming as we read, and we know it will be quite a crash. Welkin wanders through caverns filled with Amanita mushroom varieties, deadly and hallucinogenic, gathered by not just the Sky- Seller but moles. The results that follow this final trip linger with the reader. So enjoy this delightful trance of a tale, but, always remember, Sky has its dangers.
Introduction by Gwenda Bond
Sky
The Sky-Seller was Mr. Furtive himself, fox-muzzled, ferret-eyed, slithering along like a snake, and living under the Rocks. The Rocks had not been a grand place for a long time. It had been built in the grand style on a mephitic plot of earth (to transform it), but the mephitic earth had won out. The apartments of the Rocks had lost their sparkle as they had been divided again and again, and now they were shoddy. The Rocks had weathered. Its once pastel hues were now dull grays and browns. The five underground levels had been parking places for motor vehicles when those were still common, but now these depths were turned into warrens and hovels. The Sky-Seller lurked and lived in the lowest and smallest and meanest of them all. He came out only at night. Daylight would have killed him; he knew that. He sold out of the darkest shadows of the night. He had only a few (though oddly select) clients, and nobody knew who his supplier was. He said that he had no supplier, that he gathered and made the stuff himself. Welkin Alauda, a full-bodied but light-moving girl (it was said that her bones were hollow and filled with air), came to the Sky-Seller just before first light, just when he had become highly nervous but had not yet bolted to his underground. “A sack of Sky from the nervous mouse. Jump, or the sun will gobble your house!” Welkin sang-song, and she was already higher than most skies. “Hurry, hurry!” the Sky-Seller begged, thrusting the sack to her while his black eyes trembled and glittered (if real light should ever reflect into them he’d go blind).
Sky
»
Welkin took the sack of Sky, and scrambled money notes into his hands
which had furred palms. (Really? Yes, really.)
“World be flat and the Air be round, wherever the Sky grows
underground,” Welkin intoned, taking the sack of Sky and soaring along with
a light scamper of feet (she hadn't much weight, her bones were hollow).
And the Sky-Seller darted headfirst down a black well-shaft thing to his
depths.
Four of them went Sky-Diving that morning, Welkin herself, Karl Vlieger,
Icarus Riley, Joseph Alzarsi; and the pilot was—(no, not who you think, he
had already threatened to turn them all in; they'd use that pilot no more)—the
pilot was Ronald Kolibri in his little crop-dusting plane.
But a crop-duster will not go up to the frosty heights they liked to take off
from. Yes it will—if everybody is on Sky. But it isn't pressurized, and it
doesn't carry oxygen. That doesn't matter, not if everybody is on Sky, not if
the plane is on Sky too.
Welkin took Sky with Mountain Whizz, a carbonated drink. Karl stuffed it
into his lip like snuff. Icarus Riley rolled it and smoked it. Joseph Alzarsi
needled it, mixed with drinking alcohol, into his main vein. The pilot, Ronny,
tongued and chewed it like sugar dust. The plane named Shrike took it
through the manifold.
Fifty thousand feet—you can't go that high in a crop-duster. Thirty below
zero—ah, that isn't cold! Air too thin to breathe at all—with Sky, who needs
such included things as air?
Welkin stepped out, and went up, not down. It was a trick she often pulled.
She hadn't much weight; she could always get higher than the rest of them.
She went up and up until she disappeared. Then she drifted down again,
completely enclosed in a sphere of ice crystal, sparkling inside it and making
monkey faces at them.
The wind yelled and barked, and the divers took off. They all went down,
soaring and gliding and tumbling; standing still sometimes, it seemed; even
rising again a little. They went down to clouds and spread out on them; dark-
white clouds with the sun inside them and suffusing them both from above
and below. They cracked Welkin's ice-crystal sphere and she stepped out of
it. They ate the thin pieces of it, very cold and brittle and with a tang of
ozone. Alzarsi took off his shirt and sunned himself on a cloud.
"You will burn,” Welkin told him. “Nobody burns so as when sunning
himself on a cloud.” That was true.
They sank through the black-whiteness of these clouds and came into the
limitless blue concourse with clouds above and below them. It was in this
same concourse that Hippodameia used to race her horses, there not being
room for such coursers to run on Earth. The clouds below folded up and the
clouds above folded down, forming a discrete space.
"We have our own rotundity and sphere here," said Icarus Riley (these are
their Sky-Diver names, not their legal names), "and it is apart from all worlds
and bodies. The worlds and bodies do not exist for as long a time as we say
that they do not exist. The axis of our present space is its own concord.
Therefore, it being in perfect concord, Time stops."
All their watches had stopped, at least.
“But there is a world below,” said Karl. “It is an abject world, and we can
keep it abject forever if we wish. But it has at least a shadowy existence, and
later we will let it fill out again in our compassion for lowly things. It is flat,
though, and we must insist that it remain flat."
“This is important,” Joseph said with the deep importance of one on Sky.
“So long as our own space is bowed and globed, the world must remain flat
or depressed. But the world must not be allowed to bow its back again. We
are in danger if it ever does. So long as it is truly flat and abject it cannot
crash ourselves to it.”
“How long could we fall,” Welkin asked, “if we had not stopped time, if
we let it flow at its own pace, or at ours? How long could we fall?”
“Hephaestus once tumbled through space all day long,” Icarus Riley said,
"and the days were longer then."
Karl Vlieger had gone wall-eyed from an interior-turned sexual passion
that he often experienced in diving. Icarus Riley seemed to be on laughing
gas suddenly; this is a sign that Sky is not having a perfect effect. Joseph
Alzarsi felt a cold wind down his spine and a series of jerky little
premonitions.
"We are not perfect,” Joseph said. “Tomorrow or the next day we may be,
for we do approach perfection. We win a round. And we win another. Let us
not throw away our victory today through carelessness. The Earth has bowed
"
his old back a little bit, and we make ready for him! Now, guys, now!"
Four of them (or maybe only three of them) pulled the rings. The chutes
unpeeled, flowered, and jerked. They had been together like a sheaf in close
conversation. But suddenly, on coming to earth, they were spread out over
five hundred yards.
They assembled. They packed their chutes. That would be all the diving
for that day.
“Welkin, how did you pack your chute so quickly?” Icarus asked her
suspiciously.
"I don't know."
“You are always the slowest one of us, and the sloppiest. Someone always
has to reroll your chute for you before it is used again. And you were the last
one to land just now. How were you the first one to be packed? How did you
roll it so well? It has the earmarks of my own rolling, just as I rolled it for
you before we took off this morning."
“I don't know, Icarus. Oh, I think I'll go up again, straight up.”
"No, you've sailed and dived enough for one morning. Welkin, did you
even open your chute?”
“I don't know.”
*
"
High on Sky, they went up again the next morning. The little plane named
Shrike flew up as no plane had ever flown before, up through Storm. The
storm-shrouded Earth shrank to the size of a pea-doogie.
“We will play a trick on it,” said Welkin. “When you're on Sky you can
play a trick on anything and make it abide by it. I will say that the pea-doogie
that was the world is nothing. See, it is gone. Then I will select another pea-
doogie, that one there, and I will call it the world. And that is the world that
we will come down to in a little while. I've switched worlds on the world,
and it doesn't know what happened to it.”
"It's uneasy, though,” Joseph Alzarsi spoke through flared nostrils. "You
shook it. No wonder the world has its moments of self-doubt.”
They were one million feet high. The altimeter didn't go that high, but
Ronald Kolibri, the pilot, wrote out the extended figure in chalk to make it
correct. Welkin stepped out. Karl and Icarus and Joseph stepped out. Ronald
Kolibri stepped out, but only for a while. Then he remembered that he was
the pilot and got back in the plane. They were so high that the air was black
and star-filled instead of blue. It was so cold that the empty space was full of
cracks and potholes. They dived half a million feet in no time at all. They
pulled up laughing.
It was invigorating, it was vivifying. They stamped on the clouds, and the
clouds rang like frosty ground. This was the ancestral country of all hoarfrost,
of all grained-snow and glare-ice. Here was weather-maker, here was wind-
son. They came into caves of ice mixed with moraine; they found antler
hatchets and Hemicyon bones; they found coals still glowing. The winds
bayed and hunted in packs through the chasms. These were the cold Fortean
clouds, and their location is commonly quite high.
They came down below Storm, finding new sun and new air. It was
pumpkin-summer, it was deep autumn in the sky.
They dropped again, miles and millennia, to full Sky-summer: the air so
blue that it grew a violet patina on it to save the surface. Their own space
formed about them again, as it did every day, and time stopped.
But not motion! Motion never stopped with them. Do you realize that
nothingness in a void can still be in motion? And how much more they of the
great centrality! There was Dynamic; there was sustaining vortex; there was
the high serenity of fevered motion.
But is not motion merely a relationship of space to time? No. That is an
idea that is common to people who live on worlds, but it is a subjective idea.
Here, beyond the possible influence of any worlds, there was living motion
without reference.
“Welkin, you look quite different today,” Joseph Alzarsi spoke in wonder.
“What is it?”
"I don't know. It's wonderful to be different and I'm wonderful."
“It is something missing from you,” said Icarus. “I believe it is a defect
missing.”
“But I hadn't any, Icarus."
They were in central and eternal moment, and it did not end, it could not
end, it goes on yet. Whatever else seems to happen, it is merely in
parentheses to that moment.
“It is time to consider again,” Icarus mused after a while. There is no time
or while in the Moment, but there is in the parentheses. “I hope it is the last
a
time we will ever have to consider. We, of course, are in our own space and
beyond time or tangent. But the Earth, such as it is, is approaching with great
presumption and speed."
"But it's nothing to us!” Karl Vlieger suddenly raged out in a chthonic and
phallic passion. “We can shatter it! We can shoot it to pieces like a clay
pigeon! It cannot rush onto us like a slashing dog. Get down, world! Heel,
you cur! Heel, I say!"
“We say to one world ‘rise' and it rises, and to another one ‘heel' and it
heels,” Icarus Sky-spoke in his dynamic serenity.
“Not yet,” Joseph Alzarsi warned. “Tomorrow we will be total. Today we
are not yet. Possibly we could shatter the world like a clay pigeon if we
wished, but we would not be lords of it if we had to shatter it.”
“We could always make another world,” said Welkin reasonably.
"Certainly, but this one is our testing. We will go to it when it is crouched
down. We cannot allow it to come ravening to us. Hold! Hold there, we order
you!"
And the uprushing world halted, cowed.
“We go down,” said Joseph. “We will let it come up only when it is
properly broken.”
(“And they inclined the heavens and came down.")
Once more, three of them pulled the rings. And the chutes unpeeled,
flowered, and jerked. They had been like a sheaf together in their moment;
but now, coming to earth, they were suddenly scattered out over five hundred
yards.
"Welkin, you didn't have your chute at all today!" Icarus gaped with some
awe when they had assembled again. “That is what was different about you."
“No, I guess I didn't have it. There was no reason to have it if I didn't
I
need it. Really, there was never any reason for me to have used one at all,
ever.”
“Ah, we were total today and didn't know it,” Joseph ventured.
“Tomorrow none of us will wear chutes. This is easier than I had believed.”
>
a
Welkin went to the Sky-Seller to buy new Sky that night. Not finding him in
the nearer shadows of the Rocks, she went down and down, drawn by the
fungoid odor and the echoing dampness of the underground. She went
through passages that were man-made, through passages that were natural,
through passages that were unnatural. Some of these corridors, it is true, had
once been built by men, but now they had reverted and became most
unnatural deep-earth caverns. Welkin went down into the total blackness
where there were certain small things that still mumbled out a faint white
color; but it was the wrong color white, and the things were all of a wrong
shape.
There was the dead white shape of Mycelium masses, the grotesqueness of
Agaricus, the deformity of Deadly Amanita and of Morel. The gray-milky
Lactarius glowed like light-less lanterns in the dark; there was the blue-white
of the Deceiving Clitocybe and the yellow-white of the Caesar Agaric. There
was the insane ghost-white of the deadliest and queerest of them all, the Fly
Amanita, and a mole was gathering this.
“Mole, bring Sky for the Thing Serene, for the Minions tall and the Airy
Queen,” Welkin jangled. She was still high on Sky, but it had begun to leave
her a little and she had the veriest touch of the desolate sickness.
“Sky for the Queen of the buzzing drones, with her hollow heart and her
hollow bones," the Sky-Seller intoned hollowly.
"And fresh, Oh I want it fresh, fresh Sky!” Welkin cried.
"With these creatures there is no such thing as fresh," the Sky-Seller told
her. "You want it stale, Oh so stale! Ingrown and aged and with its own mold
grown moldy."
“Which is it?” Welkin demanded. “What is the name of the one you gather
it from?”
"The Fly Amanita."
“But isn't that simply a poisonous mushroom?"
“It has passed beyond that. It has sublimated. Its simple poison has had its
second fermenting into narcotic.”
“But it sounds so cheap that it be merely narcotic.”
“Not merely narcotic. It is something very special in narcotic.”
“No, no, not narcotic at all!” Welkin protested. “It is liberating, it is world-
shattering. It is Height Absolute. It is motion and detachment itself. It is the
ultimate. It is mastery."
"Why, then it is mastery, lady. It is the highest and lowest of all created
things.”
“No, no,” Welkin protested again, “not created. It is not born, it is not
made. I couldn't stand that. It is the highest of all uncreated things.”
“Take it, take it,” the Sky-Seller growled, “and be gone. Something begins
to curl up inside me.”
“I go!” Welkin said, “And I will be back many times for more.”
“No, you will not be. Nobody ever comes back many times for Sky. You
will be back never. Or one time. I think that you will be back one time.”
"
They went up again the next morning, the last morning. But why should we
say that it was the last morning? Because there would no longer be divisions
or days for them. It would be one last eternal day for them now, and nothing
could break it.
They went up in the plane that had once been named Shrike and was now
named Eternal Eagle. The plane had repainted itself during the night with
new name and new symbols, some of them not immediately understandable.
The plane snuffled Sky into its manifolds, and grinned and roared. And the
plane went up!
Oh! Jerusalem in the Sky! How it went up!
They were all certainly perfect now and would never need Sky again. They
were Sky.
“How little the world is!” Welkin rang out. “The towns are like fly-specks
and the cities are like flies.”
“It is wrong that so ignoble a creature as the Fly should have the exalted
name," Icarus complained.
"I'll fix that,” Welkin sang. “I give edict: that all the flies on Earth be
dead!” And all the flies on Earth died in that instant.
“I wasn't sure you could do that,” said Joseph Alzarsi. “The wrong is
righted. Now we ourselves assume the noble name of Flies. There are no
"
Flies but us!"
The five of them, including the pilot, Ronald Kolibri, stepped chuteless out of
the Eternal Eagle. “Will you be all right?” Ronald asked the rollicking plane.
"Certainly,” the plane said. “I believe I know where there are other Eternal
Eagles. I will mate."
It was cloudless, or else they had developed the facility of seeing through
clouds. Or perhaps it was that, the Earth having become as small as a marble,
the clouds around it were insignificant.
Pure light that had an everywhere source! (The sun also had become
insignificant and didn't contribute much to the light.) Pure and intense
motion that had no location reference. They weren't going anywhere with
their intense motion (they already were everywhere, or at the supercharged
center of everything).
Pure cold fever. Pure serenity. Impure hyper-space passion of Karl
Vlieger, and then of all of them; but it was purely rampant at least. Stunning
beauty in all things along with a towering cragginess that was just ugly
enough to create an ecstasy.
Welkin Alauda was mythic with nenuphars in her hair. And it shall not be
told what Joseph Alzarsi wore in his own hair. An always-instant, a million
or a billion years!
Not monotony, no! Presentation! Living sets! Scenery! The scenes were
formed for the splinter of a moment; or they were formed forever. Whole
worlds formed in a pregnant void: not spherical worlds merely, but dodeka-
spherical, and those much more intricate than that. Not merely seven colors
to play with, but seven to the seventh and to the seventh again.
Stars vivid in the bright light. You who have seen stars only in darkness be
silent! Asteroids that they ate like peanuts, for now they were all
metamorphic giants. Galaxies like herds of rampaging elephants. Bridges so
long that both ends of them receded over the light-speed edges. Waterfalls, of
a finer water, that bounced off galaxy clusters as if they were boulders.
Through a certain ineptitude of handling, Welkin extinguished the old sun
with one such leaping torrent.
“It does not matter," Icarus told her. “Either a million or a billion years
had passed according to the timescale of the bodies, and surely the sun had
already come onto dim days. You can always make other suns.”
Karl Vlieger was casting lightning bolts millions of parsecs long and
making looping contact with clustered galaxies with them.
“Are you sure that we are not using up any time?” Welkin asked them
with some apprehension.
“Oh, time still uses itself up, but we are safely out of the reach of it all,”
Joseph explained. “Time is only one very inefficient method of counting
numbers. It is inefficient because it is limited in its numbers, and because the
counter by such a system must die when he has come to the end of his series.
That alone should weigh against it as a mathematical system; it really
shouldn't be taught."
“Then nothing can hurt us ever?" Welkin wanted to be reassured.
“No, nothing can come at us except inside time and we are outside it.
Nothing can collide with us except in space and we disdain space. Stop it,
Karl! As you do it that's buggery.”
“I have a worm in my own tract and it gnaws at me a little,” the pilot
Ronald Kolibri said. "It's in my internal space and it's crunching along at a
pretty good rate."
"No, no, that's impossible. Nothing can reach or hurt us," Joseph insisted.
“I have a worm of my own in a still more interior tract,” said Icarus, "the
tract that they never quite located in the head or the heart or the bowels.
Maybe this tract always was outside space. Oh, my worm doesn't gnaw, but
it stirs. Maybe I'm tired of being out of reach of everything."
“Where do these doubts rise from?” Joseph sounded querulous. “You
hadn't them an instant ago, you hadn't them as recently as ten million years
ago. How can you have them now when there isn't any now?”
“Well, as to that—" Icarus began—and a million years went by)—“as to
that I have a sort of cosmic curiosity about an object in my own past—"-
(another million years went by)—"an object called world.”
"Well, satisfy your curiosity then,” Karl Vlieger snapped. “Don't you even
know how to make a world?”
“Certainly I know how, but will it be the same?”
“Yes, if you're good enough. It will be the same if you make it the same."
Icarus Riley made a world. He wasn't very good at it and it wasn't quite
the same, but it did resemble the old world a little.
>
a
“I want to see if some things are still there,” Welkin clamored. “Bring it
closer.”
“It's unlikely your things are still there,” Joseph said, “Remember that
billions of years may have passed."
“The things will be there if I put them there,” Icarus insisted.
“And you cannot bring it closer since all distance is now infinite,” Karl
maintained.
“At least I can focus it better,” Icarus insisted, and he did. The world
appeared quite near.
"It remembers us like a puppy would,” Welkin said. “See, it jumps up at
us.
"It's more like a lion leaping for a treed hunter just out of reach,” Icarus
grudged. “But we are not treed.”
“It can't ever reach us, and it wants to,” Welkin piqued. “Let's reach down
to it.”
("And they inclined the heavens and went down.")
A most peculiar thing happened to Ronald Kolibri as he touched Earth. He
seemed to have a seizure. He went slack-faced, almost horror-faced, and he
would not answer the others.
"What is it, Ronald?” Welkin begged in kindred anguish. “Oh, what is it?
Somebody help him!”
Then Ronald Kolibri did an even more peculiar thing. He began to fold up
and break up from the bottom. Bones slowly splintered and pierced out of
him and his entrails gushed out. He compressed. He shattered. He splashed.
Can a man splash?
The same sort of seizure overtook Karl Vlieger: the identical slack-face
horror-face, the same folding up and breaking up from the bottom, the same
hideous sequence.
And Joseph Alzarsi went into the same sundering state, baffled and
breaking up.
"Icarus, what's happened to them?” Welkin screamed. “What is the slow
loud booming?”
“They're dead. How could that be?” Icarus puzzled trembling. “Death is in
time, and we are not.”
Icarus himself passed through time as he crashed earth, breaking up,
spilling out more odiously than any of them.
And Welkin touched earth, crashed, then what? She heard her own slow
loud booming as she hit.
(Another million years went by, or some weeks.)
A shaky old woman on crutches was going down the middle-of-the-night
passages that are under the Rocks. She was too old a woman to be Welkin
Alauda, but not too old for a Welkin who had lived millions of years outside
of time.
She had not died. She was lighter than the others, and besides she had
done it twice before unscathed. But that was before she had known fear.
Naturally they had told her that she would never walk again; and now
most unnaturally she was walking with crutches. Drawn by the fungoid odor
and the echoing dampness she went down in the total dark to where small
things were growing with the wrong color white and were all of the wrong
shape. She wanted one thing only, and she would die without it.
“Sky for salving the broken Crone! Sky for the weal of my hollow bone!”
she crackled in an old-woman voice. But it was only her own voice that
echoed back to her.
Should a Sky-Seller live forever?
Cliffs That Laughed
Introduction by Gregory Feeley
“Cliffs That Laughed” appeared in the March 1969 issue of Magazine of
Horror, surely one of Lafferty's less likely markets (it was edited by Robert
A. W. Lowndes, who had published some of Lafferty's earliest stories and
who doubtless knew enough to ask for more). It was reprinted in Lafferty's
second collection, 1972's Strange Doings, but has scarcely been seen since. It
certainly cannot be called a horror story, although what Freud called “the
horror of incest” definitely plays a role. But what kind of story is it?
It's a tale told in a bar, at least in part—but interleaved with another tale,
told decades earlier to the same narrator, by a Malay storyteller he met while
stationed in Indonesia, who gained new inspiration when he gained access to
American comic books. The storyteller's tale, which begins with “flute notes
ascending" and ends with “flute notes descending," offers a pleasing sense of
unity, but the other story, about three soldiers who disappeared on an
Indonesian island in 1945, “keeps interposing itself” upon it. In the end,
however, the two tales complete each other, forming a deeply bizarre saga
that the narrator (his protestations notwithstanding) weaves into a third tale,
the one we read.
The tale's elements will be familiar for Lafferty fans: a bloodthirsty but
colorful pirate; a willful young woman intent on withholding sexual favors; a
fell scheme foiled by a clever trick. Neither will these readers be surprised by
the rather idealized portrait of pirates, nor with what Andrew Ferguson calls
Lafferty's "lurid depictions of death and dismemberment.” What does startle
us is that the trick turns on the incest taboo, something Lafferty never
otherwise wrote about. The brutal but poetic Willy Jones finally wins over
Margaret, daughter of a man he murdered, and succeeds in consummating his
love, but when he disregards her warning not to resume pirating, she exacts a
grotesque vengeance upon his return to their sinister island, which forever
frustrates his desire to "board” his wife lest he unwittingly commit the
abomination of incest. Since her trick requires both Margaret and her nubile
-indeed indistinguishable daughter (born and bred during Willy's twenty-
year absence) to be at once dead and alive, the grotesque family romance
seethes with the Freudian unheimlich or uncanny, and leads in time to father,
mother, and daughter banding perversely together to attract other men to the
island and then slaughter them as they “frolicked" with the two beautiful
women.
This tangle of rage and baffled lust—the impulse to incest deflected into
murderous resolve-gets its sequel in the tale told in the bar, by an American
soldier who alone escaped from Willy Jones Island in 1945 and now, after
twenty years' journeying home, wishes for nothing but to go back again. A
Malay folk tale updated by Wonder Woman (complete with numerous
elements common to incest myths, such as identical mother and daughter and
a questing figure who was declared dead yet is still alive) turns into the
evocation of a composite Belle Dame Sans Merci, who leaves the men she
encounters wracked by sexual enthrallment and desolation. It is a strange
short story even for Lafferty, and this is without mentioning the “golems”
(who are clearly something else) or the uncanny intermediate condition that
haunts the text, such as the “middle state” between life and death (which
mother and daughter now inhabit) or the "middle land” that the soldier
traverses beneath the earth.
And what does the title signify? There are no cliffs in the story. The
soldier now returning to his death remembers the two women as being “like
volcanoes" and declares that "we climbed them like mountains. Man, the
uplift on them! The shoulders were cliffs that laughed. The swaying—”
It's an odd image (it does not sound like shoulders that he is praising) and
recalls a short story Lafferty published a year later, “The Cliff Climbers," in
which the eponymous cliff—which the narrator tells us at the outset is
actually “a spire”—clearly (like the “up-thrust” or “rock chimney” in
"Continued on Next Rock,” also published in 1970) stands as a synecdoche,
too blatant for readers to overlook, for a centuries-long male desire, one that
(as in “Continued on Next Rock”) proves destructive to both pursuer and
a
pursued.
Lafferty's use of “cliff” as an image of displaced sexuality remains finally
mysterious, as do his reasons for offering a different version of the three
soldiers' disappearance in his 1971 novel The Devil is Dead. “There is only
one story in the world,” the storyteller reminds us, and the version proffered
in “Cliffs That Laughed” gives us myth, humor, and virtuosity. For utter
clarity, you need look to another writer.
Cliffs That Laughed
Between ten and ten-thirty of the morning of October 1, 1945, on an island
that is sometimes called Pulau Petir and sometimes Willy Jones Island
(neither of them its map name), three American soldiers disappeared and
have not been seen since.
“I'm going back there, I tell you! It was worth it. The limbs that laughed!
Let them kill me! I'll get there! Oh, here, here, I've got to get hold of myself.
“The three soldiers were Sergeant Charles Santee of Orange, Texas;
Corporal Robert Casper of Gobey, Tennessee; and PFC Timothy Lorrigan of
Boston which is in one of the eastern states. I was one of those three soldiers.
“I'm going back there if it takes me another twenty years!”
*
No, no, no! That's the wrong story. It happened on Willy Jones Island also,
but it's a different account entirely. That's the one the fellow told me in a bar
years later, just the other night, after the usual “Didn’t I used to know you in
the Islands?”
“One often makes these little mistakes and false starts,” Galli said. “It is a
trick that is used in the trade. One exasperates people and pretends to be
embarrassed. And then one hooks them.”
Galli was an hereditary storyteller of the Indies. “There is only one story
in the world,” he said, "and it pulls two ways. There is the reason part that
says, 'Hell, it can't be' and there is the wonder part that says, 'Hell, maybe it
is.”” He was the storyteller, and he offered to teach me the art.
For we ourselves had a hook into Galli. We had something he wanted.
“We used the same stories for a thousand years,” he said. “Now, however,
a
we have a new source, the American Comic Books. My grandfather began to
use these in another place and time, and I use them now. I steal them from
your orderly tents, and I have a box full of them. I have Space Comics and
Commander Midnight; I have Galactic Gob and Mighty Mouse and the Green
Hornet and the Masked Jetter. My grandfather also had copies of some of
these, but drawn by older hands. But I do not have Wonder Woman, not a
single copy. I would trade three-for-one for copies of her. I would pay a
premium. I can link her in with an island legend to create a whole new cycle
of stories, and I need new stuff all the time. Have you a Wonder Woman?”
When Galli said this, I knew that I had him. I didn't have a Wonder
Woman, but I knew where I could steal one. I believe, though I am no longer
sure, that it was Wonder Woman Meets the Space Magicians.
I stole it for him. And in gratitude Galli not only taught me the
storyteller's art, but he also told me the following story:
“Imagine about flute notes ascending,” said Galli. “I haven't my flute with
me, but a story should begin so to set the mood. Imagine about ships coming
out of the Arabian Ocean, and finally to Jilolo Island, and still more finally to
the very island on which we now stand. Imagine about waves and trees that
were the great-great-grandfathers of the waves and trees we now have.”
It was about the year 1620, Galli is telling it, in the late afternoon of the
high piracy. These Moluccas had already been the rich Spice Islands for three
hundred years. Moreover, they were on the road of the Manila galleons
coming from Mexico and the Isthmus. Arabian, Hindu, and Chinese piracy
had decayed shamefully. The English were crude at the business. In trade the
Dutch had become dominant in the Islands and the Portuguese had faded.
There was no limit to the opportunities for a courageous and dedicated raider
in the Indies.
They came. And not the least of these new raiding men was Willy Jones.
It was said that Willy Jones was a Welshman. You can believe it or not as
a
you like. The same thing has been said about the Devil. Willy was twenty-
five years old when he finally possessed his own ship with a mixed crew. The
ship was built like a humpbacked bird, with a lateen sail and suddenly
appearing rows of winglike oars. On its prow was a swooping bird that had
been carved in Muskat. It was named the Flying Serpent, or the Feathered
Snake, depending on what language you use.
“Pause a moment,” said Galli. “Set the mood. Imagine about dead men
variously. We come to the bloody stuff at once.”
"
One early morning, the Feathered Snake overtook a tall Dutchman. The ships
were grappled together, and the men from the Snake boarded the Dutch ship.
The men on the Dutchman were armed, but they had never seen such
suddenness and savagery as shown by the dark men from the Snake. There
was slippery blood on the decks, and the croaking of men being killed. “I
forgot to tell you that this was in the passage between the Molucca Sea and
the Banda," Galli said.
The Snake took a rich small cargo from the Dutch ship, a few able-bodied
Malay seamen, some gold specie, some papers of record, and a dark Dutch
girl named Margaret. These latter things Willy Jones preempted for himself,
Then the Snake devoured that tall Dutchman and left only a few of its
burning bones floating in the ocean.
"I forgot to tell you that the tall Dutch ship was named the Luchtkastell,”
Galli said.
Willy Jones watched the Luchtkastell disappearing under the water. He
examined the papers of record, and the dark Dutch girl Margaret. He made a
sudden decision: he would cash his winnings and lay up for a season.
He had learned about an island in the papers of record. It was a rich island,
belonging to the richest of the Dutch spice men who had gone to the bottom
with the Luchtkastell. The fighting crew would help Willy Jones secure the
island for himself; and in exchange, he would give them his ship and the
whole raiding territory and the routes he had worked out.
Willy Jones captured the island and ruled it. From the ship he kept only
the gold, the dark Dutch girl Margaret, and three golems which had once
been ransom from a Jew in Oman.
"I forgot to tell you that Margaret was the daughter of the Dutch spice man
who had owned the island and the tall ship and who was killed by Willy,"
Galli said, “and the island really belonged to Margaret now as the daughter of
her father.”
For one year Willy Jones ruled the small settlement, drove the three
golems and the men who already lived there, had the spices gathered and
baled and stored (they were worth their weight in silver), and built the Big
House. And for one year he courted the dark Dutch girl Margaret, having
been unable to board her as he had all other girls.
She refused him because he had killed her father, because he had
destroyed the Luchtkastell which was Family and Nation to her, and because
he had stolen her island.
This Margaret, though she was pretty and trim as a kuching, had during
the affair of the Feathered Snake and the Luchtkastell twirled three seamen in
the air like pinwheels at one time and thrown them all into the ocean. She had
eyes that twinkled like the compounded eyes of the devil-fly; they could glint
laughter and fury at the same time.
“Those girls were like volcanoes,” the man said. “Slim, strong mountains,
and we climbed them like mountains. Man, the uplift on them! The shoulders
were cliffs that laughed. The swaying—"
No, no! Belay that last paragraph! That's from the ramble of the fellow in the
bar, and it keeps intruding.
“I forgot to tell you that she reminds me of Wonder Woman,” Galli said.
Willy Jones believed that Margaret was worth winning unbroken, as he
"
was not at all sure that he could break her. He courted her as well as he could,
and he used to advantage the background of the golden-green spicery on
which they lived.
"Imagine about the Permata bird that nests on the moon," Galli said, "and
which is the most passionate as well as the noblest-singing of the birds.
Imagine about flute notes soaring.”
Willy Jones made this tune to Margaret:
The Nutmeg Moon is the third moon of the year.
The Tides come in like loose Silk all its Nights.
The Ground is animated by the bare Feet of Margaret
Who is like the Pelepah of the Ko-eng Flower.
Willy made this tune in the Malaya language in which all the words end in
ang.
“Imagine about water leaping down rocky hills,” Galli said. “Imagine
about red birds romping in green groves.”
Willy Jones made another tune to Margaret:
A Woman with Shoulders so strong that a Man might ride upon
them
The while she is still the little Girl watching for the black Ship
Of the Hero who is the same age as the Sky,
But she does not realize that I am already here.
Willy made this tune in the Dutch language in which all the words end in lijk.
“Imagine about another flute joining the first one, and their notes scamper
like birds,” Galli said.
Willy Jones made a last tune to Margaret:
"
Damnation! That is enough of Moonlight and Tomorrows!
Now there are mats to plait, and kain to sew.
Even the smallest crab knows to build herself a house in the sand.
Margaret should be raking the oven coals and baking a roti.
I wonder why she is so slow in seeing this.
Willy made this tune in the Welsh language in which all the words end in
gwbl.
When the one year was finished, they were mated. There was still the
chilliness there as though she would never forgive him for killing her father
and stealing her island; but they began to be in accord.
“Here pause five minutes to indicate an idyllic interlude,” Galli said. “We
sing the song Bagang Kali Berjumpa if you know the tune. We flute, if I have
my flute.”
The idyllic interlude passed.
Then Willy's old ship, the Feathered Snake, came back to the Island. She
was in a pitiful state of misuse. She reeked of old and new blood, and there
were none left on her but nine sick men. These nine men begged Willy Jones
to become their captain again to set everything right.
Willy washed the nine living skeletons and fed them up for three days.
They were fat and able by then. And the three golems had refitted the ship.
“All she needs is a strong hand at the helm again,” said Willy Jones. “I
will sail her again for a week and a day. I will impress a new crew, and once
more make her the terror of the Spice Islands. Then I will return to my island,
knowing that I have done a good deed in restoring the Snake to the bloody
work for which she was born.”
"If you go, Willy Jones, you will be gone for many years," said the dark
Dutch Margaret.
"Only one at the most," said Willy.
“And I will be in my grave
when
you return."
“There is no grave could hold you, Margaret.”
“Aye, it may not hold me. I'll out of it and confront you when you come
back. But it gives one a weirdness to be in the grave for only a few years. I
will not own you for my husband when you do come back. You will not even
know whether I am the same woman that you left, and you will never know. I
am a volcano, but I banked my hatred and accepted you. But if you leave me
now, I will erupt against you forever."
But Willy Jones went away in the Flying Serpent and left her there. He
took two of the golems with him, and he left one of them to serve Margaret.
"
What with one thing and another, he was gone for twenty years.
"We were off that morning to satisfy our curiosity about the Big House,”
the fellow said, “since we would soon be leaving the island forever. You
know about the Big House. You were on Willy Jones Island too. The Jilolos
call it the House of Skulls, and the Malaya and Indonesia people will not
speak about it at all.
“We approached the Big House that was not more than a mile beyond our
perimeter. It was a large decayed building, but we had the sudden feeling that
it was still inhabited. And it wasn't supposed to be. Then we saw the two of
them, the mother and the daughter. We shook like we were unhinged, and we
ran to them.
“They were so alike that we couldn't tell them apart. Their eyes twinkled
like the compounded eyes of a creature that eats her mate. Noonday
lightning! How it struck! Arms that swept you off your feet and set your
bones to singing! We knew that they were not twins, or even sisters. We
knew that they were mother and daughter.
“I have never encountered anything like them in my life. Whatever
happened to the other two soldiers, I know it was worth it to them. Whatever
happened to them? I don't care if they kill me! They were perfect, those two
women, even though we weren't with them for five minutes."
“Then it was the Badger."
*
*
*
No, no, no! That's the wrong story again. That's not the story Galli told me.
That's part of the story the fellow told me in the bar. His confused account
keeps interposing itself, possibly because I knew him slightly when we were
both soldiers on Willy Jones Island. But he had turned queer, that fellow. "It
is the earthquake belt around the world that is the same as the legend belt,”
he said, "and the Middleworld underlies it all. That's why I was able to walk
it.” It was as though he had been keel-hauled around the world. I hadn't
known him well. I didn't know which of the three soldiers he was. I had heard
that they were all dead.
“Imagine about conspiracy stuff now,” said Galli. “Imagine about a
whispering in a pinang grove before the sun is up.”
“How can I spook that man?” Margaret asked her golem shortly after she
had been abandoned by Willy Jones. “But I am afraid that a mechanical man
would not be able to tell me how.”
“I will tell you a secret,” said the golem. “We are not mechanical men.
Certain wise and secret men believe that they made us, but they are wrong.
They have made houses for us to live in, no more. There are many of us
unhoused spirits, and we take shelter in such bodies as we find. That being
so, I know something of the houseless spirits in the depth of every man. I will
select one of them, and we will spook Willy Jones with that one. Willy is a
Welshman who has become by adoption a Dutchman and a Malayan and a
Jilolo man. There is one old spook running through them all. I will call it up
when it is time.”
“I forgot to tell you that the name of Margaret's golem was Meshuarat,"
Galli said.
>
After twenty years of high piracy, Willy Jones returned to his island. And
there was the dark Dutch Margaret standing as young and as smoldering as
when he had left. He leaped to embrace her, and found himself stretched flat
on the sand by a thunderous blow. He was not surprised, and was not (as he
had at first believed) decapitated. Almost he was not displeased. Margaret
had often been violent in her love-making.
“But I will have you," Willy swore as he tasted his own blood delightfully
in his mouth and pulled himself up onto hands and knees. “I have ridden the
Margaret-tiger before.”
"You will never ride my loins, you lecherous old goat,” she rang at him
like a bell. “I am not your wife. I am the daughter that you left here in the
womb. My mother is in the grave on the hill.”
Willy Jones sorrowed terribly, and he went to the grave.
But Margaret came up behind him and drove in the cruel lance. “I told you
that when you came back you would not know whether I was the same
woman you had left,” she chortled, “and you will never know!”
“Margaret, you are my wife!” Willy Jones gasped.
"
“Am I of an age to be your wife?” she jibed. “Regard me! Of what age do
I seem to be?”
“Of the same age as when I left," said Willy. “But perhaps you have eaten
of the besok nut and so do not change your appearance."
“I forgot to tell you about the besok nut,” said Galli. “If one eats the nut of
the besok tree, the tomorrow tree, the time tree, that one will not age. But this
is always accompanied by a chilling unhappiness."
"Perhaps I did eat it,” said Margaret. “But that is my grave there, and I have
lain in it many years, as has she. You are prohibited from touching either of
us.”
"Are you the mother or the daughter, Witch?"
“You will never know. You will see us both, for we take turns, and you
will not be able to tell us apart. See, the grave is always disturbed, and the
entrance is easy."
"I'll have the truth from the golem who served you while I was gone,"
Willy swore.
*
*
ور
“A golem is an artificial man,” said Galli. “They were made by the Jews and
Arabs in earlier ages, but now they say that they have forgotten how to make
them. I wonder that you do not make them yourselves, for you have advanced
techniques. You tell them and you picture them in your own heroic
literature,” (he patted the comic books under his arm), “but you do not have
them in actuality.”
The golem told Willy Jones that the affair was thus:
A daughter had indeed been born to Margaret. She had slain the child, and
had then put it into the middle state. Thereafter, the child stayed sometimes in
the grave, and sometimes she walked about the island. And she grew as any
other child would. And Margaret herself had eaten the besok nut so that she
would not age.
When mother and daughter had come to the same age and appearance (and
it had only been the very day before that, the day before Willy Jones had
returned), then the daughter had also eaten the besok nut. Now the mother
and daughter would be of the same appearance forever, and not even a golem
could tell them apart.
Willy Jones came furiously onto the woman again.
“I was sure before, and now I am even more sure that you are Margaret,”
he said, "and now I will have you in my fury."
“We both be Margaret,” she said. “But I am not the same one you
apprehended earlier. We changed places while you talked to the golem. And
we are both in the middle state, and we have both been dead in the grave, and
you dare not touch either of us ever. A Welshman turned Dutchman turned
Malayan turned Jilolo has this spook in him four times over. The Devil
himself will not touch his own daughters."
The last part was a lie, but Willy Jones did not know it.
“We be in confrontation forever then," said Willy Jones. "I will make my
Big House a house of hate and a house of skulls. You cannot escape from its
environs, neither can any visitor. I'll kill them all and pile their skulls up high
for a monument to you.”
Then Willy Jones ate a piece of bitter bark from the pokok ru.
“I forgot to tell you that when a person eats bark from the pokok ru in anger,
his anger will sustain itself forever,” Galli said.
“If it's visitors you want for the killing, I and my mother-daughter will
provide them in numbers,” said Margaret. “Men will be attracted here forever
with no heed for danger. I will eat a telor tuntong of the special sort, and all
men will be attracted here even to their death.”
“I forgot to tell you that if a female eats the telor tuntong of the special sort,
all males will be attracted irresistibly,” Galli said. “Ah, you smile as though
you doubted that the besok nut or the bark of the pokok ru or the telor
tuntong of the special sort could have such effects. But yourselves come now
to wonder drugs like little boys. In these islands they are all around you and
you too blind to see. It is no ignorant man who tells you this. I have read the
booklets from your orderly tents: Physics without Mathematics, Cosmology
without Chaos, Psychology without Brains. It is myself, the master of all
sciences and disciplines, who tells you that these things do work. Besides
hard science, there is soft science, the science of shadow areas and story
areas,
and
you
do wrong to deny it the name.
"I believe that you yourself can see what had to follow, from the
dispositions of the Margarets and Willy Jones,” Galli said. “For hundreds of
years, men from everywhere came to the Margarets who could not be
resisted. And Willy Jones killed them all and piled up their skulls. It became,
in a very savage form, what you call the Badger Game.”
Galli was a good-natured and unhandsome brown man. He worked around
the army base as translator, knowing (besides his native Jilolo), the Malayan,
Dutch, Japanese, and English languages, and (as every storyteller must) the
Arabian. His English was whatever he wanted it to be, and he burlesqued the
speech of the American soldiers to the Australians, and the Australians to the
Americans.
>
"Man, it was a Badger!" the man said. “It was a grizzle-haired, glare-eyed,
flat-headed, underslung, pigeon-toed, hook-clawed, clam-jawed Badger from
Badger Game Corner! They moved in on us, but I'd take my chances and go
back and do it again. We hadn't frolicked with the girls for five minutes when
the things moved in on us. I say things; I don't know whether they were men
or not. If they were, they were the coldest three men I ever saw. But they
were directed by a man who made up for it. He was livid, hopping with
hatred. They moved in on us and began to kill us."
*
No, No, that isn't part of Galli's story. That's some more of the ramble that
the fellow told me in the bar the other evening.
It has been three hundred years, and the confrontation continues. There are
skulls of Malayan men and Jilolo men piled up there; and of Dutchmen and
Englishmen and of Portuguese men; of Chinamen and Filipinos and Goanese;
of Japanese, and of the men from the United States and Australia.
"Only this morning there were added the skulls of two United States men,
and there should have been three of them,” Galli said. “They came, as have
all others, because the Margarets ate the telor tuntong of the special sort. It is
a fact that with a species (whether insect or shelled thing or other) where the
male gives his life in the mating, the female has always eaten of this telor
tuntong. You'd never talk the males into such a thing with words alone.”
“How is it that there were only two United States skulls this morning, and
there should have been three?” I asked him.
"One of them escaped,” Galli explained, “and that was unusual. He fell
through a hole to the middle land, that third one of them. But the way back
from the middle land to one's own country is long, and it must be walked. It
takes at least twenty years, wherever one's own country is; and the joker
thing about it is that the man is always wanting to go the other way.
“That is the end of the story, but let it not end abruptly,” Galli said. “Sing
the song Chari Yang Besar if you remember the tune. Imagine about flute
notes lingering in the air."
* *
“I was lost for more than twenty years, and that's a fact,” the man said. He
gripped the bar with the most knotted hands I ever saw, and laughed with a
merriment so deep that it seemed to be his bones laughing. “Did you
know
that there's another world just under this world, or just around the corner
from it? I walked all day every day. I was in a torture, for I suspected that I
I
was going the wrong way, and I could go no other. And I sometimes
suspected that the middle land through which I traveled was in my head, a
derangement from the terrible blow that one of the things gave me as he came
in to kill me. And yet there are correlates that convince me it was a real place.
“I wasn't trying to get home. I was trying to get back to those girls even if
it killed me. There weren't any colors in that world, all gray tones, but
otherwise it wasn't much different from this one. There were even bars there
a little like the Red Rooster.”
(I forgot to tell you that it was in the Red Rooster bar that the soldier from
the islands told me the parts of his story.)
“I've got to get back there. I think I know the way now, and how to get on the
road. I have to travel it through the middle land, you know. They'll kill me,
of course, and I won't even get to jazz those girls for five minutes; but I've
got to get back there. Going to take me another twenty years, though. That
sure is a weary walk.”
* *
I never knew him well, and I don't remember which of the names was his.
But a man from Orange, Texas, or from Gobey, Tennessee, or from Boston,
in one of the eastern states, is on a twenty-year walk through the middle land
to find the dark Dutch Margarets, and death.
I looked up a couple of things yesterday. There was Revel's recent work
on Moluccan narcotics. He tells of the besok nut which does seem to inhibit
aging but which induces internal distraction and hypersexuality. There is the
pokok ru whose bitter bark impels even the most gentle to violent anger.
There is one sort of telor tuntong which sets up an inexplicable aura about a
woman eater and draws all males overpoweringly to her. There is much
research still to be done on these narcotics, Revel writes.
I dipped into Mandrago's Earthquake and Legend and the Middle World.
He states that the earthquake belt around the world is also the legend belt, and
that one of the underlying legends is of the underlying land, the middle world
below this world where one can wander lost forever.
And I went down to the Red Rooster again the next evening, which was
last evening, to ask about the man and to see if he could give me a more
cogent account. For I had re-remembered Galli’s old story in the meanwhile.
"No, he was just passing through town,” the barman said. “Had a long trip
ahead of him. He was sort of a nutty fellow. I've often said the same thing
about you."
That is the end of the other story, but let it not end suddenly. Pause for a
moment to savor it. Sing the song Itu Masa Dahulu if you remember the tune.
Imagine about flute notes falling. I don't have a flute, but a story should
end so.
Seven-Day Terror
Introduction by Connie Willis
“Seven-Day Terror” was not my first introduction to R. A. Lafferty—that
was “Slow Tuesday Night”—but it instantly became my favorite Lafferty
story and remains so to this day, in spite of intense competition from "The
Hole on the Corner," the aforementioned “Slow Tuesday Night,” and “Thus
We Frustrate Charlemagne."
"Seven-Day Terror" is part of the proud tradition of science fiction stories
like C. L. Moore and Henry Kuttner's “Mimsy Were the Borogoves” and Ray
Bradbury’s “Zero Hour” which are about children and how they see the
world entirely differently from adults, a way of seeing that grants them
incomprehensible and sometimes dangerous powers. But Lafferty's children
stand alone in their audacity, precociousness, and ruthless common sense.
And wisdom: Clarissa's absolutely right about the dangers of letting
scientific discoveries like the disappearer fall into irresponsible hands, i.e.,
those of adults.
And even though this story is as lighthearted as Lafferty comes, his wry
awareness of how the world works is still present. Officer Comstock, for
instance, has a knack for "getting near the heart of dark matters. This is why
he was walking a beat out in the boondocks instead of sitting in a chair
downtown."
But mostly Lafferty's just having fun here, and so are we. The Willoughby
kids, from Clarence down to three-year-old Cyril, are charmingly
incorrigible, the dialogue's hilarious, and we get to meet the “esteemed”
scientist Willy McGilly and his pals (who pop up in several Lafferty stories).
Plus, there are oatmeal boxes, gold watches, floods, fireplugs, cats, local
officials, beer cans, and an ending you should have seen coming but didn't.
In other words, Lafferty at his best. So sit back and prepare to have a really
good time.
Seven-Day Terror
"Is there anything you want to make disappear?" Clarence Willoughby asked
his mother.
“A sink full of dishes is all I can think of. How will you do it?”
"I just built a disappearer. All you do is cut the other end out of a beer can.
Then you take two pieces of red cardboard with peepholes in the middle and
fit them in the ends. You look through the peepholes and blink. Whatever you
look at will disappear."
“Oh.”
“But I don't know if I can make them come back. We'd better try it on
something else. Dishes cost money.”
As always, Myra Willoughby had to admire the wisdom of her nine-year-
old son. She would not have had such foresight herself. He always did. "You
can try it on Blanche Manners's cat outside there. Nobody will care if it
disappears except Blanche Manners.”
"All right.”
He put the disappearer to his eye and blinked. The cat disappeared from
the sidewalk outside.
His mother was interested. “I wonder how it works. Do you know how it
works?”
“Yes. You take a beer can with both ends cut out and put in two pieces of
cardboard. Then you blink.”
.
“Never mind. Take it outside and play with it. You hadn't better make
anything disappear in here till I think about this.”
But when he had gone his mother was oddly disturbed.
“
“I wonder if I have a precocious child. Why, there's lots of grown people
who wouldn't know how to make a disappearer that would work. I wonder if
Blanche Manners will miss her cat very much?”
Clarence went down to the Plugged Nickel, a pot house on the corner.
"Do you have anything you want to make disappear, Nokomis?”
"Only my paunch."
“If I make it disappear it'll leave a hole in you and you'll bleed to death.”
“That's right, I would. Why don't you try it on the fireplug outside?”
This in a way was one of the happiest afternoons ever in the
neighborhood. The children came from blocks around to play in the flooded
streets and gutters, and if some of them drowned (and we don't say that they
did drown) in the flood and brother! it was a flood), why, you have to expect
things like that. The fire engines (whoever heard of calling fire engines to put
out a flood?) were apparatus-deep in water. The policemen and ambulance
men wandered around wet and bewildered.
"Resuscitator, resuscitator, anybody wanna resuscitator," chanted Clarissa
Willoughby.
"Oh, shut up," said the ambulance attendants.
Nokomis, the bar man in the Plugged Nickel, called Clarence inside.
“I don't believe, just for the moment, I'd tell anyone what happened to
that fireplug."
“I won't tell if you won't tell,” said Clarence.
Officer Comstock was suspicious. “There's only seven possible
explanations: one of the seven Willoughby kids did it. I dunno how. It'd take
a bulldozer to do it, and then there'd be something left of the plug. But
however they did it, one of them did it.”
Officer Comstock had a talent for getting near the truth of dark matters.
This is why he was walking a beat out here in the boondocks instead of
sitting in a chair downtown.
a
“Clarissa!” said Officer Comstock in a voice like thunder.
“Resuscitator, resuscitator, anybody wanna resuscitator?” chanted
?
Clarissa.
"Do you know what happened to that fireplug?" asked Officer C.
“I have an uncanny suspicion. As yet it is no more than that. When I am
better informed I will advise you."
Clarissa was eight years old and much given to uncanny suspicions.
»
"Clementine, Harold, Corinne, Jimmy, Cyril,” he asked the five younger
Willoughby children. “Do you know what happened to that fireplug?”
“There was a man around yesterday. I bet he took it,” said Clementine.
“I don't even remember a fireplug there. I think you're making a fuss
about nothing," said Harold.
"City hall's going to hear about this,” said Corinne.
“Pretty dommed sure,” said Jimmy, “but I won't tell.”
"Cyril!” cried Officer Comstock in a terrible voice. Not a terrifying voice,
a terrible voice. He felt terrible now.
“Great green bananas,” said Cyril, “I'm only three years old. I don't see
how it's even my responsibility.”
“Clarence,” said Officer Comstock.
Clarence gulped.
“Do you know where the fireplug went?”
Clarence brightened. “No, sir. I don't know where it went.
A bunch of smart alecs from the water department came out and shut off
the water for a few blocks around and put some kind of cap on in place of the
fireplug. “This sure is going to be a funny-sounding report,” said one of
them.
Officer Comstock walked away discouraged. “Don't bother me, Miss
Manners,” he said. “I don't know where to look for your cat. I don't even
know where to look for a fireplug.”
a
“I have an idea,” said Clarissa, “that when you find the cat you will find
the fireplug in the same place. As yet it's only an idea."
Ozzie Murphy wore a little hat on top of his head. Clarence pointed his
weapon and winked. The hat was no longer there, but a little trickle of blood
was running down the pate.
“I don't believe I'd play with that any more," said Nokomis.
"Who's playing?” said Clarence. “This is for real.”
This was the beginning of the seven-day terror in the heretofore obscure
neighborhood. Trees disappeared from the parks; lamp posts were as though
they had never been; Wally Waldorf drove home, got out, slammed the door
of his car, and there was no car. As George Mullendorf came up the walk to
his house his dog Pete ran to meet him and took a flying leap to his arms. The
dog left the sidewalk but something happened; the dog was gone and only a
bark lingered for a moment in the puzzled air.
a
But the worst were the fireplugs. The second plug was installed the
morning after the disappearance of the first. In eight minutes it was gone and
the flood waters returned. Another one was in by twelve o'clock. Within
three minutes it had vanished. The next morning fireplug number four was
installed.
The water commissioner was there, the city engineer was there, the chief
of police was there with a riot squad, the president of the Parent Teachers
Association was there, the president of the university was there, the mayor
was there, three gentlemen of the FBI, a newsreel photographer, eminent
scientists, and a crowd of honest citizens.
“Let's see it disappear now,” said the city engineer.
“Let's see it disappear now,” said the police chief.
“Let's see it disa—It did, didn't it?” said one of the eminent scientists.
And it was gone and everybody was very wet.
“At least I have the picture sequence of the year,” said the photographer.
But his camera and apparatus disappeared from the midst of them.
“Shut off the water and cap it,” said the commissioner. “And don't put in
another plug yet. That was the last plug in the warehouse."
“This is too big for me,” said the mayor. “I wonder that Tass doesn't have
it yet.”
“Tass has it,” said a little round man. “I am Tass.”
“If all of you gentlemen will come into the Plugged Nickel,” said
Nokomis, "and try one of our new Fire Hydrant Highballs you will all be
happier. These are made of good corn whiskey, brown sugar, and hydrant
water from this very gutter. You can be the first to drink them.”
Business was phenomenal at the Plugged Nickel, for it was in front of its
very doors that the fireplugs disappeared in floods of gushing water.
“I know a way we can get rich,” said Clarissa several days later to her
father, Tom Willoughby. "Everybody says they're going to sell their houses
for nothing and move out of the neighborhood. Go get a lot of money and
buy them all. Then you can sell them again and get rich.”
"I wouldn't buy them for a dollar each. Three of them have disappeared
already, and all the families but us have their furniture moved out in their
front yards. There might be nothing but vacant lots in the morning.”
"Good, then buy the vacant lots. And you can be ready when the houses
come back.”
"
"Come back? Are the houses going to come back? Do you know anything
about this, young lady?”
"I have a suspicion verging on a certainty. As of now I can say no more.”
*
"
Three eminent scientists were gathered in an untidy suite that looked as
though it belonged to a drunken sultan.
“This transcends the metaphysical. It impinges on the quantum continuum.
In some way it obsoletes Boff,” said Dr. Velikof Vonk.
“The contingence of the intransigence is the most mystifying aspect,” said
Arpad Arkabaranan.
“Yes,” said Willy McGilly. “Who would have thought that you could do it
with a beer can and two pieces of cardboard? When I was a boy I used an
oatmeal box and red crayola.”
“I do not always follow you,” said Dr. Vonk. “I wish you would speak
plainer."
So far no human had been injured or disappeared—except for a little blood
a
on the pate of Ozzie Murphy, on the lobes of Conchita when her gaudy
earrings disappeared from her very ears, a clipped finger or so when a house
vanished as the front doorknob was touched, a lost toe when a neighborhood
boy kicked a can and the can was not; probably not more than a pint of blood
and three or four ounces of flesh all together.
Now, however, Mr. Buckle the grocery man disappeared before witnesses.
This was serious.
Some mean-looking investigators from downtown came out to the
Willoughbys. The meanest-looking one was the mayor. In happier days he
had not been a mean man, but the terror had now reigned for seven days.
“There have been ugly rumors,” said one of the mean investigators, "that
link certain events to this household. Do any of you know anything about
them?”
"I started most of them," said Clarissa. “But I didn't consider them ugly.
Cryptic, rather. But if you want to get to the bottom of this just ask me a
question.”
“ "Did you make those things disappear?” asked the investigator.
“That isn't the question,” said Clarissa.
“Do you know where they have gone?” asked the investigator. “That isn’t the question either,” said Clarissa. “Can you make them come back?” “Why, of course I can. Anybody can. Can’t you?” “I cannot. If you can, please do so at once.” “I need some stuff. Get me a gold watch and a hammer. Then go down to the drug store and get me this list of chemicals. And I need a yard of black velvet and a pound of rock candy.” “Shall we?” asked one of the investigators. “Yes,” said the mayor. “It’s our only hope. Get her anything she wants.” And it was all assembled. “Why does she get all the attention?” asked Clarence. “I was the one who made all the things disappear. How does she know how to get them back?” “I knew it!” cried Clarissa with hate. “I knew he was the one that did it. He read in my diary how to make a disappearer. If I was his mother I’d whip him for reading his little sister’s diary. That’s what happens when things like that fall into irresponsible hands.” She poised the hammer over the mayor’s gold watch, now on the floor. “I have to wait a few seconds. This can’t be hurried. It’ll only be a little while.” The second hand swept around to the point that was preordained for it before the world began. Clarissa suddenly brought down the hammer with all her force on the beautiful gold watch. “That’s all,” she said. “Your troubles are over. See, there is Blanche Manners’s cat on the sidewalk just where she was seven days ago.” And the cat was back. “Now let’s go down to the Plugged Nickel and watch the fireplugs come back.” They had only a few minutes to wait. It came from nowhere and clanged into the street like a sign and a witness. “Now I predict,” said Clarissa, “that every single object will return exactly seven days from the time of its disappearance.” The seven-day terror had ended. The objects began to reappear. “How,” asked the mayor, “did you know they would come back in seven days?” “Because it was a seven-day disappearer that Clarence made. I also know
how to make a nine-day, a thirteen-day, a twenty-seven-day, and an eleven- year disappearer. I was going to make a thirteen-year one, but for that you have to color the ends with the blood from a little boy’s heart, and Cyril cried every time I tried to make a good cut.” “You really know how to make all of these?” “Yes. But I shudder if the knowledge should ever come into unauthorized hands.” “I shudder, too, Clarissa. But tell me, why did you want the chemicals?” “For my chemistry set.” “And the black velvet?” “For doll dresses.” “And the pound of rock candy?” “How did you ever get to be mayor of this town if you have to ask questions like that? What do you think I wanted the rock candy for?” “One last question,” said the mayor. “Why did you smash my gold watch with the hammer?” “Oh,” said Clarissa, “that was for dramatic effect.”
In “Boomer Flats,” which originally appeared in If Magazine in 1971, Lafferty expands on the internal mythology of his work and returns to familiar themes. Evolution, and how humans fit into it through spontaneous evolutionary leaps, features in other stories such as “Ginny Wrapped in the Sun” and “In Deepest Glass.” Lafferty asserted that storytelling was a manifestation of ancestry and that storytellers belonged “to the old ‘red-bone people.’” The journey to Boomer Flats brings the reader to a strange town where those people walk daily. To those who know who Ivan Sanderson is, the clue is there from the very first line: eminent scientists Arpad Arkabaranan, Willy McGilly, and Dr. Velikof Vonk, declaring themselves his spiritual offspring, are in search of Fortean phenomena, specifically the ABSM (Abominable Snowman). It’s a literal wild-goose chase, as McGilly notes, referring to the hundreds of mud geese in flight across the sky. This sort of linguistic play, the metaphorical made real, ripples through the story, and even sometimes slides it over into poetry’s realm, such as the repeated reassurance Crayola Catfish gives the eminent scientists about their drinks, “They’re fixing them for you now. I’ll bring them after a while.” Boomer Flats is a shadow town, an echo of the town of Boomer. “Something a little queer and primordial about the whole place!” Lafferty warns the reader, who already knows we’re wandering in strange territory. The three eminent scientists know it too. Dr. Velikof Vonk’s eyes grin “out of deep folk memory,” as he begins to drink what Crayola has brought him: a clay cup that “smelled strongly of river, perhaps of interstadial river.”
Introduction by Cat Rambo
Boomer Flats
The drinks, the Green Snake Snorters, move the trio into a strange mythopoetic world in washes, like a television show’s set where each cut- away and back reveals odder and odder details changed and added. The prose becomes stranger and stranger at the same time, moving into deeper and deeper waters of wordplay. That shabby man playing dominoes is a bear. Pieces are falling off a man called the Comet. And then, the giants enter, standing around the edges of the room in their black hats. This is where the legends dwell, almost as though Boomer Flats is the secret heart of Lafferty’s cosmos. The three eminent scientists are specifically identified as three Magi, but what they find is not an answer in the form of the Christ Child, but more and more questions about the world itself. Instead the ending turns back to story’s heart in a way that pulls the reader further in and farther out, so to speak. This is Lafferty at his luminiferous best, slipstream before the term was ever invented.
“In the tracks of our spiritual father Ivan Sanderson we may now have trailed a clutch of ABSMs to their lair,” the eminent scientist Arpad Arkabaranan was saying in his rattling voice. “And that lair may not be a mountain thicket or rain forest or swamp, but these scrimpy red clay flats. I would almost give my life for the success of this quest, but it seems that it should have a more magnificent setting.” “It looks like a wild-goose chase,” the eminent scientist Willy McGilly commented. But no, Willy was not downgrading their quest. He was referring to the wild geese that rose about them from the edges of the flats with clatter and whistle and honk. This was a flight-way, a chase of theirs. There were hundreds of them if one had the fine eyes to pick them out from the background. “Mud geese,” Willy said. “We don’t see as many of them as when I was a boy.” “I do not, and I am afraid that I will not, believe in the ABSMs,” said the eminent scientist Dr. Velikof Vonk, stroking his—(no he didn’t, he didn’t have one)—stroking his jaw, “and yet this is the thing that I also have most desired, to find this missing link finally, and to refute all believers in the other thing.” “We can’t see the chain for the links,” said Willy McGilly. “I never believed that any of them was missing. There’s always been too many of them for the length of the chain: that’s the trouble.” “I’ve traveled a million miles in search of them,” said Arpad. “I’ve pretty well probed all the meager ribs of the world in that travel. My fear has always been that I’d miss them by a trick, even that in some unaccountable way I
Boomer Flats
wouldn't know them when I found them. It would be ironic if we did find
them in such a place as this: not a wild place, only a shabby and overlooked
place.”
"My own fear has been that when I finally gazed on one I would wake
with a start and find that I had been looking in a mirror," said Velikof. "There
must be some symbolism here that I don't understand. What is your own
anticipation of them, Willy?”
"Oh, coming back to people I've always liked. There used to be a bunch of
them on the edge of my hometown,” Willy McGilly said. "Come to think of
it, there used to be a bunch of them on the edge of every hometown. Now
they're more likely to be found right in the middle of every town. They're the
scrubs, you know, for the bottoming of the breed.”
“What are you talking about, Willy?” Arpad asked sharply.
What they were all talking about was ABSMs.
"
*
Every town in the south part of that county has a shadow or secondary. There
is Meehan, and Meehan Corners; Perkins, and Perkins Corner; Boomer, and
Boomer Flats. The three eminent scientists were driving the three miles from
Boomer to Boomer Flats looking for the bones, and hopefully even the living
flesh, of a legend. It was that of the missing link, of the Abominable
Snowman, the ABSM. It wasn't snowy country there, but the so-called
Snowmen have been reported in every sort of climate and countryside. The
local legend, recently uncovered by Arpad, was that there was a non-African
non-Indian “people of color” living in the neighborhood of Boomer Flats,
“between the sand-bush thickets and the river.” It was said that they lived on
the very red mud banks of the river, and that they lived a little in the river
itself.
Then Dr. Velikof Vonk had come onto a tape in a bunch of
anthropological tapes, and the tape contained sequences like this:
“What do they do when the river floods?”
"Ah, they close their noses and mouths and ears with mud, and they lie
down with big rocks on their breasts and stay there till the flood has passed.”
“Can they be taught?”
“Some of the children go to school, and they learn. But when they are
older then they stay at home, and they forget.”
“What sort of language do they talk?”
“Ah, they don't seem to talk very much. They keep to themselves.
Sometimes when they talk it is just plain Cimarron Valley English.”
"What do they eat?”
“They boil river water in mud clay pots. They put in wild onions and
greenery. The pottage thickens then, I don't know how. It gets lumps of meat
or clay in it, and they eat that too. They eat frogs and fish and owls and
thicket filaments. But mostly they don't eat very much of anything."
“It is said that they aren't all of the same appearance. It is even said that
they are born, ah, shapeless, and that—ah—could you tell me anything about
that?”
“Yeah. They're born without much shape. Most of them never do get
much shape. When they have any, well actually their mothers lick them into
shape, give them their appearance."
“It's an old folk tale that bears do that.”
“Maybe they learned it from the bears then, young fellow. There's quite a
bit of bear mixture in them, but the bears themselves have nearly gone from
the flats and thickets now. More than likely the bears learned it from them.
Sometimes the mothers lick the cubs into the shape of regular people for a
joke.”
“That is the legend?”
“You keep saying legend. I don't know anything about legend. I just tell
you what you ask me. I'll tell you a funny one, though. One of the mothers
who was getting ready to bear happened to get ahold of an old movie
magazine that some fishers from Boomer had left on the river edge. There
was a picture in it of the prettiest girl that anyone ever saw, and it was a
picture of all of that girl. This mother was tickled by that picture. She bore a
daughter then, and she licked her into the shape and appearance of the girl in
the movie magazine. And the girl grew up looking like that and she still looks
like that, pretty as a picture. I don't believe the girl appreciates the joke. She
is the prettiest of all the people, though. Her name is Crayola Catfish.”
“Are you having me, old fellow? Have those creatures any humor?”
"Some of them tell old jokes. John Salt tells old jokes. The Licorice Man
tells really old jokes. And man, does the Comet ever tell old jokes!”
“Are the creatures long-lived?”
“Long-lived as we want to be. The elixir comes from these flats, you
know. Some of us use it, some of us don't.”
“Are you one of the creatures?”
"Sure, I'm one of them. I like to get out from it sometimes though. I
follow the harvests.”
"
This tape (recorded by an anthropology student at State University who, by
the way, has since busted out of anthropology and is now taking hotel and
restaurant management) had greatly excited the eminent scientist Dr. Velikof
Vonk when he had played it, along with several hundred other tapes that had
come in that week from the anthropology circuit. He scratched his—(no he
didn't, he didn't have one)—he scratched his jowl and he phoned up the
eminent scientists Arpad Arkabaranan and Willy McGilly.
“I'll go, I'll go, of course I'll go,” Arpad had cried. “I've traveled a
million miles in search of it, and should I refuse to go sixty? This won't be it,
this can't be it, but I'll never give up. Yes, we'll go tomorrow.”
“Sure, I'll go,” Willy McGilly said. “I've been there before, I kind of like
those folks on the flats. I don't know about the biggest catfish in the world,
but the biggest catfish stories in the world have been pulled out of the
Cimarron River right about at Boomer Flats. Sure, we'll go tomorrow.”
“This may be it,” Velikof had said. “How can we miss it? I can almost
reach out and scratch it on the nose from here."
“You'll find yourself scratching your own nose, that's how you'll miss it.
But it's there and it's real."
"I believe, Willy, that there is a sort of amnesia that has prevented us
finding them or remembering them accurately.”
"Not that, Velikof. It's just that they're always too close to see.”
So the next day the three eminent scientists drove over from T-Town to come
to Boomer Flats. Willy McGilly knew where the place was, but his pointing
out of the way seemed improbable: Velikof was more inclined to trust the
information of people in Boomer. And there was a difficulty there.
People kept saying, “This is Boomer. There isn't exactly any place called
Boomer Flats.” Boomer Flats wasn't on any map. It was too small even to
have a post office. And the Boomer people were exasperating in not knowing
about it or knowing the way to it.
"Three miles from here, and you don't know where it is?” Velikof asked
one of them angrily.
"I don't even know that it is,” the Boomer man had said in his own near
anger. “I don't believe that there is such a place.”
Finally, however, other men told the eminent scientists that there sort of
was such a place, sort of a place. Sort of a road going to it too. They pointed
out the same improbable way that Willy McGilly had pointed out.
The three eminents took the road. The flats hadn't flooded lately. The road
was sand, but it could be negotiated. They came to the town, to the sort of
town, in the ragged river flats. There was such a place. They went to the
Cimarron Hotel which was like any hotel anywhere, only older. They went
into the dining room, for it was noon.
It had tables, but it was more than a dining room. It was a common room.
It even had intimations of old elegance in blued pier mirrors. There was a
dingy bar there. There was a pool table there, and a hairy man was playing
rotation with the Comet on it. The Comet was a long gray-bearded man (in
fact, comet means a star with a beard) and small pieces were always falling
off him. Clay-colored men with their hats on were playing dominos at several
of the tables, and there were half a dozen dogs in the room. Something a little
queer and primordial about those dogs! Something a little queer and
primordial about the whole place!
But, as if set to serve as distraction, there was a remarkably pretty girl
there, and she might have been a waitress. She seemed to be waiting, either
listlessly or profoundly, for something.
Dr Velikof Vonk twinkled his deep eyes in their orbital caves: perhaps he
cogitated his massive brain behind his massive orbital ridges: and he arrived,
by sheer mentality, at the next step.
“Have you a menu, young lady?” he asked.
“No,” she answered simply, but it wasn't simple at all. Her voice didn't go
with her prettiness. It was much more intricate than her appearance, even in
that one syllable. It was powerful, not really harsh, deep and resonant as
caverns, full and timeless. The girl was big-boned beneath her prettiness,
a
a
with heavy brindled hair and complex eyes.
"We would like something to eat,” Arpad Arkabaranan ventured. "What
do you have?”
“They're fixing it for you now," the girl said. “I'll bring it after a while.”
There was a rich river smell about the whole place, and the room was
badly lit.
“Her voice is an odd one,” Arpad whispered in curious admiration. “Like
rocks rolled around by water, but it also has a touch of springtime in it,
springtime of a very peculiar duality.”
“Not just a springtime; it's an interstadial time,” Willy McGilly stated
accurately. “I've noticed that about them in other places. It's old green season
in their voices, green season between the ice.”
The room was lit only by hanging lamps. They had a flicker to them. They
were not electric.
“There's a lot of the gas-light era in this place,” Arpad gave the opinion,
"but the lights aren't gas lights either."
“No, they're hanging oil lamps,” Velikof said. “An amusing fancy just
went through my head that they might be old whale-oil lamps.”
"Girl, what do you burn in the hanging lamps?” Willy McGilly asked her.
“Catfish oil,” she said in the resonant voice that had a touch of the green
interstadial time in it. And catfish oil burns with a clay-colored flame.
“Can you bring us drinks while we wait?” Velikof of the massive head
asked.
“They're fixing them for you now," the girl said. “I'll bring them after a
while.”
Meanwhile on the old pool table the Comet was beating the hairy man at
rotation. Nobody could beat the Comet at rotation.
"We came here looking for strange creatures,” Arpad said in the direction
of the girl. “Do you know anything about strange creatures or people, or
where they can be found?”
“You are the only strange people who have come here lately,” she told
them. Then she brought their drinks to them, three great sloshing clay cups or
bulbous stems that smelled strongly of river, perhaps of interstadial river. She
set them in front of the eminents with something like a twinkle in her eyes;
something like, but much more. It was laughing lightning flashing from under
the ridges of that pretty head. She was awaiting their reaction.
Velikof cocked a big deep eye at his drink. This itself was a feat. Other men hadn’t such eyes, or such brows above them, as had Velikof Vonk. They took a bit of cocking, and it wasn’t done lightly. And Velikof grinned out of deep folk memory as he began to drink. Velikof was always strong on the folk memory bit. Arpad Arkabaranan screamed, rose backward, toppled his chair, and stood aghast while pointing a shaking finger at his splashing clay cup. Arpad was disturbed. Willy McGilly drank deeply from his own stirring vessel. “Why, it’s Green Snake Snorter!” he cried in amazement and delight. “Oh drink of drinks, thou’re a pleasure beyond expectation! They used to serve it to us back home, but I never even hoped to find it here. What great thing have we done to deserve this?” He drank again of the wonderful splashing liquor while the spray of it filled the air. And Velikof also drank with noisy pleasure. The girl righted Arpad’s chair, put Arpad into it again with strong hands, and addressed him powerfully to his cresting breaker. But Arpad was scared of his lively drink. “It’s alive, it’s alive,” was all that he could jabber. Arpad Arkabaranan specialized in primitives, and primitives by definition are prime stuff. But there wasn’t, now in his moment of weakness, enough prime stuff in Arpad himself to face so pleasant and primitive a drink as this. The liquid was sparkling with bright action, was adequately alcoholic, something like choc beer, and there was a green snake in each cup. (Velikof in his notebook states that they were green worms of the species vermis ebrius viridis, but that is only a quibble. They were snakelike worms and of the size of small snakes, and we will call them snakes.) “Do get with it, Arpad,” Willy McGilly cried. “The trick is to drink it up before the snake drinks it. I tell you though that the snakes can discern when a man is afraid of them. They’ll fang the face off a man who’s afraid of them.” “Ah, I don’t believe that I want the drink,” Arpad declared with sickish grace. “I’m not much of a drinking man.” So Arpad’s green snake drank up his Green Snake Snorter, noisily and greedily. Then it expired—it breathed out its life and evaporated. That green snake was gone. “Where did he go?” Arpad asked nervously. He was still uneasy about the
business. “Back to the catfish,” the girl said. “All the snakes are spirits of catfish just out for a little ramble.” “Interesting,” Velikof said, and he noted in his pocket notebook that the vermis ebrius viridis is not a discrete species of worm or snake, but is rather spirit of catfish. It is out of such careful notation that science is built up. “Is there anything noteworthy about Boomer Flats?” Velikof asked the girl then. “Has it any unique claim to fame?” “Yes,” the girl said. “This is the place that the comets come back to.” “Ah, but the moths have eaten the comets,” Willy McGilly quoted from the old epic. The girl brought them three big clay bowls heaped with fish eggs, and these they were to eat with three clay spoons. Willy McGilly and Dr. Velikof Vonk addressed themselves to the rich meal with pleasure, but Arpad Arkabaranan refused. “Why, it’s all mixed with mud and sand and trash,” he objected. “Certainly, certainly, wonderful, wonderful,” Willy McGilly slushed out the happy words with a mouth full of delicious goop. “I always thought that something went out of the world when they cleaned up the old shantytown dish of shad roe. In some places they cleaned it up; not everywhere. I maintain that roe at its best must always have at least a slight tang of river sewage.” But Arpad broke his clay spoon in disgust. And he would not eat. Arpad had traveled a million miles in search of it but he didn’t know it when he found it; he hadn’t any of it inside him so he missed it. One of the domino players at a near table (the three eminents had noticed this some time before but had not fully realized it) was a bear. The bear was dressed as a shabby man, he wore a big black hat on his head; he played dominos well; he was winning. “How is it that the bear plays so well?” Velikof asked. “He doesn’t play at all well,” Willy McGilly protested. “I could beat him. I could beat any of them.” “He isn’t really a bear,” the girl said. “He is my cousin. Our mothers, who were sisters, were clownish. His mother licked him into the shape of a bear for fun. But that is nothing to what my mother did to me. She licked me into pretty face and pretty figure for a joke, and now I am stuck with it. I think it
is too much of a joke. I’m not really like this, but I guess I may as well laugh at me just as everybody else does.” “What is your name?” Arpad asked her without real interest. “Crayola Catfish.” But Arpad Arkabaranan didn’t hear or recognize the name, though it had been on a tape that Dr. Velikof Vonk had played for them, the same tape that had really brought them to Boomer Flats. Arpad had now closed his eyes and ears and heart to all of it. The hairy man and the Comet were still shooting pool, but pieces were still falling off the Comet. “He’s diminishing, he’s breaking up,” Velikof observed. “He won’t last another hundred years at that rate.” Then the eminents left board and room and the Cimarron Hotel to go looking for ABSMs who were rumored to live in that area. ABSM is the code name for the Abominable Snowman, for the Hairy Woodman, for the Wild Man of Borneo, for the Sasquatch, for the Booger- Man, for the Ape-Man, for the Bear-Man, for the Missing Link, for the nine- foot-tall Giant things, for the living Neanderthals. It is believed by some that all of these beings are the same. It is believed by most that these things are no thing at all, no where, not in any form. And it seemed as if the most were right, for the three eminents could not find hide nor hair (rough hide and copious hair were supposed to be marks by which the ABSMs might be known) of the queer folks anywhere along the red bank of the Cimarron River. Such creatures as they did encounter were very like the shabby and untalkative creatures they had already encountered in Boomer Flats. They weren’t an ugly people: they were pleasantly mud- homely. They were civil and most often they were silent. They dressed something as people had dressed seventy-five years before that time—as the poor working people had dressed then. Maybe they were poor, maybe not. They didn’t seem to work very much. Sometimes a man or a woman seemed to be doing a little bit of work, very casually. It may be that the red-mud river was full of fish. Something was splashing and jumping there. Big turtles waddled up out of the water, caked with mud even around their eyes. The shores and flats were treacherous, and sometimes an eminent would sink into the sand-mud up to the hips. But the broad-footed people of the area didn’t seem to sink in.
There was plenty of greenery (or brownery, for it had been the dusty weeks) along the shores. There were muskrats, there were even beavers, there were skunks and possums and badgers. There were wolf dens and coyote dens digged into the banks, and they had their particular smells about them. There were dog dens. There were coon trees. There were even bear dens or caves. But no, that was not a bear smell either. What smell was it? “What lives in these clay caves?” Velikof asked a woman who was digging river clams there. “The Giants live in them,” she said. Well, they were tall enough to be Giants’ caves. A nine-footer need hardly stoop to enter one. “We have missed it,” Arpad said. “There is nothing at all to be found here. I will travel farther, and I may find it in other places.” “Oh, I believe we are right in the middle of it,” Velikof gave the opinion. “It is all around us, Arpad, everything you wanted,” Willy McGilly insisted. But Arpad Arkabaranan would have none of the muddy water, none of the red sand or the red sand caves, nothing of anything here. The interest had all gone out of him. The three of them went back to the Cimarron Hotel without, apparently, finding primitive creature or missing link at all. They entered the common room of the hotel again. Dominos were set before them. They played draw listlessly. “You are sure that there are no odd creatures around this place?” Arpad again asked the girl Crayola Catfish. “John Salt is an odd creature and he comes from this place,” Crayola told them. “The Licorice Man is an odd creature, I suppose. So is Ape Woodman: he used to be a big-time football player. All three of them had regular-people blood in them; I suppose that’s what made them odd. They were almost as odd as you three creatures. And the Comet playing pool there is an odd one. I don’t know what kind of blood he has in him to make him odd.” “How long has he been around here?” Velikof asked. “He returns every eighty-seven years. He stays here about three years, and he’s already been here two of them. Then he goes off on another circuit. He goes out past the planets and among the stars.” “Oh? And how does he travel out there?” Velikof asked with cocked tongue and eye. “With horse and buggy, of course.”
“Oh there, Comet,” Willy McGilly called. “Is it true that you travel out among the stars with horse and buggy?” “Aye, that I do,” the long gray-bearded man named Comet called back, “with a horse named Pee-gosh and a buggy named Harma. It’s a flop-eared horse and a broken buggy, but they take me there.” “Touch clay,” said Crayola Catfish, “for the lightning.” They touched clay. Everything was of baked clay anyhow, even the dominos. And there had been lightning, fantastic lightning dashing itself through every crack and cranny of the flimsy hotel. It was a lightning brighter than all the catfish-oil lamps in the world put together. And it continued. There was clattering sequence thunder, and there was a roaring booming sound that came from a few miles west of the thunder. The Giants came in and stood around the edges of the room. They were all very much alike, like brothers. They were tall and somber, shabby, black- bearded to the eyes, and with black hats on their heads. Unkempt. All were about nine feet tall. “Shall I sound like a simpleton if I ask if they are really giants?” Velikof questioned. “As your eyes tell you, they are the Giants,” Crayola said. “They stay here in the out-of-the-way places even more than the rest of us. Sometimes regular people see them and do not understand that they are regular people too. For that there is scandal. It was the scent of such a scandal, I believe, that brought the three of you here. But they are not apes or bears or monsters. They are people too.” “They are of your own same kindred?” Velikof asked. “Oh yes. They are the uncles, the old bachelors. That’s why they grow tall and silent. That’s why they stand around the edges of the room. And that is why they dig themselves caves into the banks and bluffs instead of living in huts. The roofs of huts are too low for them.” “It would be possible to build taller huts,” Willy McGilly suggested. “It would be possible for you, yes,” Crayola said. “It would not be possible for them. They are set in their ways. They develop a stoop and a gait because they feel themselves so tall. They let their hair grow and overflow, all over their faces and around their eyes, and all over their bodies also. They are the steers of the species. Having no children or furniture, what can they do but grow tall and ungainly like that? This happens also to the steers of
cattle and bears and apes, that they grow tall and gangling. They become bashful, you see, so sometimes it is mistakenly believed that they are fierce.” The roaring and booming from west of the thunder was becoming louder and nearer. The river was coming dangerously alive. All of the people in the room knew that it was now dark outside, and it was not yet time to be night. The Comet gave his pool cue to one of the bashful giants and came and sat with the eminents. “You are Magi?” he asked. “I am a magus, yes,” Willy McGilly said. “We are called eminent scientists nowadays. Velikof here also remains a magus, but Arpad has lost it all this day.” “You are not the same three I first believed,” the old Comet said. “Those three passed me several of my cycles back. They had had word of an Event, and they had come from a great distance as soon as they heard it. But it took them near two thousand years to make the trip and they were worried that myth had them as already arriving long ago. They were worried that false Magi had anticipated them and set up a preventing myth. And I believe that is what did happen.” “And your own myths, old fellow, have they preceded you, or have you really been here before?” Willy McGilly asked. “I see that you have a twisty tongue that turns out some really winding myths.” “Thank you, for that is ever my intent. Myths are not merely things that were made in times past: myths are among the things that maintain the present in being. I wish most strongly that the present should be maintained: I often live in it.” “Tell us, old man, why Boomer Flats is a place that the comets come back to?” Willy said. “Oh, it’s just one of the post stations where we change horses when we make our orbits. A lot of the comets come to the Flats: Booger, Donati, Encke, 1914c, and Halley.” “But why to Boomer Flats on the little Cimarron River?” Willy inquired. “Things are often more than they seem. The Cimarron isn’t really so little a river as you would imagine. Actually it is the river named Ocean that runs around all the worlds.” “Old Comet, old man with the pieces falling off of you,” Dr. Velikof Vonk asked out of that big head of his, “can you tell us just who are the under-
people that we have tracked all around the world and have probably found here no more than seventy miles from our own illustrious T-Town?” “A phyz like you have on you, and you have to ask!” the old Comet twinkled at Velikof (a man who twinkled like that had indeed been among the stars; he had their dust on him). “You’re one of them, you know.” “I’ve suspected that for a long time,” Velikof admitted. “But who are they? And who am I?” “Wise Willy here said it correctly to you last night; that they were the scrubs who bottom the breed. But do not demean the scrubs: they are the foundation. They are human as all of us are human. They are a race that underlies the other several races of man. When the bones and blood of the more manifest races grow too thin, then they sustain you with the mixture of their strong kingship: the mixing always goes on, but in special eras it is more widespread. They are the link that is never really missing, the link between the clay and the blood.” “Why are they, and me if I were not well-kempt and eminent, sometimes taken to be animals?” Velikof asked. “Why do they always live in such outlandish places?” “They don’t always. Sometimes they live in very inlandish places. Even wise Willy understands that. But it is their function to stand apart and grow in strength. Look at the strong bone structure of that girl there! It is their function to invent forms—look at the form her mother invented for her. They have a depth of mind, and they have it particularly in those ghostly areas where the other races lack it. And they share and mingle it in those sudden motley ages of great achievement and vigor. Consider the great ages of Athens, of Florence, of Los Angeles. And afterward, this people will withdraw again to gather new strength and bottom.” “And why are they centered here in a tumble-down hotel that is like a series of old daguerreotypes?” Willy McGilly asked. “Will you tell us that there is something cosmic about this little old hotel, as there is about this little old river?” “Aye, of course there is, Willy. This is the hotel named Xenodocheion. This is the special center of these Xenoi, these strangers, and of all strangers everywhere. It isn’t small; it is merely that you can see but a portion of it at one time. And then they center here to keep out of the way. Sometimes they live in areas and neighborhoods that regularized humanity has abandoned
a
(whether in inner-city or boondock). Sometimes they live in eras and decades
that regularized humanity has abandoned: for their profundity of mind in the
more ghostly areas, they have come to have a cavalier way with time. What is
wrong with that? If regular people are finished with those days and times,
why may not others use them?”
The roaring and booming to the west of the thunder had become very loud
and very near now, and in the immediate outdoors there was heavy rain.
“It is the time," the girl Crayola Catfish cried out in her powerful and
intricate voice. “The flash flood is upon us and it will smash everything. We
will all go and lie down in the river.”
They all began to follow her out, the Boomer Flats people, and the Giants
among them; the eminents, everybody.
“Will you also lie down in the river, Comet?” Willy McGilly asked.
"Somehow I don't believe it of you."
“No, I will not. That isn't my way. I will take my horse and buggy and
ascend above it.”
“Ah, but Comet, will it look like a horse and buggy to us?”
a
“No, it will look quite other, if you do chance to see it.”
“And what are you really, Comet?” Velikof asked him as they left him.
“What species do you belong to?"
“To the human species, of course, Velikof. I belong to still another race of
it; another race that mixes sometimes, and then withdraws again to gather
more strength and depth. Some individuals of us withdraw for quite long
times. There are a number of races of us in the wide cousinship, you see, and
it is a necessity that we be strangers to each other for a good part of the time.”
“Are you a saucerian?”
"Oh saucerian be damned, Velikof! Harma means chariot or it means
buggy; it does not mean saucer. We are the comets. And our own mingling
with the commonalty of people has also had quite a bit to do with those
sudden incandescent eras. Say, I'd like to talk with you fellows again some
time. I'll be by this way again in about eighty-seven years.”
“Maybe so," said Dr. Velikof Vonk.
“Maybe so," said Willy McGilly.
*
*
The eminents followed the Boomer Flats people to the river. And the Comet,
we suppose, took his horse and buggy and ascended out of it. Odd old fellow
he was; pieces falling off him; he'd hardly last another hundred years.
The red and black river was in surging flood with a blood-colored crest
bearing down. And the flats—they were just too flat. The flood would be a
mile wide here in one minute and everywhere in that width it would be deep
enough and swift enough to drown a man. It was near dark: it was near the
limit of roaring sound. But there was a pile of large rocks there in the
deepening shallows: plenty of rocks: at least one big heavy rock for every
person.
The Boomer Flats people understood what the rocks were for, and the
Giants among them understood. Two of the eminents understood; and one of
them, Arpad, apparently did not. Arpad was carrying on in great fear about
the dangers of death by drowning.
Quickly then, to cram mud into the eyes and ears and noses and mouths.
There is plenty of mud and all of it is good. Spirits of Catfish protect us now!
-it will be only for a few hours, for two or three days at the most.
Arpad alone panicked. He broke and ran when Crayola Catfish tried to put
mud in his mouth and nose to save him. He ran and stumbled in the rising
waters to his death.
But all the others understood. They lay down in the red roaring river, and
one of the Giants set a heavy rock on the breast of every person of them to
hold them down. The last of the Giants then rolled the biggest of the rocks
onto his own breast.
So all were safe on the bottom of the surging torrent, safe in the old mud-
clay cradle. Nobody can stand against a surging flood like that: the only way
is to lie down on the bottom and wait it out. And it was a refreshing, a
deepening, a renewing experience. There are persons, both inside and outside
the orders, who make religious retreats of three days every year for their
renewal. This was very like such a retreat.
When the flood had subsided (this was three days later), they all rose
again, rolling the big rocks off their breasts; they cleared their eyes and ears
and mouths of the preserving mud, and they resumed their ways and days.
For Velikof Vonk and for Willy McGilly it had been an enriching
experience. They had found the link that was not really lost, leaving the other
ninety-nine meanwhile. They had grown in cousinship and wisdom. They
said they would return to the flats every year at mud-duck season and turtle-
egg season. They went back to T-Town enlarged and happy.
There is, however, a gap in the Magi set, due to the foolish dying of Arpad
Arkabaranan. It is not of scripture that a set of Magi should consist of only
three. There have been sets of seven and nine and eleven. It is almost of
scripture, though, that a set should not consist of less than three. In the
Masulla Apocalypse it seems to be said that a set must contain at the least a
Comet, a Commoner, and a Catfish. The meaning of this is pretty muddy, and
it may be a mistranslation.
There is Dr. Velikof Vonk with his huge head, with his heavy orbital
ridges, with the protruding near-muzzle on him that makes the chin
unnecessary and impossible, with the great back-brain and the great good
humor. He is (and you had already guessed it of him) an ABSM, a neo-
Neanderthal, an unmissing link, one of that branch of the human race that
lives closest to the clay and the catfish.
There is Willy McGilly who belongs (and he himself has come to the
realization of this quite lately) to that race of mankind called the Comets. He
is quite bright, and he has his periods. He himself is a short-orbit comet, but
for all that he has been among the stars. Pieces fall off of him; he leaves a
wake; but he'll last a while yet.
One more is needed so that this set of Magi may be formed again. The
other two aspects being already covered, the third member could well be a
regularized person. It could be an older person of ability, an eminent. It could
be a younger person of ability, a pre-eminent.
This person may be you. Put your hand to it if you have the surety about
you, if you are not afraid of green snakes in the cup (they'll fang the face off
you if you're afraid of them), or of clay-mud, or of comet dust, or of the
rollicking world between.
So, here’s a quick story of mine, relevant to this particular story. My wife became pregnant when I was twenty-nine years old, and when she told me the news
a) I was ecstatic; b) I suddenly begun waking up at three in the morning every night with the thought “dude, you’re totally gonna die one day” ricocheting through my brain.
You don’t need to be a genius of psychology to figure this one out. With the advent of our child, I was no longer the final generation on the family chain; a new link would be forged and I would be inevitably pulled into eternity’s maw. I would survive by passing along my genes, not by living forever, which, up to age twenty-nine apparently, was my unspoken assumption. I got over it. My kid’s pretty great and I don’t mind shuffling off the mortal coil, because I helped make her, and also I wrote a few books people might still read after I’m gone. I’m doing OK. But that jolt of awareness I got at twenty-nine pops up again every now and then, in a slightly different way. I don’t mind so much that I will die. But I’m sad that I will no longer exist. I enjoy existing. Existing is pretty neat. And while I’m pretty sure that when I no longer exist I won’t mind (I didn’t mind not existing before I was born, after all), right now I’m put out about it. I mean, I put a lot of effort into developing a sense of self, here, people. I don’t get to take it with me? That’s some bullshit right there, I tell you.
Introduction by John Scalzi
Old Foot Forgot
It’s selfish of me but I don’t mind that little bit of selfishness. It won’t help me in the end, but until then it gets me along. As I said, this story is relevant to “Old Foot Forgot,” which is a story that makes me both happy and sad. Happy because clearly Lafferty got where I was coming from. Sad because, well. Oblivion awaits, doesn’t it? Fine. Bring it on (eventually). Until then: hey, I’m here, man. And I like it.
“Dookh-Doctor, it is a sphairikos patient,” Lay Sister Moira P. T. de C. cried happily. “It is a genuine spherical alien patient. You’ve never had one before, not in good faith. I believe it is what you need to distract you from the—ah— happy news about yourself. It is good for a Dookh-Doctor to have a different patient sometimes.” “Thank you, lay sister. Let it, him, her, fourth case, fifth case, or whatever come in. No, I’ve never had a sphairikos in good faith. I doubt if this one is, but I will enjoy the encounter.” The sphairikos rolled or pushed itself in. It was a big one, either a blubbery kid or a full-grown one. It rolled itself along by extruding and withdrawing pseudopods. And it came to rest grinning, a large translucent rubbery ball of fleeting colors. “Hello, Dookh-Doctor,” it said pleasantly. “First I wish to extend my own sympathy and that of my friends who do not know how to speak to you for the happy news about yourself. And secondly I have an illness of which you may cure me.” “But the sphairikoi are never ill,” Dookh-Doctor Drague said dutifully. How did he know that the round creature was grinning at him? By the colors, of course; by the fleeting colors of it. They were grinning colors. “My illness is not of the body but of the head,” said the sphairikos. “But the sphairikoi have no heads, my friend.” “Then it is of another place and another name, Dookh-Doctor. There is a thing in me suffering. I come to you as a Dookh-Doctor. I have an illness in my Dookh.”
Old Foot Forgot
“That is unlikely in a sphairikos. You are all perfectly balanced, each a cosmos unto yourself. And you have a central solution that solves everything. What is your name?” “Krug Sixteen, which is to say that I am the sixteenth son of Krug; the sixteen fifth case son, of course. Dookh-Doc, the pain is not in me entirely; it is in an old forgotten part of me.” “But you sphairikoi have no parts, Krug Sixteen. You are total and indiscriminate entities. How would you have parts?” “It is one of my pseudopods, extended and then withdrawn in much less than a second long ago when I was a little boy. It protests, it cries, it wants to come back. It has always bothered me, but now it bothers me intolerably. It screams and moans constantly now.” “Do not the same ones ever come back?” “No. Never. Never exactly the same ones. Will exactly the same water ever run past one point in a brook? No. We push them out and we draw them back. And we push them out again, millions of times. But the same one can never come back. There is no identity. But this one cries to come back, and now it becomes more urgent. Dookh-Doc, how can it be? There is not one same molecule in it as when I was a boy. There is nothing of that pseudopod that is left; but parts of it have come out as parts of other pseudopods, and now there can be no parts left. There is nothing remaining of that foot; it has all been absorbed a million times. But it cries out! And I have compassion on it.” “Krug Sixteen, it may possibly be a physical or mechanical difficulty, a pseudopod imperfectly withdrawn, a sort of rupture whose effects you interpret wrongly. In that case it would be better if you went to your own doctors, or doctor: I understand that there is one.” “That old fogey cannot help me, Dookh-Doc. And our pseudopods are always perfectly withdrawn. We are covered with the twinkling salve; it is one-third of our bulk. And if we need more of it we can make more of it ourselves; or we can beg some of it from a class four who makes it prodigiously. It is the solvent for everything. It eases every possible wound; it makes us round as balls; you should use it yourself, Dookh-Doc. But there is one small foot in me, dissolved long ago, that protests and protests. Oh, the shrieking! The horrible dreams!” “But the sphairikoi do not sleep and do not dream.”
"Right enough, Dookh-Doc. But there's an old dead foot of mine that sure
does dream loud and wooly."
The sphairikos was not grinning now. He rolled about softly in
apprehension. How did the Dookh-Doctor know that it was apprehension? By
the fleeting colors. They were apprehension colors now.
“Krug Sixteen, I will have to study your case," said the Dookh-Doctor. “I
will see if there are any references to it in the literature, though I don't
believe that there are. I will seek for analogy. I will probe every possibility.
Can you come back at the same hour tomorrow?”
"I will come back, Dookh-Doc,” Krug Sixteen sighed. "I hate to feel that
small vanished thing crying and trembling.”
It rolled or pushed itself out of the clinic by extruding and then
withdrawing pseudopods. The little pushers came out of the goopy surface of
the sphairikos and then were withdrawn into it completely. A raindrop falling
in a pond makes a much more lasting mark than does the disappearing
pseudopod of a sphairikos.
But long ago, in his boyhood, one of the pseudopods of Krug Sixteen had
not disappeared completely in every respect.
“There are several jokers waiting," Lay Sister Moira P. T. de C. announced a
little later, “and perhaps some valid patients among them. It's hard to tell.”
“Not another sphairikos?” the Dookh-Doctor asked in sudden anxiety.
“Of course not. The one this morning is the only sphairikos who has ever
come. How could there be anything wrong with him? There is never anything
wrong with a sphairikos. No, these are all of the other species. Just a regular
morning bunch.”
So, except for the visitation of the sphairikos, it was a regular morning at
the clinic. There were about a dozen waiting, of the several species; and at
least half of them would be jokers. It was always so.
There was a lean and giddy subula. One cannot tell the age or sex of them.
But there was a tittering. In all human or inhuman expression, whether of
"
sound, color, radioray, or osmerhetor, the titter suggests itself. It is just
around the corner, it is just outside, it is subliminal, but it is there somewhere.
“It is that my teeth hurt so terrible,” the subula shrilled so high that the
Dookh-Doctor had to go on instruments to hear it. “They are tromping pain.
They are agony. I think I will cut my head off. Have you a head-off cutter,
Dookh-Doctor?”
“Let me see your teeth,” Dookh-Doctor Drague asked with the beginnings
of irritation.
“There is one tooth jump up and down with spike boot,” the subula
shrilled. “There is one jag like poisoned needle. There is one cuts like coarse
rough saw. There is one burns like little hot fires.”
“Let me see your teeth,” the Dookh-Doctor growled evenly.
“There is one drills holes and sets little blasting powder in them,” the
subula shrilled still more highly. “Then he sets them off. Ow! Good night!”
“Let me see your teeth!!”
"Peeef!” the subula shrilled. The teeth cascaded out, half a bushel of them,
ten thousand of them, all over the floor of the clinic.
"Peeef,” the subula screeched again, and ran out of the clinic.
Tittering? (But he should have remembered that the subula have no teeth.)
Tittering? It was the laughing of demented horses. It was the jackhammer
braying of the dolcus, it was the hysterical giggling of the ophis (they were a
half a bushel of shells of the little stink conches and they were already
beginning to rot), it was the clown laughter of the arktos (the clinic would
never be habitable again; never mind, he would burn it down and build
another one tonight).
The jokers, the jokers, they did have their fun with him, and perhaps it did
them some good.
“I have this trouble with me,” said a young dolcus, “but it make me so
nervous to tell it. Oh, it do make me nervous to tell it to the Dookh-Doc.”
“Do not be nervous,” said the Dookh-Doctor, fearing the worst. “Tell me
your trouble in whatever way you can. I am here to serve every creature that
is in any trouble or pain whatsoever. Tell it.”
“Oh but it make me so nervous. I perish. I shrivel. I will have accident I
am so nervous.”
“Tell me your trouble, my friend. I am here to help.”
“Whoops, whoops, I already have accident! I tell you I am nervous.”
The dolcus urinated largely on the clinic floor. Then it ran out laughing.
The laughing, the shrilling, the braying, the shrill giggling that seemed to
scrape the flesh from his bones. (He should have remembered that the dolcus
do not urinate; everything comes from them hard and solid.) The hooting, the
laughing! It was a bag of green water from the kolmula swamp. Even the
aliens gagged at it, and their laughter was of a pungent green sort.
Oh well, there were several of the patients with real, though small,
ailments, and there were more jokers. There was the arktos who—(Wait,
wait, that particular jokerie cannot be told with human persons present; even
the subula and the ophis blushed lavender at the rawness of it. A thing like
that can only be told to arktos themselves.) And there was another dolcus
who—
Jokers, jokers, it was a typical morning at the clinic.
One does whatever one can for the oneness that is greater than self. In the
case of Dookh-Doctor Drague it meant considerable sacrifice. One who
works with the strange species here must give up all hope of material reward
or material sophistication in his surroundings. But the Dookh-Doctor was a
dedicated man.
Oh, the Dookh-Doctor lived pleasantly and with a sort of artful simplicity
and dynamic involvement in the small articles of life. He had an excited
devotion and balanced intensity for corporate life.
He lived in small houses of giolach-weed, woven with careful double-
rappel. He lived in each one for seven days only, and then burned it and
scattered the ashes, taking always one bitter glob of them on his tongue for
reminder of the fleetingness of temporal things and the wonderfulness of the
returning. To live in one house for more than seven days is to become dull
and habitual; but the giolach-weed will not burn well till it has been cut and
plaited for seven days, so the houses set their own terms. One half day to
build, seven days to inhabit, one half day to burn ritually and scatter, one
renewal night under the speir-sky.
The Dookh-Doctor ate raibe, or he ate innuin or ull or piorra when they
were in season. And for the nine days of each year when none of these were
in season, he ate nothing at all.
His clothing he made himself of colg. His paper was of the pailme plant.
His printer used buaf ink and shaved slinn stone. Everything that he needed
he made for himself from things found wild in the hedgerows. He took
nothing from the cultivated land or from the alien peoples. He was a poor and
dedicated servant.
Now he stacked some of the needful things from the clinic, and Lay Sister
Moira P. T. de C. took others of them to her own giolach house to keep till
the next day. Then the Dookh-Doctor ritually set his clinic on fire, and a few
moments later his house. This was all symbol of the great nostos, the
returning. He recited the great rhapsodies, and other persons of the human
kind came by and recited with him.
“That no least fiber of giolach die,” he recited, “that all enter immediately
the more glorious and undivided life. That the ashes are the doorway, and
every ash is holy. That all become a part of the oneness that is greater than
self.
“That no splinter of the giuis floorboards die, that no glob of the chinking
clay die, that no mite or louse in the plaiting die. That all become a part of the
oneness that is greater than self.”
He burned, he scattered, he recited, he took one glob of bitter ash on his
tongue. He experienced vicariously the great synthesis. He ate holy innuin
and holy ull. And when it was finished, both of the house and the clinic,
when it had come on night and he was homeless, he slept that renewal night
under the speir-sky.
And in the morning he began to build again, the clinic first, and then the
house. “It is the last of either that I shall ever build,” he said. The happy news
about himself was that he was a dying man and that he would be allowed to
take the short way out. So he built most carefully with the Last Building
Rites. He chinked both the buildings with special uir clay that would give a
special bitterness to the ashes at the time of final burning.
Krug Sixteen rolled along while the Dookh-Doctor still built his final
clinic, and the sphairikos helped him in the building while they consulted on
the case of the screaming foot. Krug Sixteen could weave and plait and
rappel amazingly with his pseudopods; he could bring out a dozen of them, a
hundred, thick or thin, whatever was needed, and all of a wonderful dexterity.
That globe could weave.
“Does the forgotten foot still suffer, Krug Sixteen?” Dookh-Doctor
Drague asked it.
“It suffers, it's hysterical, it's in absolute terror. I don't know where it is; it
does not know; and how I know about it at all is a mystery. Have you found
any way to help me, to help it?"
"No. I am sorry, but I have not.”
“There is nothing in the literature on this subject?”
“No. Nothing that I can identify as such.”
"And you have not found analogy to it?”
“Yes, Krug Sixteen, ah— In a way I have discovered analogy. But it does
not help you. Or me."
“That is too bad, Dookh-Doc. Well, I will live with it; and the little foot
will finally die with it. Do I guess that your case is somewhat the same as
mine?”
“No. My case is more similar to that of your lost foot than to you.”
“Well, I will do what I can for myself, and for it. It's back to the old
remedy then. But I am already covered deep with the twinkling salve."
"So am I, Krug Sixteen, in a like way.”
a
“I was ashamed of my affliction before and did not mention it. Now,
however, since I have spoken of it to you, I have spoken of it to others also.
There is some slight help, I find. I should have shot off my big bazoo before.”
“The sphairikoi have no bazoos."
“Folk-joke, Dookh-Doc. There is a special form of the twinkling salve.
My own is insufficient, so I will try the other.”
“A special form of it, Krug Sixteen? I am interested in this. My own salve
seems to have lost its effect.”
"There is a girlfriend, Dookh-Doc, or a boyfriend person. How shall I say
it? It is a case four person to my case five. This person, though promiscuous,
is expert. And this person exudes the special stuff in abundance."
“Not quite my pot of ointment I'm afraid, Krug Sixteen; but it may be the
answer for you. It is special? And it dissolves everything, including
objections?”
“It is the most special of all the twinkling salves, Dookh-Doc, and it solves
and dissolves everything. I believe it will reach my forgotten foot, wherever
it is, and send it into kind and everlasting slumber. It will know that it is itself
that slumbers, and that will be bearable."
“If I were not-ah-going out of business, Krug Sixteen, I'd get a bit of it
and try to analyze it. What is the name of this special case four person?”
"Torchy Twelve is its name.”
“Yes. I have heard of her.”
* *
*
Everybody now knew that it was the last week in the life of the Dookh-
Doctor, and everyone tried to make his happiness still more happy. The
morning jokers outdid themselves, especially the arktos. After all, he was
dying of an arktos disease, one never fatal to the arktos themselves. They did
have some merry and outrageous times around the clinic, and the Dookh-
Doctor got the sneaky feeling that he would rather live than die. He hadn't, it
was plain to see, the right attitude. So Lay Priest Migma P. T. de C. tried to
inculcate the right attitude in him.
"It is the great synthesis you go to, Dookh-Doctor," he said. "It is the
happy oneness that is greater than self.”
"Oh I know that, but you put it on a little too thick. I've been taught it
from my babyhood. I'm resigned to it.”
“Resigned to it? You should be ecstatic over it! The self must perish, of
course, but it will live on as an integral atom of the evolving oneness, just as
a drop lives on in the ocean.”
"Aye, Migma, but the drop may hang onto the memory of the time when it
was cloud, of the time when it was falling drop, indeed, of the time when it
was brook. It may say, “There's too damned much salt in this ocean. I'm lost
here.'
"Oh, but the drop will want to be lost, Dookh-Doctor. The only purpose of
existence is to cease to exist. And there cannot be too much of salt in the
evolving oneness. There cannot be too much of anything. All must be one in
it. Salt and sulfur must be one, undifferentiated. Offal and soul must become
one. Blessed be oblivion in the oneness that collapses on itself.”
"Stuff it, lay priest. I'm weary of it."
“Stuff it, you say? I don't understand your phrase, but I'm sure it's apt.
Yes, yes, Dookh-Doctor, stuff it all in: animals, people, rocks, grass, worlds,
and wasps. Stuff it all in. That all may be obliterated into the great—may I
not coin a word even as the master coined them?—into the great stuffiness!”
“I'm afraid your word is all too apt.”
دور
"
"It is the great quintessence, it is the happy death of all individuality and
memory, it is the synthesis of all living and dead things into the great
amorphism. It is the—”
"It is the old old salve, and it's lost its twinkle," the Dookh-Doctor said
sadly. “How goes the old quotation? When the salve becomes sticky, how
then will you come unstuck?”
No, the Dookh-Doctor did not have the right attitude, so it was necessary
that many persons should harass him into it. Time was short. His death was
due. And there was the general fear that the Dookh-Doctor might not be
properly lost.
He surely came to his time of happiness in grumpy fashion.
The week was gone by. The last evening for him was come. The Dookh-
Doctor ritually set his clinic on fire, and a few minutes later his house.
He burned, he scattered, he recited the special last-time recital. He ate holy
innuin and holy ull. He took one glob of most bitter ash on his tongue: and he
lay down to sleep his last night under the speir-sky.
He wasn't afraid to die.
“I will cross that bridge gladly, but I want there to be another side to that
bridge,” he talked to himself. “And if there is no other side of it, I want it to
be me who knows that there is not. They say, 'Pray that you be happily lost
forever. Pray for blessed obliteration.' I will not pray that I be happily lost
forever. I would rather burn in a hell forever than suffer happy obliteration!
I'll burn if it be me that burns. I want me to be me. I will refuse forever to
surrender myself."
It was a restless night for him. Well, perhaps he could die easier if he were
wearied and sleepless at dawn.
“Other men don't make such a fuss about it,” he told himself (the self he
refused to give up). “Other men are truly happy in obliteration. Why am I
suddenly different? Other men desire to be lost, lost, lost. How have I lost the
faith of my childhood and manhood? What is unique about me?”
There was no answer to that.
“Whatever is unique about me, I refuse to give it up. I will howl and moan
against that extinction for billions of centuries. Ah, I will go sly! I will devise
a sign so I will know me if I meet me again.”
About an hour before dawn the Lay Priest Migma P. T. de C. came to Dookh-
Doctor Drague. The dolcus and the arktos had reported that the man was
resting badly and was not properly disposed.
“I have an analogy that may ease your mind, Dookh-Doctor," the Lay
Priest whispered softly, "ease it into great easiness, salve it into great salving
“Begone, fellow, your salve has lost its twinkle.”
“Consider that we have never lived, that we have only seemed to live.
Consider that we do not die, but are only absorbed into great selfless self.
Consider the odd sphairikoi of this world—”
“What about the sphairikoi? I consider them often.”
“I believe that they are set here for our instruction. A sphairikos is a total
globe, the type of the great oneness. Then consider that it sometimes ruffles
its surface, extrudes a little false-foot from its soft surface. Would it not be
odd if that false-foot, for its brief second, considered itself a person? Would
you not laugh at that?"
“No, no. I do not laugh.” And the Dookh-Doctor was on his feet.
“And in much less than a second, that pseudopod is withdrawn back into
the sphere of the sphairikoi. So it is with our lives. Nothing dies. It is only a
ripple on the surface of the oneness. Can you entertain so droll an idea as that
the pseudopod should remember, or wish to remember?”
“Yes. I'll remember it a billion years for the billion who forget.”
The Dookh-Doctor was running uphill in the dark. He crashed into trees and
boles as though he wished to remember the crashing forever. “I'll burn before
I forget, but I must have something that says it's me who burns!”
Up, up by the spherical hills of the sphairikoi, bawling and stumbling in
the dark. Up to a hut that had a certain fame he could never place, to the hut
a
that had its own identity, that sparkled with identity.
"Open, open, help me!" the Dookh-Doctor cried out at the last hut on the
hill.
“Go away, man!” the last voice protested. “All my clients are gone, and
the night is almost over with. What has this person to do with a human man
anyhow?"
It was a round twinkling voice out of the roweled dark. But there was
enduring identity there. The twinkling, enduring-identity colors, coming from
the chinks of the hut, had not reached the level of vision. There was even the
flicker of the I-will-know-me-if-I-meet-me-again color.
"Torchy Twelve, help me. I am told that you have the special salve that
solves the last problem, and makes it know that it is always itself that is
solved.”
"Why, it is the Dookh-Doc! Why have you come to Torchy?”
"I want something to send me into kind and everlasting slumber," he
moaned. “But I want it to be me who slumbers. Cannot you help me in any
way?”
"Come you in, the Dookh-Doc. This person, though promiscuous, is
expert. I help you—”
The World as Will and
Wallpaper
Introduction by Samuel R. Delany
Along with “The Primary Education of the Camiroi,” this was one of the first
tales by Raphael Aloysius Lafferty (1914–2002) I read.
Where it appeared, however, I have no notion. Possibly that's because
today I know so much more about the intellectual context that informs his
story than I did when I first read it, and it is easy to let the context overwhelm
the tale. One suspects that is part of the story's project. But in whose
anthology–Judith Merril's? Terry Carr's?—I first read this piece, I have no
notion at all.
I once taught a Clarion workshop at Tulane (where the students included
George R. R. Martin), and I wondered if somehow Lafferty himself might be
in evidence. He wasn't. And the class was in some confusion because the
young man who had set up the whole thing had also pulled out at the last
minute. It's interesting that even at that time Lafferty as a myth was so in
evidence.
But what of the tale to hand?
William Morris (1834–1896) was intelligent, rich, and multitalented. He
was a committed socialist, and the author of a number of fantasies, including
News from Nowhere and The World Beyond the Wood. He supported a
number of other artists, including Edward Burne-Jones, and he designed
ornate wallpapers still used today; as well, he printed sumptuous illustrated
editions of books such as the Kelmscott Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. He is
one of the most written-about men of his times, and he is the avatar of the
hero of Lafferty's futuristic tale of a trip through the City of the World.
As much or more than any famous Victorian figure, it's easy to see how
the nature of Morris's fame is entirely an accident of a social position.
Lafferty's title riffs on the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer's
(1788–1860) two-volume philosophical treatise The World as Will and
Representation. Schopenhauer is known for the extreme pessimism of his
philosophy and the beauty of his writing.
Like a Wallace Shawn play, Lafferty's tale takes place in a stressed future
and moves from there to its distressing end.
The story begins from a seeming common-sense challenge to the classical
description of a city, straight out of Jane Jacobs (“a concentration of persons
that is not economically self-contained...”) and sets it at the limit of its
growth: “The World City is economically self-contained.”
By the story's end, Lafferty's own pessimism is running neck and neck
with Schopenhauer’s. Lafferty's Catholicism was a topic often referred to by
fans and critics: the other writer who sits in my mind as a (severely lapsed)
Catholic is Thomas Disch. And I wonder to what extent that can be read as
part of the cultural context that informs both writers.
Lafferty's is a story of bookies and talkies and readies, where the World
City is a tidy place because it tips and tilts with the tides it floats on, and
Willy, whose “name game” is based on William Morris, goes to explore with
Kandy Kalosh and later Fairhair Farquhar, the World City which is, of
course, much too large for them to see more than a fraction of—though what
of it that's revealed, with each narrative move, is more and more distressing.
In all, “The World as Will and Wallpaper" offers a grim view of what a
world as it approaches its end times requires to be self-sustaining.
a
The World as Will and
Wallpaper
A template, a stencil, a plan.
Corniest, orniest damsel and man,
Orderly, emptily passion and pity,
All-the-World, All-the-World, All-the-World City.
-13th Street Ballad
a
There is an old dictionary-encyclopedia that defines a City as "... a
concentration of persons that is not economically self-contained.” The
dictionary-encyclopedia being an old one, however (and there is no other
kind), is mistaken. The World City is economically self-contained.
It was William Morris who read this definition in the old book. William
was a bookie, or readie, and he had read parts of several books. But now he
had a thought: if all the books are old, then things may no longer be as the
books indicate. I will go out and see what things are like today in the City. I
will traverse as much of the City as my life allows me. I may even come to
the Wood Beyond the World that my name-game ancestor described.
William went to the Permit Office of the City. Since there was only one
City, there might be only one Permit Office, though it was not large.
“I want a permit to traverse as much of the City as my life allows me,”
William told the permit man. “I even want a permit to go to the Wood Beyond
the World. Is that possible?”
The permit man did a little skittish dance around William, “like a one-
eyed gander around a rattlesnake.” The metaphor was an old and honored
one, one of the fifty-four common metaphors. They both understood it: it
didn't have to be voiced. William was the first customer the permit man had
had in many days, though, so the visit startled him.
"Since everything is permitted, you will need no permit,” the permit man
said. "Go, man, go."
“Why are you here then?” William asked him. “If there are no permits,
why is there a Permit Office?"
“This is my niche and my notch,” the permit man said. “Do away with me
and my office and you begin to do away with the City itself. It is the custom
to take a companion when you traverse the City.”
Outside, William found a companion named Kandy Kalosh and they
began to traverse the City that was the World. They began (it was no more
than coincidence) at a marker set in stone that bore the words “Beginning of
Stencil 35,352.” The City tipped and tilted a bit, and they were on their way.
Now this is what the City was like:
It was named Will of the World City, for it had been constructed by a
great and worldwide surge of creative will. Afterward, something had
happened to that surge, but it did not matter; the City was already created
then.
The City was varied, it was joyful, it was free, and it covered the entire
world. The mountains and heights had all been removed, and the City, with
its various strips of earth and sweet water and salt water, floated on the ocean
on its interlocking floaters. As to money values, everything was free; and
everything was free as to personal movement and personal choice. It was not
really crowded except in the places where the people wanted it crowded, for
people do love to congregate. It was sufficient as to foodstuff and shelter and
entertainment. These things have always been free, really; it was their
packaging and traffic that cost, and now the packaging and traffic were
virtually eliminated.
“Work is joy" flashed the subliminal signs. Of course it is. It is a joy to
stop and turn into an area and work for an hour, even an hour and a half, at
some occupation never or seldom attempted before. William and Kandy
entered an area where persons made cloth out of clamshells, softening them
in one solution, then drawing them out to filaments on a machine, then
forming (not weaving) them into cloth on still another machine. The cloth
was not needed for clothing or for curtains, though sometimes it was used for
-
one or the other. It was for ornamentation. Temperature did not require cloth
(the temperature was everywhere equitable) and modesty did not require it,
but there was something that still required a little cloth as ornament.
William and Kandy worked for nearly an hour with other happy people on
the project. It is true that their own production was all stamped “Rejected”
when they were finished, but that did not mean that it went all the way back
to the clamshells, only back to the filament stage.
"Honest labor is never lost,” William said as solemnly as a one-horned
owl with the pip.
“I knew you were a readie, but I didn't know you were a talkie,” Kandy
said. People didn't talk much then. Happy people have no need to talk. And
of course honest labor is never lost, and small bits of it are pleasurable.
This portion of the City (perhaps all portions of the City) floated on an old
ocean itself. It had, therefore, a slight heave to it all the time. "The City is a
tidy place” was an old and honored saying. It referred to the fact that the City
moved a little with the tides. It was a sort of joke.
The two young persons came ten blocks; they came a dozen. For much of
this traverse the City had been familiar to William but not to Kandy. They
had been going west, and William had always been a westing lad. Kandy,
however, had always wandered east from her homes, and she was the farthest
west that she had ever been when she met William.
They came to the 14th Street Water Ballet and watched the swimmers.
These swimmers were very good, and great numbers of curiously shaped fish
frolicked with them in the green salt-fresh pools. Anyone who wished to
could, of course, swim in the Water Ballet, but most of the swimmers seemed
to be regulars. They were part of the landscape, of the waterscape.
William and Kandy stopped to eat at an algae-and-plankton quick-lunch
place on 15th Street. Indeed, Kandy worked there for half an hour, pressing
the plankton and adding squirts of special protein as the people ordered it.
Kandy had worked in quick-lunch places before.
The two of them stopped at the Will of the World Exhibit Hall on 16th
Street. They wrote their names with a stylus in wax when they went in, or
rather William wrote the names of both of them for Kandy could not write.
And because he bore the mystic name of William, he received a card out of
the slot with a genuine Will of the World verse on it:
This City of the World is wills
Of Willful folk, and nothing daunts it.
With daring hearts we hewed the hills
To make the World as Willy wants it.
Really, had it taken such great will and heart to build the City of the World?
It must have or there would not have been a Will of the World Exhibit Hall to
commend it. There were some folks, however, who said that the building of
the World City had been an automatic response.
Kandy, being illiterate (as the slot knew), received a picture card.
They stopped at the Cliff-Dweller Complex on 17th Street. This part of the
City was new to William as well as to Kandy.
The cliffs and caves were fabricated and not natural cliff dwellings, but
they looked very much as old cliff dwellings must have looked. There were
little ladders going up from one level to the next. There were people sitting
on the little terraces with the small-windowed apartments behind them. Due
to the circular arrangement of the cliff dwellings, very many of the people
were always visible to one another. The central courtyard was like an
amphitheater. Young people played stickball and Indian ball in this area.
They made music on drums and whistles. There were artificial rattlesnakes in
coils, artificial rib-skinny dogs, artificial coyotes, artificial women in the act
of grinding corn with hand querns. And also, in little shelters or pavilions,
there were real people grinding simulacrum corn on apparatus.
Kandy Kalosh went into one of the pavilions and ground corn for fifteen
minutes. She had a healthy love for work. William Morris made corndogs out
of simulacrum corn and seaweeds. It was pleasant there. Sometimes the
people sang simulacrum Indian songs. There were patterned blankets,
brightly colored, and woven out of bindweed. There were buffoons in masks
and buffoon suits who enacted in-jokes and in-situations that were
understood by the cliff-dwelling people only, but they could be enjoyed by
everyone.
“All different, all different, every block different,” William murmured in
rapture. It had come on evening, but evening is a vague thing. It was never
very bright in the daytime or very dark at night. The World City hadn't a
clear sky but it had always a sort of diffused light. William and Kandy
traveled still farther west.
"It is wonderful to be a world traveler and to go on forever,” William
exulted. “The City is so huge that we cannot see it all in our whole lives and
every bit of it is different.”
"A talkie you are,” Kandy said. "However did I get a talkie? If I were a
talkie too I could tell you something about that every-part-of-it-is-different
bit.”
“This is the greatest thing about the whole World City,” William sang, “to
travel the City itself for all our lives, and the climax of it will be to see the
Wood Beyond the World. But what happens then, Kandy? The City goes on
forever, covering the whole sphere. It cannot be bounded. What is beyond the
Wood Beyond the World?”
“If I were a talkie I could tell you,” Kandy said.
But the urge to talk was on William Morris. He saw an older and
somehow more erect man who wore an armband with the lettering “Monitor”
on it. Of course only a readie, or bookie, like William would have been able
to read the word.
“My name-game ancestor had to do with the naming as well as the
designing of the Wood Beyond the World,” William told the erect and smiling
man, “for I also am a William Morris. I am avid to see this ultimate wood. It
is as though I have lived for the moment."
"If you will it strongly enough, then you may see it, Willy," the man said.
“But I am puzzled,” William worried out the words, and his brow was
furrowed. “What is beyond the Wood Beyond the World?”
“A riddle, but an easy one.” The man smiled. “How is it that you are a
readie and do not know such simple things?”
“Cannot you give me a clue to the easy riddle?” William begged.
“Yes,” the man said. “Your name-game ancestor had to do with the
designing of one other particular thing besides the Wood Beyond the World."
"Come along, readie, come along," Kandy said.
They went to the West Side Show Square on 18th Street. Neither of them
had ever been to such a place, but they had heard rumors of it for there is
nothing at all like the West Side Show Square on 18th Street.
There were the great amplifiers with plug-ins everywhere. Not only were
the instruments plugged in, but most of the people were themselves plugged
in. And ah! The wonderful setting was like the backside of old tenements all
together in a rough circuit. There were period fire escapes that may even have
»
been accurate. They looked as though persons might actually climb up and down on them. Indeed, light persons had actually done this in the past, but it was forbidden now as some of the folks had fallen to death or maiming. But the atmosphere was valid. Listen, there was period washing on period clotheslines! It was flapped by little wind machines just as though there were a real wind blowing. No wonder they called this the show square. It was a glum-slum, a jetto-ghetto, authentic past time. The performing people (and all the people on that part of 18th Street seemed to be performing people) were dressed in tight jeans and scalloped or ragged shirts, and even in broken shoes full of holes. It must have been very hot for them, but art is worth it. It was a memento of the time when the weather was not everywhere equitable. There were in-dramas and in-jokes and in-situations acted out. The essence of the little dramas was very intense hatred for a group or class not clearly defined. There were many of those old-period enemy groups in the various drama locations of the City. The lights were without pattern but they were bright. The music was without tune or melody or song or chord but it was very loud and very passionate. The shouting that took the place of singing was absolutely livid. Some of the performers fell to the ground and writhed there and foamed at their mouths. It was a thing to be seen and heard—once. William and Kandy finally took their leave with bleeding ears and matter-encrusted eyes. They went along to 19th Street where there was a Mingle-Mangle. It was now as dark as it ever got in the City but the Mangle was well lighted. Certain persons at the Mangle laughingly took hold of William and Kandy and married them to each other. They had bride and groom crowns made of paper and they put them on their heads. Then they wined and dined them, an old phrase. Really, they were given fine cognac made of fish serum and braised meat made of algae but also mixed with the real chopped flesh of ancients. Then William and Kandy padded down in the great Pad Palace that was next to the Mangle. Every night there were great numbers of people along that part of 19th Street, at the Mingle-Mangle and at the Pad Palace, and most of these folks were friendly, with their glazed eyes and their dampish grins.
In the morning, Kandy Kalosh wanted to return to her home even though it was nearly twenty blocks to the eastward. William watched her go without
The world’s resources are consumed disproportionately by the intelligent classes. Therefore we will keep our own numbers drastically reduced. The wan-wits have not strong reproductive or consuming urge so long as they are kept in reasonable comfort and sustenance. They are happy, they are entertained; and when they are convinced that there is no more for them to see, they become the ancients and go willingly to the choppers. But the 2 percent or so of us superior ones are necessary to run the world. Why then do we keep the others, the simple-minded billions? We keep them for the same reason that our ancestors kept blooms or lands or animals or great houses or trees or artifacts. We keep them because we want to, and because there is no effort involved. But a great effort was made once. There was an incredible surge of will. Mountains were moved and leveled. The sky itself was pulled down, as it were. The Will of the World was made manifest. It was a new act of creation. And what is the step following creation when it is discovered that the Commonality is not worthy of the City created? When it is discovered also that they are the logical cattle to fill such great pens? The next step is hierarchies. The Angels themselves have hierarchies, and we are not less. It is those who are intelligent but not quite intelligent enough to join the Club who are imperiled and destroyed as a necessity to the operation of the City. At the Summit is always the Club. It is the Club in the sense of a bludgeon and also of an organization. Will of the World Annals—Classified Abstract
2. Pleasant most special to folks of the club! Pleasant for manifold minions and hinds of it! Stuff them with plankton and choppings and chub! Simple the City and simple the minds of it. —20th Street Ballad
sorrow. He would get a westering girl to go with him on the lifelong exploration of the endlessly varied City. He might get a girl who was a talkie or even a readie, or bookie. And he did. She was named Fairhair Farquhar, though she was actually dark of hair and of surface patina. But they started out in the early morning to attain (whether in a day or a lifetime) the Wood Beyond the World. “But it is not far at all,” Fairhair said (she was a talkie). “We can reach it this very evening. We can sleep in the Wood in the very night shadow of the famous Muggers. Oh, is the morning not wonderful! A blue patch was seen only last week, a real hole in the sky. Maybe we can see another.” They did not see another. It is very seldom that a blue (or even a starry) hole can be seen in the greenhouse glass–gray color that is the sky. The Will of the World had provided sustenance for everyone, but it was a muggy and sticky World City that provided almost equally warm from pole to pole, cloyingly fertile in both the land strips and the water strips, and now just a little bit queasy. “Run, William, run in the morning!” Fairhair cried, and she ran while he shuffled after her. Fairhair did not suffer morning sickness but most of the world did: it had not yet been bred out of the races. After all, it was a very tidy world. There was a great membrane or firmament built somewhere below, and old ocean was prisoned between this firmament and the fundamental rock of Gehenna-earth. But the ocean-monster tossed and pitched and was not entirely tamed: he was still old Leviathan. Along and behind all the streets of the World City were the narrow (their width not five times the length of a man) strips, strips of very nervous and incredibly fertile land, of salt water jumping with fish and eels and dark with tortoise and so thick with blue-green plankton that one could almost walk on it, of fresh water teeming with other fish and loggy with snapping turtles and snakes, of other fresh water almost solid with nourishing algae, of mixed water filled with purged shrimp and all old estuary life; land strips again, and strips of rich chemical water where people voided themselves and their used things and from which so many valuable essences could be extracted; other strips, and then the houses and buildings of another block, for the blocks were not long. Kaleidoscope of nervous water and land, everywhere basic and everywhere different, boated with boats on the strange overpass canals,
crossed by an infinity of bridges. “And no two alike!” William sang, his morning sickness having left him. “Every one different, everything different in a world that cannot be traversed in a lifetime. We’ll not run out of wonders!” “William, William, there is something I have been meaning to tell you,” Fairhair tried to interpose. “Tell me, Fairhair, what is beyond the Wood Beyond the World, since the world is a globe without bounds?” “The World Beyond the Wood is beyond the Wood Beyond the World,” Fairhair said simply. “If you want the Wood, you will come to it, but do not be cast down if it falls short for you.” “How could it fall short for me? I am a William Morris. My name-game ancestor had to do with the naming as well as the designing of the Wood.” “Your name-game ancestor had to do with the designing of another thing also,” Fairhair said. Why, that was almost the same thing as the monitor man had said the day before. What did they mean by it? William and Fairhair came to the great Chopper House at 20th Street. The two of them went in and worked for an hour in the Chopper House. “You do not understand this, do you, little William?” Fairhair asked. “Oh, I understand enough for me. I understand that it is everywhere different.” “Yes, I suppose you understand enough for you,” Fairhair said with a touch of near sadness. (What they chopped up in the Chopper House was the ancients.) They went on and on along the strips and streets of the ever- changing city. They came to 21st Street and 22nd and 23rd. Even a writie could not write down all the marvels that were to be found at every street. It is sheer wonder to be a world traveler. There was a carnival at 23rd Street. There were barkies, sharkies, sparkies, darkies, parkies, and markies; the visitors were the markies, but it was not really bad for them. There was the very loud music even though it was supposed to be period tingle-tangle or rinky-dink. There was a steam calliope with real live steam. There were the hamburger stands with the wonderful smell of a touch of garlic in the open air, no matter that it was ancient chopper meat and crinoid-root bun from which the burgers were made. There were games of chance, smooch houses and cooch houses, whirly rides and turning wheels, wino and steino bars and bordellos, and Monster and
Misbegotten displays in clamshell-cloth tents. Really, is anyone too old to enjoy a carnival? Then let that one declare himself an ancient and turn himself in to a Chopper House. But on and on; one does not tarry when there is the whole World City to see and it not be covered in one lifetime. On 24th (or was it 25th?) Street were the Flesh Pots; and a little beyond them was the Cat Center. One ate and drank beyond reason in the Flesh Pots region and also became enmeshed in the Flesh Mesh booths. And one catted beyond reason in the honeycomb-like cubicles of the Cat Center. Fairhair went and worked for an hour at the Cat Center; she seemed to be known and popular there. But on and on! Everywhere it is different and everywhere it is better. Along about 27th and 28th Streets were the Top of the Town and Night- Life Knoll, those great cabaret concentrations. It was gin-dizzy here; it was yesterday and tomorrow entangled with its great expectations and its overpowering nostalgia; it was loud as the West Side Show Square; it was as direct as the Mingle-Mangle or the Pad Palace. It was as fleshy as the Flesh Pots and more catty than the Cat-Center. Oh, it was the jumpingest bunch of places that William had yet seen in the City. Something a little sad there, though; something of passion and pity that was too empty and too pat. It was as though this were the climax of it all, and one didn’t want it to be the climax yet. It was as if the Top of the Town and Night-Life Knoll (and not the Wood Beyond the World) were the central things of the World City. Perhaps William slept there awhile in the sadness that follows the surfeit of flesh and appetite. There were other doings and sayings about him, but mostly his eyes were closed and his head was heavy. But then Fairhair had him up again and rushing toward the Wood in the still early night. “It is only a block, William, it is only a block,” she sang, “and it is the place you have wanted more than any other.” (The Wood began at 29th Street and went on, it was said, for the space of two full blocks.) But William ran badly and he even walked badly. He was woozy and confused, not happy, not sad, just full of the great bulk of life in the City. He’d hardly have made it to his high goal that night except for the help of Fairhair. But she dragged and lifted and carried him along in her fine arms and on her dusky back and shoulders. He toppled off sometimes and cracked his crown, but there was
never real damage done. One sometimes enters the Wood Beyond in a sort of rhythmic dream, grotesque and comic and jolting with the sway of a strong friend and of the tidy world itself. And William came in with his arms around the neck and shoulders of the girl named Fairhair, with his face buried in her hair itself, with his feet touching no ground. But he knew it as soon as they were in the Wood. He was afoot again and strong again in the middle of the fabled place itself. He was sober? No, there can be no sobriety in the Wood; it has its own intoxication. But it had real grass and weeds, real trees (though most of them were bushes), real beasts as well as artificial, real spruce cones on the turf, real birds (no matter that they were clattering crows) coming in to roost. There was the carven oak figure of old Robin Hood and the tall spar-wood form of the giant lumberjack Paul Bunyan. There was the Red Indian named White Deer who was carved from cedarwood. There was maple syrup dripping from the trees (is that the way they used to get it?), and there was the aroma of slippery elm with the night dampness on it. There were the famous Muggers from the mugger decades. They were of papier-mâché, it is true, and yet they were the most fearsome. There were other dangerous beasts in the Wood, but none like the Muggers. And William and Fairhair lay down and wept in the very night shadow of the famous Muggers for the remainder of the enchanted night. 3. “Wander-bird, wander-bird, where do you fly?” “All over the City, all under the sky.”
“Run, William, run in the morning!” Fairhair cried, and she ran while William (confused from the night) shuffled after her. “We must leave the Wood?” he asked.
“Wandr’ing through wonders of strippies and streets, Changing and challenging, bitters and sweets.”
“Wander-bird, squander-bird, should not have budged: City is sicko and sky is a smudge.” —1st Street Ballad
“Of course you must leave the Wood. You want to see the whole world, so you cannot stay in one place. You go on, I go back. No, no, don’t you look back or you’ll be turned into a salt-wood tree.” “Stay with me, Fairhair.” “No, no, you want variety. I have been with you long enough. I have been guide and companion and pony to you. Now we part.” Fairhair went back. William was afraid to look after her. He was in the world beyond the Wood Beyond the World. He noticed though that the street was 1st Street and not 31st Street as he had expected. It was still wonderful to be a world traveler, of course, but not quite as wonderful as it had been one other time. The number of the street shouldn’t have mattered to him. William had not been on any 1st Street before. Or 2nd. But he had been on a 3rd Street before on his farthest trip east. Should he reach it again on his farthest trip west? The world, he knew (being a readie who had read parts of several books), was larger than that. He could not have gone around it in thirty blocks. Still, he came to 3rd Street in great trepidation. Ah, it was not the same 3rd Street he had once visited before; almost the same but not exactly. An ounce of reassurance was intruded into the tons of alarm in his heavy head. But he was alive, he was well, he was still traveling west in the boundless City that is everywhere different. “The City is varied and joyful and free,” William Morris said boldly, “and it is everywhere different.” Then he saw Kandy Kalosh and he literally staggered with the shock. Only it did not quite seem to be she. “Is your name Kandy Kalosh?” he asked as quakingly as a one-legged kangaroo with the willies. “The last thing I needed was a talkie,” she said. “Of course it isn’t. My name, which I have from my name-game ancestor, is Candy Calabash, not at all the same.” Of course it wasn’t the same. Then why had he been so alarmed and disappointed? “Will you travel westward with me, Candy?” he asked. “I suppose so, a little way, if we don’t have to talk,” she said. So William Morris and Candy Calabash began to traverse the City that was the world. They began (it was no more than coincidence) at a marker set in stone that bore the words “Beginning of Stencil 35,353,” and thereat
William went into a sort of panic. But why should he? It was not the same
stencil number at all. The World City might still be everywhere different.
But William began to run erratically. Candy stayed with him. She was not
a readie or a talkie, but she was faithful to a companion for many blocks. The
two young persons came ten blocks; they came a dozen.
They arrived at the 14th Street Water Ballet and watched the swimmers. It
was almost, but not quite, the same as another 14th Street Water Ballet that
William had seen once. They came to the algae-and-plankton quick-lunch
place on 15th Street and to the Will of the World Exhibit Hall on 16th Street.
Ah, a hopeful eye could still pick out little differences in the huge sameness.
The World City had to be everywhere different.
They stopped at the Cliff-Dweller Complex on 17th Street. There was an
artificial antelope there now. William didn't remember it from the other time.
There was hope, there was hope.
And soon William saw an older and somehow more erect man who wore
an armband with the word “Monitor” on it. He was not the same man, but he
had to be a close brother of another man that William had seen two days
before.
“Does it all repeat itself again and again and again?” William asked this
man in great anguish. “Are the sections of it the same over and over again?"
“Not quite,” the man said. “The grease marks on it are sometimes a little
different.”
“My name is William Morris,” William began once more bravely.
“Oh, sure. A William Morris is the easiest type of all to spot,” the man
said.
“You said—no, another man said that my name-game ancestor had to do
with designing of another thing besides the Wood Beyond the World,”
William stammered. “What was it?”
"Wallpaper," the man said. And William fell down in a frothy faint.
Oh, Candy didn't leave him there. She was faithful. She took him up on her
shoulders and plodded along with him, on past the West Side Show Square
on 18th Street, past the Mingle-Mangle and the Pad Palace, where she (no,
another girl very like her) had turned back before, on and on.
“It's the same thing over and over and over again,” William whimpered as
she toted him along.
“Be quiet, talkie,” she said, but she said it with some affection.
They came to the great Chopper House on 20th Street. Candy carried
William in and dumped him on a block there.
“He's become ancient,” Candy told an attendant. “Boy, how he's become
ancient!" It was more than she usually talked.
Then, as she was a fair-minded girl and as she had not worked any stint
that day, she turned to and worked an hour in the Chopper House. (What they
chopped up in the Chopper House was the ancients.) Why, there was
William’s head coming down the line! Candy smiled at it. She chopped it up
with loving care, much more care than she usually took.
She'd have said something memorable and kind if she'd been a talkie.
a
Funnyfingers
Introduction by Andrew Ferguson
Ask a few readers of Lafferty what they treasure him for, and you'll get a lot
of the same answers. He will make you laugh, uproariously. He will show
you new possibilities inherent in language—not just in English, but many
others as well. He will provide you a vantage point on this world (and other
worlds, to boot) that flips you inside out, inverting everything you thought
you knew about the workings of fiction.
What they won't mention as often—partly because he doesn't do it that
much, and partly because it hurts so much when he does—is that he will
break your heart wide open.
"Funnyfingers" is, at its most basic level, a tale of doomed love. It isn't
spoiling anything to say that in an introduction, either, because as he often
does, Lafferty tells us what's going to happen right from the start. Here it's in
an epigram alluding to Orpheus, something you don't do unless a Eurydice is
about to be lost. With admirable narrative economy, the main character
immediately thereafter poses the central question that will lead to her
romantic impasse—who, or what, am I?—and then the reader is given several
valid answers: she is a somewhat exasperating and precocious little girl, and
she is also a young Dactyl, a creature of myth, one of a number who gave
humankind ironworking, arithmetic, and the alphabet and who (in their adult
years) remain responsible for manufacturing letters and numbers and pieces
for the entire world.
The story plays out from there, though the narrative beats and resolution
are hardly formulaic. However, Lafferty is as usual concerned with much
more than just the central relationship of his unhappy couple: he's exploring
a
humanity’s relationship with its stories, as well as his own particular relation as a channel for those myths. While Lafferty’s personal relationship experience was limited to what he could glean from others, he nonetheless understood that much of what we love about another is the stories we construct around them, myths that are deeply personal even as they partake of the universal. But when what you love is a story—or you yourself are a story —the deck is stacked against you from the start. As the young lovers in “Funnyfingers” realize to their dismay, our stories will outlive us, and in particular they will outlive their own tellers. The result is a curious (if typically Laffertian) inversion of the Orpheus legend: it’s not the stories who must be left behind to the darkness, but us. When Oread Funnyfingers traipses through the mine, assembling iron dogs or iron boys or iron philosophies, it’s us she’s putting together. And when she disassembles them at the end of play, it’s us she puts back in the spare-part bins. And, in the end, though we too feel heartbreak at the conclusion of our all-too-brief parts, it is Oread and it is Pluto, the stories themselves, who will weep iron tears.
“Who am I?” Oread Funnyfingers asked her mother one day, “and, for that matter, what am I?” “Why, you are our daughter,” the mother Frances Funnyfingers told her, “or have you been talking to someone?” “Only to myself and to my uncles in the mountain.” “Oh. Now first, dear, I want you to know that we love you very much. There was nothing casual about it. We chose you, and you are to us—” “Oh, take it easy, Mother. I know that I’m adopted. And I’m sure that you both love me very much; you tell me so often enough. But what am I really?” “You are a little girl, Oread, a somewhat exasperating and precocious little girl.” “But I don’t feel precocious. I feel like a rock-head. How can I be a little bit like Papa and not anything like anyone else at all? What was the connection between myself and Papa?” “There wasn’t any at first, Oread, not like that. We were looking for a child since we could not have one of our own. I fell in love with you at first sight because you reminded me of Henry. And Henry fell in love with you at first sight because you reminded him of Henry. Henry was always the favorite person of both myself and Henry. That’s a joke, dear. But not entirely; my husband is so delightfully boyish and self-centered. Now run out and play.”
Funnyfingers
“—and Pluto, Lord of Hell, wept when Orpheus played to him that lovely phrase from Gluck—but these were iron tears.” —H. Belloc, On Tears of the Great
“No, I think I’ll run in and play.” “Oh, but it’s so dark and dirty and smoky in there.” “And it’s so light and unsmoky everywhere else, Mama,” Oread said, and she ran inside the mountain to play. Well, the house and the shop of Henry Funnyfingers backed onto the mountain. It was really only a low but steep foot-hill to the Osage Hills. This was on the northwest fringe of the city. The shop was the typewriter repair shop of Henry the father of Oread. You wouldn’t know that from the sign out front, though. The sign said “Daktylographs Repaired Here, Henry Funnyfingers.” The shop part of the building was half into and under the hill. Behind the shop was a dimly lit parts room that was entirely under the hill. And behind this were other parts rooms, one after the other, rock-walled and dark, rockier and darker as one went on, all deep under the hills. And these continued, on and on, as tunnel and cavern without apparent end. In these places of total darkness, if only one knew where to reach in which pot, there was to be found every part for every sort of machine in the world; or so Henry Funnyfingers said. Oread ran through room after room, through passage after passage in the blackness. She drew parts from the pots and the furnaces as she ran. She put the parts together, and it barked remindfully. “What have I forgotten?” Oread asked. “Ah, Rusty, I’ve given you only one ear. I’m sorry.” She took the other ear from the Other Ear Pot as she ran past, and she put it on him. Then she had an iron dog complete. It would run and play and bark after her in the tunnels under the mountain. “Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three! Come out of the mountain and play with me.” Oread sang that. Sometimes the three Mountain Uncles were busy (they had to make numbers and letters and pieces for the whole world) and couldn’t come to play. But almost always one of them came, and Kelmis came today. Kelmis was the smoky smelly one, but Oread didn’t mind that. He was full of stories, he was full of fun, he was full of the hot darkness-fire from which anything can be made. It was great fun there through all the afternoon and evening, as they are called out in the light. But then Kelmis had to go back to work. Oread and the iron dog Rusty ran back up the passages toward the house.
She took the dog apart as they went back and put each piece into its proper
pot. Last of all she put its bark in the bark pot, and she came up through the
shop and into the inside of the house for supper.
"Oh, Oread, however do you get so smoky and smelly?" mother Frances
Funnyfingers asked her. "Why don't you play out in the sunshine like other
girls do? Why don't you play with other girls and boys?”
“I made an iron boy to play with once, Mama,” Oread said. “You wouldn't
believe how he carried on or the things he wanted to do. I had the devil's own
time taking him apart again. That's the last boy I ever make, I tell you.
They're tricky."
“Yes, as I remember it, they are,” Frances conceded. “Whatever do you
make your stories out of, Oread?”
"Oh, I make them out of iron," Oread told her seriously. "Iron is what
everything is made out of first. The pieces are all there in the pots and the
furnaces. You just put them together.”
"Pieces of stories, Oread?”
"Oh yes.
"
"Iron stories, girl?”
"Oh, yes, yes, iron stories."
"You are funny-fingers and funny-face and funny-brains," the mother told
her. “I think I'll have you eat your supper off an iron plate with iron spoon
and knife.”
"Oh, may I? I'll go make them," Oread cried.
“Make me a set while you're at it,” father Henry Funnyfingers said.
"No, Oread. Sit down and eat your supper from what we have, both of
you.” Frances Funnyfingers loved her husband and her daughter, but
sometimes they puzzled her.
We cannot honestly say that Oread grew up; we can hardly say that she grew
older. She finally started school when she was nine years old, and she looked
as though she were four or five. Going to school was only for seemliness
anyhow. Oread already knew everything. She got on well. She was a peculiar
little girl, but she didn't know it. She gave disconcerting answers in class, but
nobody could say that they were wrong answers. What difference does it
make which end you start and answer at? She was a strange, smiling little
girl, and she was liked by most of her schoolmates. Those who didn't like
her, feared her; and why should anyone fear so small a creature as Oread
Funnyfingers? They feared her because she said, “Be good to me or I'll make
an iron wolf to eat you up.” She would have done it, and they knew she
would have done it.
And she always got her homework and got it right. She had, what seemed
to her mother, an unscholarly way of doing it, though. She would take her
books or her printed assignments. She would walk singing through the shop,
through the parts room, through the other parts rooms behind that, and down
into the passages in the toes of the hills.
"Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
Make ready all pots where the answers may be.”
Oread would sing so. Then she would pick the iron answers out of the
answer pots. She'd put them together by subjects. She would stamp them
onto her papers, and they would mark all the answers correct in her
handwriting. So she would have the Catechism, the Composition, the
questions on the Reading, the Arithmetic all perfect. Then she'd drop all the
iron answers back into the answer pots where they would melt themselves
down to iron slag again.
“Don't you think that's cheating?” her mother would ask her. “What if all
the other children got their homework that way?”
“They couldn't unless they were funnyfingers,” Oread said. “The hot iron
answers would burn their hands clear off unless they were funnyfingers. No,
it isn't cheating. It's just knowing your subject.”
"I guess so then," mother Frances said. There were so many things she
didn't understand about her husband Henry (“He's boyish, like a boy, like an
iron boy," she'd say), and about her daughter (“She's like an owl, like a little
owl, a little iron owl”). Neither Henry nor Oread liked the daylight very
much, but they always faced it as bravely as they could.
One day Oread found her mother in tears, yet there was happy salt in
them. “Look," the mother Frances said. She had a valentine, an iron valentine
that Henry had given her. There was an iron heart on it and an iron verse:
"
a
“When you are dead five hundred years
Who once were full of life,
I'll think of you with salty tears,
And take another wife.”
“Oh, it's nice, Mama,” Oread said.
“But of iron?" Frances asked.
“Oh yes, the very first rimes were made out of iron, you know.”
"And what of the five hundred years?"
"I think it's considerate that he would wait five hundred years after you
die to take another wife.”
“Yes, I suppose so, Oread.” But Frances wasn't completely at ease with
her family.
Henry always made a good living from his typewriter repair shop, or rather
,
he made a good living from his parts stocks in the rooms behind. Other
dealers and repairmen, not just of typewriters but of everything, came to him
for parts. His prices were reasonable, and there was never a part that he didn't
have. A dealer would rattle off the catalog number of something for a tractor
or a hay-baler or a dishwasher. “Just a minute,” Henry Funnyfingers would
say, and he would plunge into his mysterious back rooms. He had a comical
little song he would croon to himself as he went:
"Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
Now this is the number, Oh make it for me!”
And in a second, with the last word of the song just out of his mouth, he'd
be back with the required part still hot in his hand. He never missed. Parts of
combines, parts of electric motors, parts for Fords, he could come up with all
of them instantly with only a catalog number or the broken piece itself or
even a vague description to go on. And he did repair typewriters quicker and
better than anyone in town. He wasn't rich, he was fearful of becoming rich;
but he did well, and nobody in the Funnyfinger family wanted for anything.
When they were in the sixth grade, Oread had a boyfriend. He was a Syrian
boy named Selim Elia. He was dark and he was handsome. He looked the
veriest little bit as though he were made of iron; that was the main reason that
Oread liked him. And he seemed to suspect entirely too much about the
funnyfingers; she thought that was a reason that she'd better like him.
"When you grow up (Oh, Oread, will you ever grow up?) I'm going to
marry you,” Selim said boldly.
"Of course I'll grow up. Doesn't everyone?” Oread said. “But you won't
be able to marry me.”
"Why not, little horned owl?”
“I don't know. I just feel that we won't be grown up at the same time.”
“Hurry up then, little iron-eyes, little basilisk-eyes," Selim said. “I will
marry you."
They got along well. Selim was very protective of little Oread. They liked
each other. What is wrong with people liking each other?
When in the eighth grade, Oread made a discovery about Sister Mary Dactyl,
the art teacher for all the grades. Sister Mary D seemed to be very young.
“But she can't be that young,” Oread told Selim. “Some of the mythological
things she draws, they've been gone a long time. She has to be old to have
seen them.”
“Oh, she draws them from old stories and old descriptions,” Selim said,
"or she just draws them out of her imagination.”
“A couple of them she didn't draw out of her imagination,” Oread insisted.
“She had to have seen them.” That, however, wasn't the discovery.
Sister was drawing something very rapidly one day, and she forgot that
someone with very rapid eyes might be watching her hands. Oread saw, and
she waited around after class.
"You are a funnyfingers,” she said to Sister. “All your fingers are triple-
jointed like mine. They can move fast as light like mine. I bet you can pick
up iron parts out of the hot pots without getting burned.”
“Sure I can,” said Sister M.D.
“But are you a funnyfingers all the way?” Oread asked. “Papa says that, in
the old language, our name Funnyfingers meant both funny-fingers and
funny-toes. Are you?”
“Sure I am,” said the very young-looking Sister Mary Dactyl. She took off
her shoes and stockings. Sisters didn't do that very often in the classroom
then. Now, of course they go everywhere barefooted and in nothing but a
transparent short shift, but that wasn't so when Oread Funnyfingers was still
in the eighth grade.
Yes, Sister was a funny-toes also. She had the triple-jointed fast-as-vision
toes. She could do more things with her toes than other people could do with
their fingers.
“Did you have a little hill or mountain when you were young, I mean
when you were a girl?” Oread asked her.
"Oh, yes, yes, I have it still, an interior mountain.”
“How old are you, sister who always looks so young and pretty?”
"Very old, Oread, very old.”
”
"How old?"
“Ask me again in eight years, Oread, if you still want to know.”
"In eight years? Oh, all right, I will."
High school went by, four years just like a day. Selim had made a big twisted
hammered iron thing that said “Selim Loves Oread.” He suspected something
very strongly about the iron. But he wasn't a funny-fingers, so it took him
three weeks instead of three seconds to make the thing. Many other things
happened in those four years, but they were all happy things so there is no
use mentioning them.
When they were in and almost through college (Oread still looked like a
nine- or ten-year-old, and this was maddening) they were into some very
intricate courses. Selim was veritable genius, and Oread always knew in
which pots the answers might be found, so the two of them qualified for the
profound fields. It is good to have a piece of the deep raw knowledge as it
births, it is good to see the future lifted out of the future pots.
“We have come to the point where we must invent a whole new system of
concepts and symbols,” said the instructor of one powerful course one day.
“Little girl, what are you doing in this room,” he added to Oread. “This is a
college building and a college course.”
“I know it. We've been through this every day for a year,” she said.
“We are as much at a crossroads as was mankind when the concept of a
crossroads was first invented," the instructor continued. "If that concept
(excluding choice pictured graphically with simple diverging lines) had not
been invented, mankind would have remained at that situation, unchoosing
and merely accepting. There are dozens of cases where mankind has
remained in a particular situation for thousands of years for failure to invent a
particular concept. I suspect that is the situation here; we have not moved in a
I
certain area because we have not entertained the possibility of movement in
that area. A whole new concept is needed, but I cannot even conceive what
that concept should be.”
"Oh, I'll make it for you tonight,” Oread said.
“Has that little girl wandered into the class again today?” the instructor
asked with new irritation. “Oh yes, I remember now, you always come up
with some sort of proof that you're an enrolled member of the class and that
you're twenty-one years old. You're not, though. You're just a little girl with
little-girl brains.”
"Oh, I know it,” Oread said sadly, "but I'll still make the thing for you
tonight.”
“Make what thing, little girl?”
“The new concept, and the symbol set that goes with it.
“And just what does one make a concept out of?” that man asked her with
near exasperation.
"I'll make it mostly out of iron, I think,” Oread said. “I'll use whatever is
in the pots, but I guess it will be mostly iron.”
“Oh God help us!” the man cried out.
“Such a nice expression,” Oread told him, “and somebody had told me
that you were an unbeliever.”
"
* *
"Actually,” said the instructor, controlling himself and talking to the rest of
the class and not to Oread Funnyfingers. “Actually, these things often appear
simple in retrospect. So may this be if ever we are able to make it retro. The
ABCs, the alphabet isn't very hard, is it? Yes, Mr. Levkovitch, I know all
about those hard letters after C. A little humor, it is said, is a tedious thing.
But the alphabet was a hard thing when mankind stood at the foothills—”
"En daktulos, at the toes of, that's what the original form of the expression
>
"
was,” Oread told him.
"Be quiet, little girl,” the instructor muttered darkly. “—when mankind
stood at the foothills of the alphabetical concept and looked up at the
mountain, it was hard then.”
"Yes, the first alphabets were all made out of hammered iron," Oread told
the world, “and they were quite hard.”
“The same was the case with simple arithmetic,” said the instructor,
disregarding Oread with a deep sigh. “It is easy as we look back on it in its
ordered simplicity. But when it was only a crying need and not yet a real
concept, then it was hard, very hard."
“Sure, it was made out of iron too,” Oread whispered to Selim. “Why does
he get so mad when I tell him about things being made out of iron?”
"It's just a weakness of the man, Oread," Selim whispered. “We'll have to
accept it.”
“And so we are probably at an end,” the instructor was ending his class for
the day. “If we cannot come up with a new dimension, with a
symbolism, with a new thought and a new concept (having no idea at all what
they should be) then we might as well end this class forever. We might as
well, as a matter of likely fact, end the world forever. And on that somber
note I leave you till tomorrow, if there should be a tomorrow.”
“Don't worry, Mr. Zhelezovitch,” Oread said. “I'll make it for you
tonight.”
new
2.
The name Daktuloi (Fingers) is variously explained from their
number being five or ten, or because they dwelt at the foot (en
daktulois) of Mount Ida. The original number seems to have been
three: i.e., Kelmis the smelter, Damnameneus the hammer, and
Acmon the anvil. This number was afterward increased to five,
then to ten ... and finally to one hundred.
-Harper's Dictionary of Classical Literature and Antiquities
In the forests of Phrygian Ida there lived cunning magicians
called the Dactyls. Originally there were three of them. Celmis,
Damnameneus, and the powerful Acmon who in the caves of the
mountains was the first to practice the art of Hephaestus and who
Just after closing time that evening, Oread Funnyfingers went by City Museum to see Selim. Selim Elia worked as night watchman there to help pay his way through the University. There really wasn’t much to do on the job. He sat at a big administrator’s desk and studied all night. Studying all night every night is how he got to be a genius. Oread had brought some sandwiches with her. “Peanut-butter and jelly sandwiches made out of iron,” Selim joked. “No, they’re not of iron,” Oread said solemnly. “One would need iron teeth to eat an iron sandwich.” “Surely a funnyfingers could manage iron teeth.” “Oh, our third set comes in iron, but for me that should be many years yet.” “Oread, I want to marry you.” “Everyone calls you a cradle-robber.” “I know they do. And yet we’re almost exactly the same age.” “There’s so many people here,” Oread said. “Terra Cotta People, Marble People, Sandstone People, Basalt People, Raffia People, Wooden People, Wax People. I will have to find out from my uncles which ones are real. Some of them aren’t, you know; some of them never lived at all.” “We have one of your friends or uncles here, Oread, in wax. Over here.” “I know where. You have all three of my uncles here in wax,” Oread said. “You might not recognize them from the forms of their names on the plaques, though. “Oh Kelmis, Oh Acmon, Oh Damnae all three,
knew how to work blue iron, casting it into the burning furnace. Later their number increased. From Phrygia they went to Crete where they taught the inhabitants the use of iron and how to work metals. To them is also attributed the discovery of arithmetic and the letters of the alphabet. —Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology
It is also said of the Dactyls (the Finger-Folk inside the hills) that they live very long lives and retain their youthful appearance for very many years. —Groff Crocker, Mear-Daoine
Come out of your cases and play with me. “I don’t think they’ll come out though, Selim, since they’re made out of wax instead of iron. Effigies should always be made out of iron.” “What do their names mean, Oread?” “Oh Smelter, Oh Anvil, Oh Hammer all three, Come out of your cases and play with me. “No, they won’t come out. I’d have to be a bee-brain to evoke anything out of wax.” “Oread, I love you very much.” “No, they won’t come out at all. I’ll have them come over here themselves some night and make iron effigies of themselves. Then you can get rid of those silly wax ones.” “Little iron-ears, I said that I loved you very much.” “Oh, I heard you. You won’t be alarmed when they come out some night to make the effigies? They’re kind of funny-looking.” “So are you, Oread. No, I won’t be alarmed. Why should a Syrian be alarmed over fabulous people? We’re fabulous people ourselves. And if they’re your uncles they cannot be dangerous.” “Sure they can. I am. You said yourself that I’d set the flaming ducks after you again. I go home now, Selim, to get my homework made, and also to make that concept-symbol system for Mr. Zhelezovitch the instructor. It’s important, isn’t it?” “I’ll go with you, Oread. Yes, it’s important to Zhelly and to the class and the course. It’s true that he might as well end the class forever if he doesn’t find it. But it isn’t true that we might as well end the world if we don’t find it. It’s not quite that important.” “Who will watch the museum if you leave? I want very much to make this correctly and understandably for Mr. Zhelezovitch. I am a Funnyfinger, and making things for people is the whole business and being of the funnyfingers.” “Oh, tell Kelmis to watch the place for me. Will it take long for them and you to make the concept?” “Oh watch it for Selim, and watch it real nice, Oh Kelmis, from rotters and robbers and mice. “Sure, he’ll watch it for you. Even a Waxman-Kelmis will be faithful in that. Oh no, they never take very long to make anything for anybody any
more.” (Time had slipped by, though not much of it; Selim had a sporty car
that he drove like a flaming rocket; and it wasn't very far to the northwest
side of town. They were out at the Funnyfingers' place now, and into the
back, back rooms that turned into tunnels.) “They never take very long to
make things anymore," Oread was continuing, “not since that time, you
know, when God got a little bit testy with them on Sinai when there was a
little delay. They first made the tablets out of iron entirely, and they wouldn't
do. They had to make them out of slate-stone with the iron letters inset in it,
and the iron had to be that alloy known as command iron. Since then they are
all pretty prompt with everyone, and they follow instructions exactly. You
never know who it really is who places an order.
“Kelmis has the original all-iron set. I'll get him to show them to you
some time.”
"Where do you get your stories, Oread?”
“I tell my mother that I make them out of iron.”
"And where do you really get them?"
“I make them out of iron.”
"
Selim talked easily with the three uncles while they wrought and hammered
the white-hot parts that Oread was to assemble into a symbol concept.
“How is it that you work inside a little hill in Oklahoma?” he asked them.
“Shouldn't you be in the forests or hills of Phrygian Ida? How did you come
to leave the Old Country?”
“This is the Old Country, and we haven't left it,” powerful Acmon said.
“Everything underground anywhere is part of the Old Country. All hills and
mountains of the world connect down in their roots, in their toes, and they
make a single place. We are in Mount Ida, we are in Crete, we are in
Oklahoma. It is all one.”
They made the pieces. And Oread, dipping the parts out of the white-hot
iron as if it were water, put them together to make the thing. It was a new
concept-symbol system, and it looked as if it would work.
And it looked much more as if it would work the next afternoon. Mr.
Zhelezovitch the instructor was almost out of his mind with it. The graduate
students and the regular students (for this was one of those advanced, mixed
classes) crowded about it and went wild. The implications of the new thing
would tumble in their minds for weeks; the class would be a marathon affair
going on and on as the wonderful new things were put to work to uncover
still more wonderful things. The stars were out when Oread and Selim left the
class, and no one else would leave it at all that night. But these two had
something between them, and it might take another new concept to solve it.
“Oread, give me your answer,” Selim was saying again. “I want to marry
you."
“Make a wish on a star then. On that one where I'm pointing.”
“Triple jointed funnyfingers, who can tell where you're pointing?"
“On that male star there between the several eunuch stars."
“Yes, I see the one you mean, Oread. I make a wish. Now, when will you
answer me?”
“Within a half hour. I go to question two people first.”
I
Oread left there at a run. She went home. She talked to her mother.
“Mama, why is my father so boyish? Is he really just a boy?”
"Yes he is, Oread. Just a boy."
“After some years would he be a man, really, and not just a pleasant young
kid?”
"I think so, Oread, yes."
“Then after some years you two could have children of your own? Being a
funnyfingers isn't an obstacle?”
"I'll never know that, Oread. When he is grown up I will be long dead."
Oread ran out of there and ran to the convent that was behind the school she
used to attend. She entered and went upstairs and down a hallway. She knew
where she was going. One funnyfingers can always find another one.
Besides, the eight years was up. She opened the door and found Sister Mary
Dactyl playing solitaire with iron cards.
“How old?” Oread asked.
“Three hundred and fifty-eight years,” said Sister M.D. without looking
up. “Were I not vowed, I would be coming to the family age now.”
Oread ran all the way back to where Selim was still waiting in the street
under the stars. She was crying, she was bawling.
“The answer is no,” she blubbered. Selim, under the stars, was as white-
faced as it is possible for a Syrian to be. But he must not give up.
“Oread, I love you more than you can know,” he said. “Maybe we can
make a different answer out of iron,” he proposed in desperate jest.
“This is the iron answer,” she bawled, "and the answer is no.” She ran
away too fast to follow.
Deep under the hills Oread was crying. She was weeping big hot tears.
They weren't, however, iron tears that she wept. That part is untrue.
The tears were actually of that aromatic flux of salt and rosin that
wrought-iron workers employ in their process.
.
Thieving Bear Planet
Introduction by Jeff VanderMeer
“Anomalies are messy,” R. A. Lafferty writes at the beginning of “Thieving
Bear Planet,” and the reader might be forgiven for thinking Lafferty was
referring to his own career and body of work. But, in fact, he's referring to
the alien thieving bears of the title, which follow their own peculiar set of
rules. Too often science fiction gives us humans in uncanny bear suits, so to
speak, when it comes to aliens. But Lafferty in this story and several others
manages to create deeply strange and original alien encounters that both
unsettle the reader and send up traditional science fiction approaches.
As ever with Lafferty, too, he manages feats of compression that are
beyond most writers. Take the deliberately blithe reference to a Directory and
Delineation of Planets, which, in offering an entry on the Thieving Bear
Planet, tries from the start to impose a cage of logic on the unknowable, with
its catalog of the usual planetary attributes, even if it destabilizes its authority
in the same instant by including irrational statements from a former explorer
of the planet. Or take Lafferty's riotous description of the current
expedition's gastronome's delight of a meal—which proves to be a great set-
up to the stealing of the thieving bears, who are not just robbing the
explorers' very stomachs of plain old pork-and-beans, but a sumptuous feast,
that the reader may feel the loss quite viscerally. These are lovely stories
within the main story, little whirlpools of magnificent narrative energy.
“Visceral” is a key word when thinking of Lafferty's triumphs, alongside
"weird.” In, again, a condensed tale-like form Lafferty accomplishes what
some space operas take trilogies to get to. A space opera, in its finest form, is
just a mimic: a commercial delivery system for some of the strangest
moments and situations in science fiction. (See: early Alastair Reynolds, for
example.) With Lafferty, the traditional tropes of SF—alien contact, alien
invasion, the noble exploration of space—are jewels he likes to put beneath
tattered overturned cups, daring the reader to bet on where in the world the
true treasure lies. But beware—when you pin down the location of that
treasure, it'll likely change shape, grow legs, and hop off the table.
This applies even to the thieving bears of the title, who take on a
marvelous initial form, able to fly not so much because of having lightweight
bones but because they're almost like drifting toupees in structure. The
mimicry they are capable of seems cute at first and then horribly brutal as the
explorers become caught up in events they cannot control. Yet even then,
Lafferty isn't content, restless. It would have been easy enough for him to
take the initial set-up to a very satisfying conclusion, but instead he roughs up
and destabilizes his own story with the second act, which makes the reader
question ... well, everything. Is all that occurs just a joke by the thieving
bears? Is there some other animating impulse at work? How is it that this
Jenga-like structure Lafferty creates doesn't fall and crash to the ground?
Along with many other complexities, then, “Thieving Bear Planet”
chronicles the impossibility of comprehension of the alien, the war between
the logical and illogical in ourselves that spills out into the cosmos beyond-
all in the context of the certain knowledge that human beings will never know
everything about this world, let alone the next, or the universes we inhabit.
And that there is something wonderful about that fact.
Not many writers could grapple with such ideas and create a story that's
both so creepy and so funny and in the moment, but as in Lafferty's best work
in general, the author manages to channel a narrative momentum and a kind
of joy in the very act of outrageous and madcap invention that provides unity,
depth, and, yes, even a kind of beautiful closure.
Thieving Bear Planet
"Deliver me from carks and cares,
Deliver me from Thieving Bears.”
—John Chancel, Logs and Epilogs of Sector 24
A simple explanation was needed for the conditions on Thieving Bear Planet.
It was needed because, as the great Reginald Hot had phrased it, “Anomalies
are messy.”
Every decade or so, somebody with a passion for regularity takes over the
administration of the Directory and Delineation of Planets, that massive
cataloging operation, and makes a new survey of the anomalies. And there
was not any way that such a survey could miss Thieving Bear Planet.
"It offers no threat to human life or activity, no danger to bodily health,
and only slight danger to mental health," the great John Chancel had written
about it a century before this. "It has almost uniformly ideal climate, though
it is not a place to generate sudden wealth. It is serene in environment and in
ecological balance, and it is absolutely caressing in its natural beauty. But it
does have a strange effect on some of its visitors. It forces them to write
things that are untrue, as it is forcing me to do at this moment.” That was an
odd thing to write in a ship’s log.
And, as one later old hand put it, “There is nothing to conquer here. It is a
poorly endowed and counterproductive world. And everything goes wrong
here. I will say this for it: things go wrong here in the most pleasant way
possible. But they do go wrong.'
Now another expedition consisting of six explorers—George Mahoon (he
was wrestler-big, and with a groping, grappling, leverage-seeking wrestler-
mind); Elton Fad (he was long on information and short on personal
incandescence); Benedict Crix-Crannon (buff and charming, and he knew all
the jobs of the expedition); Luke Fronsa (he was a “comer,” as they said in
the department, but wasn't he a little bit overage in grade as a "comer"
now?); Selma Last-Rose (what can you say after you say that somebody has
everything?); Gladys Marclair (pleasant, capable, but she wasn't a genius,
and genius was really required for an explorer); and Dixie Late-Lark (sheer
Spirit, she!)—had set down on Thieving Bear Planet. These were not the
most experienced explorers in the Service, but they were among the newest
and freshest. And they had already demonstrated that they were top people at
clearing up anomalies.
“It's a pleasant place, but not good for much," George Mahoon said before
they had been there ten minutes. “Why didn't the earlier explorers simply say
that it was ‘Only marginally or submarginally productive, indicated by fast
scans to be poor in both radioactive and base metals and also in rare earths
and fossil fuels, not recommended for development in the present century
when so many better places are available,' or some such thing as that? Why
did they put so much stuttering gibberish in their reports? I'm going to like it
here, though. It's nice for a brief vacation."
“Oh, I'm going to like it too,” Selma Last-Rose spoke in her curious rat-a-
tat-tat voice. “There must be a puzzle here, and I like puzzles. And there's a
minor mystery in this ‘Plain of the Old Spaceships.' I may as well solve
that.”
They had landed in a clear place on the Plain of the Old Spaceships. Here
there were remarkable full-scale drawings or schematics of old spaceships,
twelve of them in two-thirds of a circle, from the earliest to the latest, going
clockwise on the ground. What medium these schematics were done in was
not certain, but the lush grass refrained from growing on the lines of them
and so marked them off. The "drawings” showed the circle-spheres of the
spaceships and their fore and aft bulges. They gave accurate indication of the
interior bulkheads. This was really a life-sized museum of ships that lacked
only substance and the dimension of height.
"I recall two passages in the log of the ship Sorcerer about this plain or
meadow," Elton Fad said. “The first of them stated, “Some of our party
believe that the plain of the ships was actually done by the Thieving Bears in
a historical marker sort of response, but I myself do not credit the little
a
beasties with that much intelligence.' And there was a later entry in another
hand, “The Thieving Bears really did make those schematics-in-the-grass
memorials of all the spaceships that had been here, but they didn't do it in
any way that we had imagined.' But that latter log entry, like latter entries of
several of the explorers, had been written in something other than ink.
“Well, I'll imagine a few ways that the little buggers could have done it,
and I'll test it somehow. I'll ask them how they did it. If the tittering little
obscenities have any intelligence at all, I'll find a way to ask them."
The "tittering little obscenities,” the Thieving Bears, were not much like
bears. They were more like large flying squirrels, and they did glide on the
winds, apparently for sport. They were more like pack rats (the Neotoma
cinerea of Earth) both in appearance and in their thieving ways, but larger. It
was old John Chancel who had named the species “Ursus furtificus, the
Thieving Bears." Oh, the explorers had their introduction to the thieving of
the little animals within five minutes of planet-landing. The creatures came
into the ship itself and got into places that should have been impossible to
them. They stole Selma's candy and Dixie's snuff. They stole (by drinking it
on the spot) George Mahoon's “He-Man Scent—Cinnamon,” thirteen bottles
of it, but they did not drink any of the other scents. They went wild over
mustard, emptying whole containers of it and then wheezing in delicious
agony from the effect. Elton Fad tried to drive them away with heavy sticks.
They fastened onto the sticks while he swung them and ate them right up to
his hands. They were funny, but they could become infuriating. They stole
six of Dixie Late-Lark's French horror story novels.
That wouldn't be fatal to her. She had lots of them.
“They're going to sample them,” Dixie said. (She herself looked a little bit
like one of those Thieving Bears.) “They'll be the test. If they do read them
and appreciate them, it'll prove that they're intelligent creatures and have
better reading tastes than my crewmates. That will be a start in analyzing
them, something to put into the electronic notebooks."
Could the Thieving Bears talk? That was not determined for sure within
the first ten or even twenty minutes.
“Say ‘Good morning,' fuzzy head,” Selma rattled at one of the creatures.
“Say good morning, fuzzy head," it bear-barked back at her. Well, it had
the right number of syllables, and the right rhythm and stress. And the bear-
barks did resemble Selma's rattling words. And whenever the bears answered
one of the persons, it answered in that person’s own timbre. The bears began to imitate the people quickly, and there was never any doubt as to which person was being imitated. The tittering that went with the imitations, though! Ooooh, that could become tiresome after a little while. “Tittering little obscenities,” yes. Could the Thieving Bears read? ’Twould be known in a bit, maybe. The bears had gotten into those big lockers that were full of comic books and had stolen big bunches of them. These comic books from the Trader Planets were now collector’s items on Old Earth, and they generated quite a profit. The wonderful things should be collector’s items everywhere. Some of the big Thieving Bears were “reading” those comic books to some of the little Thieving Bears, reading them in the Thieving Bears’ own barking talk. And some of the little bears would bark their excitement and incredulity at parts of the narration and would come and look at the pictures and the worded balloons themselves. And then there would be that damned tittering! It was clear that the big bears believed that they were reading, and that the little bears believed they were understanding. But the wording in the comic book balloons was in the Gno-Pidgin dialect of the Trader Planets, and people from the Traders had never been to Thieving Bear Planet. It was almost too much to believe that “Sangster’s Syndrome Intuitive Translation” was being practiced by animals below the level of conceptual thinking. Then some of the little bears were clearly acting out episodes from the comic books (very subtle episodes, according to Benedict Crix-Crannon, who had total knowledge of the content of all the comic books from the lockers). Well, there was no easy explanation for that. The explorers treated themselves to a bonus meal within an hour of their arrival, after things were pretty well settled down. On a new world, they did this only when they had complete confidence that everything was under control. It was a traditional Earth-hearty meal, though it was from a packet of such bonus meals that had been packaged on Trader Planet Number Four. There were ten-centimeter-thick Cape buffalo steaks, mountains of Midland mushrooms, Camiroi currants and Astrobe apples, Elton eels, Wrack World rye bread, “Galaxy” brand goat butter, Rain Mountain coffee, Rumboat cordials, and Ganymede cigars (“They have an aroma that outlasts the Everlasting Hills,” a testimonial said of those perfectos).
“Logs of earlier explorers say that there is no real enjoyment in eating on Thieving Bear Planet because of the harassment of the bears,” Benny Crix- Crannon gloated. “Well, I’m enjoying this meal (another bumper of Rumboat cordial, Luke, please), and I’d like to see anybody take that enjoyment away from me.” And yet the enjoyment and savor of that grand meal began to disappear almost at that moment. How? Oh, it was just that all the items of their enjoyment were being mysteriously stolen away from them. “All the rest of Dixie’s snuff has been stolen by the bears now,” Gladys said. “That’s too bad. She loves it so much. If all her idiosyncrasies are stolen away, it’s as if she is stolen away too.” “And another thirty or so of Dixie’s French horror story novels have been stolen by the bears,” Elton Fad grumbled. “She’s bound to be frustrated by that. We should insist on fair play from the bears.” “Her gold snuffboxes have been stolen, too,” Selma Last-Rose lamented. “How mean of the bears! The snuffboxes were valuable, even for the gold.” “And her hookah pipe is gone,” Luke Fronsa complained. “What will the bears steal next?” “I don’t know,” George Mahoon wondered, “but Dixie Late-Lark has herself been stolen now, or at least she’s gone. She could not have gone out unrecorded, for the ship is on full security. And yet the ship itself registers that she is no longer on board. She was sitting between you and Selma, was she not, Gladys?” “She was, yes, just a moment ago, on the chair between the two of us. But there isn’t any chair between us now, and there couldn’t have been; there isn’t any room for one. She must have been sitting on something else. Oh, that damned tittering! I wonder how they stole her and what they did with her.” “Be rational, Gladys,” Luke said. “There’s no way the little bears could have stolen Dixie Late-Lark.” “Then where did she go? And how?” “I don’t know,” Mahoon admitted, “and I don’t believe that any of us know. All at once, it doesn’t seem very important. Ah, I’m queasy. Yes, and I’m hungry. After a perfect bonus meal, I shouldn’t be either. Fortunately, I had plugged myself into the ship’s monitor, because of early reports of anomalies on Thieving Bear Planet, reports of the well-feeling and the wits of the explorers being stolen away. All right, monitor, what has gone wrong
with me?” The ship’s monitor spilled it all out. It was in coded chatter. “But we all understand the coded chatter just like our mother’s milk,” as Dixie had once said. All of them were completely tuned to the code of their own ship. And each of them put it into words automatically. “Essential food value suddenly stolen from your ingested food,” the monitor chattered. “Pepsin stolen from your stomach, thalmatite stolen from your thalamus, thyroxine stolen from your pharynx, Cape buffalo essence stolen from your esophagus and stomach, mushrooms and currants and apples stolen from your lower stomach and small intestine, rum alcohol stolen from your stomach and ileum and bloodstream, and normal blood alcohol and blood sugar stolen as part of the same theft. Slurry of rye bread and butter and coffee stolen from your paunch and antrum stomach. Essence of Elton eels stolen from some saltwater swamp of you. And at the same time, insulin and glucagon are stolen from your pancreas, hepatocytes and bile salts from your bile duct and duodenum; and words, ideas, and inklings have been swiped from several parts of your brain. No wonder you’re queasy and hungry at the same time.” “Thank you, ship’s monitor,” George Mahoon said. “Well, it seems that I’ve been infected by some microbe or germ or virus. I’ll take a few of the anti-anti pills to quell the infection.” “Forget the anti-anti pills, George!” Elton Fad cried angrily. “I think we should take a couple of steel bars and teach the Thieving Bears a lesson. There are microbes and germs and viruses infecting me too, but they are about half my own size and are known as the Thieving Bears. Damn those tittering little idiots! They’re beginning to intrude too intimately with their thefts and their eatings; but I don’t know how they’re doing these things so interiorly. Sometimes I wish I’d gone into the family business and never become an explorer at all.” Elton Fad’s family was in eels: they were big and rich people in eels. A little doll made out of wax and rags, with thorns and pins and needles sticking clear through it, and with its throat cut horribly, came sailing through the air and landed on the table where all the explorers had just finished their fine meal that had lost its power just after passing its climax. The tortured little doll had Dixie Late-Lark’s face on it. Its mouth was wide open and it was screaming silently and horribly.
"At least we know that the bears can read and absorb world-French,"
Gladys Marclair laughed. And they all laughed. “They couldn't have learned
about the poupées-fetiches, the fetish dolls, anywhere except from Dixie's
French horror stories. Why, it's Stridente Mimi, Screaming Mimi herself.
That's really Dixie's theme story. Oh, I wish that Dixie would come back so
she could see this comical takeoff of herself. Shut your mouth, doll-Dixie!"
Gladys pushed her forefinger against the mouth of the little fetish doll to
close it, but the doll bit her finger suddenly, viciously, terribly, and set the
blood gushing from it. When Gladys got her finger loose again, the doll
opened its mouth wide once more and continued to scream silently and
horribly from a now blood-dribbling mouth. It has long been noted that fetish
dolls seem to have a life of their own.
That little comic interlude cheered them all a bit, and they left the table in
a happier state. And they went out from the ship.
Oh, the Thieving Bears wanted to play games, did they! Well, the explorers
would beat them at their games, and they would solve all the mysteries about
them at the same time. But the explorers had now come to regard the bears as
more complex and as more nearly intelligent than they had previously
seemed. They were still tittering little stinkers, though. The Thieving Bears
were bigger than police dogs and a little bit smaller than Great Danes. They
were toothless and clawless and apparently harmless. How can you worry
about such tittering and giggling things?
a
"Quick! Come quick!” Selma Last-Rose was calling, in a queer voice on the
edge of panic. "Come quick! I've found Dixie.”
The Thieving Bears, however large they seemed, gave the impression of
being nearly weightless. They had to be nearly weightless to glide on the
wind the way they did. They seemed to be mostly—well, it wasn't hair and it
wasn't feathers—they seemed to be mostly made out of a fluffy and deep-
piled covering with not much body inside it.
"Come, come, somebody come!" Selma was still calling in her rattling
voice. "Dixie is dead.”
The bears had to be ninety percent fluffy covering and no more than ten
percent body. Otherwise, big as they seemed, they couldn't have gotten
through some of the holes that they did go through.
“Horribly, horribly dead,” Selma was chanting in a little-girl singsong
voice. “Horribly, horribly dead. Oh please, somebody come and help me look
at her. I can hardly manage to look at her all by myself.”
Dead Dixie Late-Lark was an exact life-sized replica of her own many
times-transfixed fetish doll. Her throat was just as flamboyantly and terribly
cut as the doll's had been. The same thorns and pins and needles ran through
her, but now they were meter-long thorns and two-meter-long needles. And
her mouth was very wide open, as had been that of the doll; and Dixie was
likewise screaming horribly and silently.
And a tittering, a giggling in the Thieving Bears' fashion, was coming
from her silently screaming mouth and also from her laid-open throat. How
ghastly!
The horror was broken a bit, or diverted into a wondering exasperation, by
Benny Crix-Crannon's voice booming, "Here's another one of them. This
one's better done. It's good!”
Yes, it was another horribly dead Dixie Late-Lark, with her throat cut even
more savagely, with her poor body transfixed with even longer thorns and
needles, with the tittering and giggling from her wide-open and silently
screaming mouth even more disconcerting.
In all, they found seven life-sized versions of Dixie Late-Lark horribly and
ritually murdered. Then all seven of them jumped up, turned into rather
young Thieving Bears, and ran away tittering. And the very stones of that
planet seemed to join in that tittering and giggling.
But where was Dixie Late-Lark herself? Was that not a pertinent question?
More pertinent questions may have been: why did all the explorers stop
wondering what had happened to their colleague Dixie Late-Lark? And why
did they now feel that her disappearance was unimportant?
"
"I have lost my judgment,” George Mahoon lamented. “I've still got most of
the pieces of things in my mind, but I can no longer put them together.
Putting things together is what judgment is. One of you others will have to
take over the captaincy of this expedition."
"Oh, bother the captaincy!” Gladys Marclair rejected it. "Expeditions
would be better without captains anyhow. And you can't lose something that
you never had, George. Let's play ‘Ask the Question' with this situation. And
let's wonder why no bunch, coming here, has played it before. This is an
Earth-sized planet and remarkably monotonous. On its look-alike continents,
there are hundreds and thousands of little low plains or meadows comparable
to this Plain of the Old Spaceships. Why have all the expeditions to this
world, from that of John Chancel to our own, landed here within one
thousand meters of each other? Instructions for exploration landing sites have
always been 'Random selection, tempered with intelligence.' And another
instruction has been 'Examine new ground wherever possible.' For whose
convenience have we all landed in this one place? Oh, your diminished
judgment, George! Probably somebody has been eating the hippo out of your
hippocampus (I've always believed that the 'little hype' is the center of the
judgment as well as of the memory), so now you're not as well hyped as you
were. What if hardly any of the area of this planet has been checked out?”
“Oh, we made sixteen scanning circuits of Thieving Bear Planet before we
landed,” George Mahoon said. “Sixteen circuits will give a very good
recorded sample. And some of the previous expeditions made the full sixty-
four scanning circuits, and the full scan doesn't miss much."
“Do we believe that the Thieving Bears are to be found in all parts of this
planet, George?” Selma Last-Rose asked.
“I don't know. Do we believe it, Benny?”
"Oh no. The Thieving Bears are strictly small-species and small-area
creatures. Their crankinesses as well as their brilliancies indicate that they
have far too small a gene-pool. They have to stay close together in a small
area to keep warm' in the special (of a species) identity-survival sense."
“As to myself, I've lost more than my judgment,” Luke Fronsa mourned.
“I've lost all my ideas, and all that I have left now are notions. Somebody is
eating all my ideas right out of my head and leaving only the hulls of them.
Did you know that notions are only the shells or hulls of ideas after the meat
is eaten out of them?”
The bears were toothless, and they were playful. Sometimes they came
gliding in on the air, and they might be practically invisible when the light
was in their favor. They came gliding in or ambling in, and they tagged the
people gently as a breath. But whenever they touched the people, however
briefly or lightly, they left what seemed to be very small entering marks. And
they also left a redness, like the stings of nettles. One of the explorers (no
matter which one; they had begun to run together, even in their own regard)
said that the Thieving Bears were really a species of giant insects, insects
with strange appetites and always hungry.
*
Seven days and nights went by very rapidly. It was a giddy world in this
respect, fast-spinning: for seven days and nights on Thieving Bear Planet
were the equivalent of only about eighteen hours on Old Earth or sixteen
hours on Astrobe. And the fast-spin did make a difference on Thieving Bear.
It was because of the fast-spin that there were no large treelike plants, not
even any very large bushes. There were small bushes, and there was the non-
gramineous grass.
a
2.
People without an accompaniment of ghosts are a deprived
people. They will descend to almost any depth of "oriental”
cultishness or modish superstition or silliness or astrological
depravity to hide the fact that they have lost their ghosts.
Ghosts without an accompaniment or “neighborness” of
people are similarly deprived, and they will cast themselves into
the most bizarre roles or forms to try to create a company for
themselves.
Both of these conditions are unhealthy.
-Terrance Taibhse, Introduction to Ghost Stories of Sector 24
The storminess of Thieving Bear Planet wouldn't have permitted any
botanical constructs taller than small bushes. And the fast-spin of Thieving
Bear compelled certain surface conditions for that world. On most worlds, the
hills go up. On Thieving Bear Planet, the hills went down.
The upper levels of all the continents of Thieving Bear were flat and lush,
and sometimes they were swept by violent winds. And down from them, the
hills ran to the sheltered plains or meadows or circle-valleys (such as was the
Plain of the Old Spaceships), and on these lower levels the winds were less
violent.
Two of the seven short nights just past had been "electric nights," and the
ghosts walked on electric nights. The electric nights were highlighted
(literally) by massive thunderstorms and plasmal displays. (The odds are that
these storms are more violent than the storms where you come from.) The
lightning piled up on the high places, roaring like lazaruslions. Then it rolled
down the hills like waterfalls and formed hot and spitting pools on the lower
plains and meadows.
The ghosts were always there, but some of them were ordinarily like
empty balloons. On the electric nights, they filled up with lightning and
manifested themselves. But others of the ghosts were always low-key, living
out their endless nights and days till they would finally fade away after a long
era. One of the ghosts was that of John Chancel, one of the earlier visitors to
Thieving Bear Planet, usually called the “discoverer” of Thieving Bear, but
now he said that this wasn't true. During the second of the electric nights,
Chancel's ghost sat in the cockpit room of the ship with the explorers and
lovingly handled the eight hundred knobs, wheels, levers, push buttons,
keyboards, and voice boxes that commanded the ship. The ships hadn't been
so sophisticated in his day.
“I catch onto all the new and enjoyable advances in ship control quicker
than ‘he' would,” Chancel's ghost spoke softly. “Oh, he has the physical
brains with him, most of them; but I have the intuition. And he, we, were
never very good on brains anyhow. We had the mystique and the personality,
we had the intuition, we guessed a lot, and we faked a lot. But we were never
a well-linked personality."
“Just how does one become a ghost?” Gladys Marclair asked. “Besides
dying, I mean, is there any way to bring it about?”
"It happens, in many cases, long before death. I was his ghost here for
twenty years (Earth years) before Chancel died elsewhere. He left his (my)
>
a
ghost here on his second landing. He came back here for me several times
after that, but I wouldn't rejoin him or go away with him. He had become
quite cranky in his ways, and I in mine. There would have been everlasting
conflict if we had joined. But it was also psychic disaster (more for him than
for me) for us to be separated.
“It's not at all rare for a living person to be separated from his ghost. I see
that two of you six have become separated from your own ghosts, and none
of you can guess which two of you it is. On Thieving Bear, the conditions
seem to be favorable for these split-ups. It leaves a great hunger (yes, a
physical hunger) in the ghosts who are left behind. But each planet has its
own ghostliness that is different from that of other places. Even Old Earth has
remnants and tatters of ghostliness, and it isn't a hungry world. As a prophet
said, 'Happy the world that has iron meadows and rich essences on which the
spirits may feed, and then go to sleep.' But we spirits are most often sleepless
here."
"What happened to Dixie Late-Lark?” Gladys Marclair asked this pleasant
ghost.
“Oh, she's a ghost of a different sort. There never was any Dixie Late-
Lark as a person. There were only the six of you who arrived here. Dixie was
your esprit de group, your group effigy, and also a manifestation of your
'goofiness syndrome.' But we made her visible to you for the first time. And
you recognized her and accepted her in your unthinking way. This
‘unthinking way' has become part of the environment of Thieving Bear
Planet. She was the toothsome imaginative essence of all of you, the
capriciousness or coltishness of you, and that made her very appetizing. We
love essence. It's so concentrated.”
"Why did you make her visible?” Selma asked.
“Because we like to see what we're eating.”
"Who or what are the Thieving Bears?” Luke Fronsa asked Chancel's
ghost.
“Oh, they're a sort of tumbleweed, a sort of nettle. Ghosts use them to get
around in some of the time; so I myself am often a Thieving Bear. It is only
on the electric nights that we can inflate ourselves with enough plasm to look
like ourselves. We walk here a lot because we are always hungry and restless.
Ghosts in places that are richer in organics and metals and minerals stay well
fed by a sort of osmosis, so they walk and stir very little. They sleep their
"
decades and centuries away. Notice it sometimes that active ghosts are only
to be found in deprived regions. One of my counterparts has hardly stirred in
a hundred years. I can feel my counterparts, but there's not much of them to
feel.”
"Where do the little Thieving Bears come from?”
“From a very early landing, perhaps the earliest, for they were here when I
arrived. It was an ill-advised settlement expedition of men, women, and
children. Then all died of starvation, not knowing how to turn the lush grass
into food. They were the first of the hungry ghosts. It was their crying hunger
that has drawn all the ships to land in this one place. 'Come let us eat you' is
their cry, and it is still a most passionate cry.”
"You spoke of your counterparts' a moment ago," George Mahoon said.
“Did John Chancel generate more ghosts than one? Is he himself restless and
hungry?”
“Oh, I myself (the central John Chancel) have gone to my glory. But all of
us great ones leave multiple ghosts behind us. He (I) left at least two others
besides myself. We have a sort of awareness of each other, a loose feeling.
He had real greatness (unlikely as it seems), and I didn't. And yet this is the
paradox: he saw himself entirely from the outside, and he loved what he saw;
I saw us from the inside, and I wasn't impressed. And we were not the first
man on as many planets as is claimed for us. We were not the first man here.
There were already Thieving Bears here when we came, ghosts of earlier
explorers. But John Chancel had the greatness; and the earlier explorers had it
not. So Chancel was credited with many first landings.
“Good luck to you, ladies and gentlemen, when you lift off in your capsule
this electric morning. There are several entries that you must make in your
log immediately after lift-off, or you will forget them and never make them at
all. And you will have to make these entries in something other than ink.”
"Why should we lift off in our capsule?” Elton Fad asked. “We use the
capsule only when the ship is inoperative.”
"It's inoperative now and forever,” the ghost of John Chancel said. "Well,
it's a good ship and it eased the hunger of a lot of us. You'd better lift off in
a
the capsule as soon as possible now. We try to play fair, but we'll be feeding
on it very soon if it's still here.”
That John Chancel was a nice fellow, even in his fading ghost form.
>
* * *
But a much more violent ghost (right at that electric dawn after the second
electric night) was the ghost of Manbreaker Crag. After the second of the
electric nights had ended, Manbreaker decided to remain apparent out of
sheer stubbornness. They had all been feeling the powerful presence of this
Manbreaker Crag for some time.
"I'm the only one here of any moment or weight," Manbreaker's ghost
spoke in a rough sort of roar. “I'm not a person to crawl into pieces of nettle
or tumbleweed or any weeds except my own mortal weeds. I'm not one to
take on the form of a cutie giggling bear or other toy. I am not a ghost, nor
any part of a ghost story. Ghost stories are for children and cutie bears. I am a
simple dead man who is restless and hungry on this mineral-poor world. On
electric nights, I go get my own body where I keep it. I enter it and I inflate it
with the crackling lightning and the electricity that has gathered here. I'm a
hungry dead man with a dead man's temper. Don't mess with me!"
“Don't mess with us, fellow," George Mahoon spoke sharply. “Our ship
seems to be in a very weakened condition and we have to be getting out of
here quickly. Stay out of the way, grave-rot oaf, and be quiet. Elton, go
sharpen this, and then bring it back to me along with a heavy sledgehammer.
I think I know how to deal with hungry dead men.”
George Mahoon handed a thick and heavy hardwood dowel pin to Elton
Fad. It was about the length and heft of a baseball bat.
“The other ones, the real ghosts, which is to say the real unreal ones, have
their little self-saving fables that they recite when they feed on people and the
possessions of people," the hungry, long-dead man, Manbreaker Crag,
roared. The only speaking voice he possessed was this sort of dogged roar.
“They say, “We do not steal important things out of your minds. We steal
only funny-shaped, trifling things. Serious people like you are better off
without them. Our gain is your gain.' That is what they are telling you, but
they lie. What we eat out of your minds are the most serious things that your
minds are capable of holding. What we steal and eat out of your bodies are
the tastiest things in your bodies. We come to table on you, and we feast on
you. What we eat out of your ships and your stores are the most nourishing
and sophisticated things you have brought, wotto metal, data gelatin,
electronic reta, codified memories and processes. We eat these things because
we are hungry. And I eat them more ravenously than do any of the others. I
eat the essence of minds and leave gibbering idiocy in its place. I eat the
bodies of whole people where they stand.”
"Is everything possible transferred from the ship to the capsule?” big
George Mahoon asked his party.
"It is," several of them answered.
"I will eat the essence of your capsule-boat just as all of us on Thieving
Bear have eaten the essence of your ship,” dead Manbreaker Crag roared.
"Is it sharpened?” Mahoon asked as he took the thick hardwood dowel
from the returning Elton Fad.
“It is sharpened,” Elton said, “but something has gone wrong with it. It
loses weight as I stand here. They feed across short distances.”
"Scrawny ship captain, I think I'll eat you as you stand there," dead
Manbreaker roared at Captain Mahoon. “You'd make a big bite, but I'll eat
you."
Big George Mahoon felled bigger dead-man Manbreaker Crag with a
powerful blow to his dead face. Then he put the point of the sharpened dowel
pin (“Yes, Elton, I believe that he ate the heart out of it, but how could it have
been prevented?” Mahoon asked) to the region of the heart of Manbreaker
and struck the pin a heavy blow with the big sledgehammer. But the wooden
pin or stake came apart into weak splinters and pieces of worm-eaten (or
zombie-eaten) wood.
“Ah well, we'll have to leave him as he is,” Mahoon said. “I don't know
any other way to kill a man who's already dead.”
The six explorers got into the capsule-boat then and lifted off. They looked
down on the ship they had left behind them then, and it crumbled down and
became a part of its own outline and schematic. It became one more of the
token spaceships that formed that part-circle that gave the name Plain of the
Old Spaceships to that curious site. Those drawn outlines of the old
spaceships, they were the old spaceships. There must have been a lot of good
eating in each of them, though.
“To the log!” George Mahoon howled. “I feel it all slipping out of my
memory so fast! Each one of us take a long log page and write as rapidly as
a
possible. Get it down, before we lose it as earlier explorers lost it.”
“No use lamenting that there is no ‘ink’ in any stylus or pen or log pencil
laid out or still boxed,” Selma Last-Rose rattled. “No use lamenting that even
the electronic ink is eaten out of every recorder and that the remembering
jelly is eaten out of every memory pot. The hungers of the Thieving Bears are
unaccountable. All the earlier logs had a few words written in something
other than ink. If we all write as fast as we can, we may get more than a few
words down. We may even get the explanation down onto the log sheets
before it fades completely from our minds."
They all opened their veins and wrote on the long log sheets in their own
blood. It was sticky going. So many free-flowing things had been eaten out of
their blood that it was now viscous and thick. But they made it do. They got
the explanation all down, even though (when it was shown to them later) they
hardly remembered writing it.
A simple explanation had been needed for the conditions on Thieving Bear
Planet. It was needed because, as the great Reginald Hot had once phrased it,
“Anomalies are messy.”
And that simple explanation is herewith given, more or less as it was
written in thick blood in the log book.
Days of Grass, Days of
Straw
Introduction by Gary K. Wolfe
“Days of Grass, Days of Straw” first appeared in New Dimensions 3, the third
in a series of rather adventurous anthologies edited by Robert Silverberg
throughout the 1970s. Coming close on the heels of science fiction's
controversial New Wave, Silverberg's series was clearly out to recognize
new voices and new literary approaches to science fiction and fantasy, and
Lafferty had stories in each of the first four volumes. The volume with “Days
of Grass, Days of Straw" also included two stories which would become
widely reprinted, Hugo Award-winning classics, Ursula K. Le Guin's "The
Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas” and James Tiptree, Jr.'s “The Girl
Who Was Plugged In” (Tiptree was of course later revealed to be a
pseudonym of Alice Sheldon). Each of those would be reprinted dozens of
times in the coming decades, but Lafferty's story—despite now being
regarded as one of his best and most strikingly visionary by aficionados-
was reprinted only in a few of his own collections. It did, however, get
translated into Dutch and inspired the 2004 song Dagen van gras, dagen van
stro (a literal translation of the title) by the performer Spinvis (Erik de Jong).
Spinvis's lyrics have only an elliptical connection with Lafferty's story, but
the point is that Lafferty's best stories, even when not widely familiar,
manage to find their way into unexpected corners of the culture and leave
traces there.
The story itself is one that some readers find challenging—within the first
two lines, a city street morphs into a road, then a trail, then a mere path, and
"
our protagonist Christopher finds himself in a pre-urban, pre-industrial
landscape with features resembling Native American legends and Oklahoma
tall tales. Even his own name doesn't ring true, and half-recognized people
and places never quite coalesce into a more traditionally realized fantasy
landscape. Yet he feels revived and invigorated, as though the world had
been “pumped full of new juice.” “Things were mighty odd here,” he notices
in an observation that may well sound familiar to anyone reading a Lafferty
story for the first time. “There was just a little bit of something wrong about
things.”
We eventually learn that Christopher hasn't crossed into a fantasy world at
all, but rather to a different kind of time—a “day of grass," one of the
"overflowing and special days apart from the regular days,” which are called
days of straw. Although these special days are “Days out of Count” in terms
of history and the calendar, they are earned at great cost by prophets and
"prayer-men," who wrestle with God to gain them. Called by different names
in different cultures, these "rich days, full of joy and death, bubbling with
ecstasy and blood” may include entire seasons, and although “nobody has
direct memory of being in them or living in them,” we give them pallid
names like Indian Summer. Lafferty's stunning vision of a more vital and
perhaps more dangerous world just beyond the one we know, but somehow
folded into it, is one of his most haunting recurrent themes.
Days of Grass, Days of
Straw
1.
Fog in the corner and fog in his head:
Gray day broken and bleeding red.
-Henry Drumhead, Ballads
Christopher Foxx was walking down a city street. No, it was a city road. It
was really a city trail or path. He was walking in a fog, but the fog wasn't in
the air or the ambient: it was in his head. Things were mighty odd here. There
was just a little bit of something wrong about things.
Oceans of grass for one instance. Should a large and busy city (and this
was clearly that) have blue-green grass belly-high in its main street? Things
hardly remembered: echoes and shadows, or were they the strong sounds and
things themselves? Christopher felt as though his eyeballs had been cleaned
with a magic cleaner, as though he were blessed with new sensing in ears and
nose, as though he went with a restored body and was breathing a new sort of
air. It was very pleasant, but it was puzzling. How had the world been
pumped full of new juice?
Christopher couldn't recall what day it was; he certainly didn't know what
hour it was. It was a gray day, but there was no dullness in that gray. It was
shimmering pearl-gray, of a color bounced back by shimmering water and
shimmering air. It was a crimson-edged day, like a gray squirrel shot and
bleeding redly from the inside and around the edges. Yes, there was the
pleasant touch of death on things, gushing death and gushing life.
Christopher's own name didn't sound right to him. He didn't know what
town he was in. Indeed he'd never before seen a town with all the storefronts
flapping in the wind like that. Ah, they'd curl and bend, but they wouldn't
break. A town made of painted buckskin, and yet it was more real than towns
made of stone and concrete.
He saw persons he almost knew. He started to speak and only sputtered.
Well, he'd get a newspaper then; they sometimes gave information. He
reached in his pocket for a coin, and discovered that he didn't have regular
pockets. He found a little leather pouch stuck in his belt. What's this? What
else was stuck in his belt? It was a breechclout with the ends fore and aft
passing under his belt. Instead of pants he had a pair of leggings and a
breechclout, three-piece pants. Oh, oh, what else?
Oh, he wore a shirt that seemed to be leather of some sort. He wore soft
shoes that were softer than slippers. He was hatless, and his hair came
forward over his shoulders in two tight long braids. He had dressed casually
before, but he didn't remember ever dressing like this. How were the rest of
the people dressed? No two alike, really, no two alike.
But he did bring a coin out of that leather pouch that was stuck in his belt.
A strange coin. It wasn't metal: it was made of stone, and made roughly. On
the face of it was the head and forequarters of a buffalo. On the reverse side
was the rump of a buffalo. The words on the obverse of it read WORTH
ONE BUFFALO, and on the reverse they read MAYBE A LITTLE BIT
LESS.
“And where do I put a coin in this contraption?” Christopher asked
himself angrily and loudly. A hand extended itself, and Christopher put the
coin in the hand. The hand belonged to an old wrinkled brown man, swathed
in robes and folds of blackened leather, and sitting in the dust.
The old man gave Christopher a newspaper, or gave him something
anyhow. It was on leather that was almost board-stiff. It was illustrated, it
was printed in a variety of hands; and here and there it had a little hair
growing out of it as though its leather were imperfectly scraped.
“Wait, your change,” the old brown man said. He gave Christopher seven
small coins. These were neither metal nor stone: they were clay baked in the
sun. The obverse of each was the head and fore of a badger, puffed and
bristled and hissing in high defense. And the reverse was the reared rump of
the same badger in embattled clawed stance.
“Price go down a little but not a whole badger,” the old man said. “Take
three puffs. It's close as I can get to even change.” Wondering at himself,
Christopher took three strong rich smoky puffs from the old pipe of the old
man. He felt that he had received full value then. It was about all that he felt
satisfied with. But is it wrong to feel unsatisfied, which is unsated?
Christopher thought about it.
He went over and sat on a bale of rags outside the shop with the sign HOT
ROAST DOG FOR SALE OR GIVE. The bale of rags seemed somehow
lively; it was as if there was no division between the animate and the
inanimate this day. He tried to make something out of the strange newspaper
or the strange day, or the newly strange man who was apparently himself.
Oh, the newspaper was interesting. It could be read one way or another; by
picture, by stylized pictograph, by various writings and printings. Here were
anecdotes; wooly, horny, bottomlessly funny anecdotes: and they were about
people that Christopher knew, or almost knew. And all the people passing by
(Christopher realized it with a chuckling gasp) were also people that he knew
or almost knew. Well, what made them so different then? They looked like
familiar people, they smelled like familiar people (which the familiar people
erstwhile had not done), they had the familiar name that came almost to the
edge of the tongue.
“But what town is this? What day is this? What is the context?”
Christopher wailed out loud. “Why is everything so strange?”
"Kit-Fox, you call me?” Strange Buffalo boomed at him. Strange Buffalo
was a big and boisterous man and he had always been a good friend of
Christopher. He had? Then why did he look so different? And why was his
real name, or his other name, now unremembered?
“Will the buffalo go to war, do you think, Kit-Fox?" Strange Buffalo
asked him. “Do you believe that the two great herds of them will go to war?
They come near to each other now and they swear that neither will give
way.”
“No, there will be only the pushing and goring of a few thousand bulls, not
much else,” Christopher said. “The buffalo simply haven't the basis for a real
war." He was surprised at his own knowledge of the subject.
"But the buffalo have human advisers now,” Strange Buffalo said. “It
began with the betting, of course, but now we can see that there is real cause
a
>
a
of conflict on both sides. I dabble in this myself and have some good ideas.
We are tying spear-shafts to the horns of some of the big bulls and teaching
them to use them. And we're setting up big bows and teaching them to bend
them with their great strength, but they haven't any accuracy at all.”
“No, I don't believe they were meant to have a real war. It's a wonderful
dust they raise, though, when they all come together. It makes you glad to be
alive. And the thunder of their millions of hoofs!" (There was the distant
sound of morning thunder.) “Or is that a thundering in the mountains?" Kit-
Fox-ah, Christopher was asking.
"Well, there is quite a clatter in the mountains this morning, Kit,” Strange
Buffalo was saying in happy admiration. “The deep days, the grass days like
this one aren't come by easily. It's a wonder the mountains aren't knocked to
pieces when the big prophets pray so noisily and wrestle so strong. But, as
the good skin says, we must work out our salvation in fear and thundering."
"Is it not 'In fear and trembling'?" Christopher asked as he lounged on the
lively bale of rags.
“No, Kit-Fox, no!” Strange Buffalo pealed at him. “That's the kind of
thing they say during the straw days; not here, not now. In the Cahooche
shadow-writing it says ‘In fear and chuckling,' but the Cahooche words for
thunder and chuckling are almost the same. On some of the Kiowa antelope-
skin drawings, 'In scare-shaking and in laughter-shaking.' I like that. I wish I
could pray and wrestle as wooly and horny as the big ones do. Then I'd get to
be a prophet on the mountain also, and I'd bring in more days of grass. Yes,
and days of mesquite also."
“The mountain is a funny one this morning, Strange Buffalo. It doesn't
reach clear down to the ground," Christopher said. “There's a great space
between, and there are eagles flying underneath it.”
“Ah, it'll fall back after a while, Kit-Fox, when they have won or lost the
wrestling for the day; after they have generated sufficient juice for this day,
for I see that they have already won it and it will be a day of grass. Let's go
have a rack of roast dog and a gourd of choc beer,” Strange Buffalo
proposed.
“In a minute, Strange Buffalo. I am in the middle of a puzzle and I have
this fog in my head. What day is this?"
"It's one of the days of grass, Kit-Fox. I just told you that.”
“But which one, Strange Buffalo? And what, really, are ‘days of grass'?”
“I believe that it is the second Monday of Indian Summer, Kit-Fox,"
Strange Buffalo was saying as he gave the matter his thought and attention.
“Or it may be the first Monday of Blue-Goose Autumn. We're not sure,
though, that it is a Monday. It sounds and tastes more like a Thursday or an
aleikaday.”
“It sure does,” Christopher—ah, Kit-Fox agreed.
A laughing, dying man was carried past by four hale men. This fortunate one
had been smashed by bear or rolled on by horse or gored by buffalo, and the
big red blood in him was all running out. "It works,” the happy dying man
cried out. “It works. I got a little too close to him and he ripped me to pieces,
but it works. We are really teaching those big bulls to use the spears lashed to
their horns. Others will carry on the work and the fun. I bet that I've had it.”
“A little blood to bless me!" Strange Buffalo cried out, and the dying man
splashed him with the rich and rigorous blood.
"For me also," Kit-Fox begged, and the dying man smeared him with
blood on the brow and breast and shoulders and loins. Two other friends,
Conquering Sharp-Leaf and Adoration on the Mountain, came and were
blessed with the blood. Then the man died and was dead.
“There is nothing like the fine rich blood to make a grass day sing in your
head and in your body,” Strange Buffalo exulted. “On the straw days they try
to hide the blood or they bleed in a dark corner.”
(What was all this about the grass days and the straw days? There was
now a sordid dull-dream quality, a day-of-straw quality that kept trying to
push itself in. "For a little while,” it begged, "to reestablish rigor and rule and
reason for just a little while.” “Go away,” said the day-of-grass quality. “The
wrestle was won this morning, and this is a day out of the count.”)
Kit-Fox and Strange Buffalo went in, past the booths and work areas of
the coin-makers, past the stands of the eaglewing-bone-whistle makers, and
into the shop which had roast dog for sale or give. Strange Buffalo had a
shoulder of dog and Kit-Fox had a rack of ribs. There was fried bread also,
and hominy and pumpkin. There was choc beer dipped with gourd dippers
out of a huge crock. Thousands of people were there. It was crowded and it
was supposed to be. The man named Mountain twinkled in the air. Why had
a
"
a
they not noticed that about him before? Folks rolled up the walls and tied them. Now the strong smoke and savor could visit all the places, and the folks in every shop could see into every other shop. It was full morning and beginning to get warm. “But I still want to know the date,” Kit-Fox insisted, not quite converted to the day of grass, not quite clear of the head-fog that accompanies the sullen burning of the straw days. “What newspaper is this that doesn’t have a date? I want a date!” “Look at it. It tells,” said Strange Buffalo. “You want a date, honey?” the top of the newspaper writhed in sudden flickering of day-fire print. “Phone 582-8316 and I give you a real date.” Then the day-fire print was gone. “I hope I can remember that number,” Kit-Fox said anxiously. “Strange Buffalo, where is there a telephone exchange?” “They are the same and single and right outside past the booths,” Strange Buffalo said. “You were sitting upon it when I came upon you. And you, you old straw-head, you thought it was a bale of rags.” Kit-Fox went outside, past the booths of the stone-buffalocoin makers and the clay-badger-coin makers, past the tents of the porcupine-quill dealers, to what he had thought was a bale of rags, a lively bale of rags as he now remembered it. Well, it was an ample lady in her glad rags and she was the telephone exchange lying there in the grass. “I want to call number 582-8316,” Kit-Fox said uneasily. “Here are a handful of dice,” the glad-rags lady told him. “Arrange them here in the short grass and make any number you want.” “But proper dice have numbers only to six,” Kit-Fox protested, “and some of the numbers are higher.” “Those are improper dice, they are crooked dice,” the lady said. “They have numbers more than six and numbers less than one. Number out your telephone number in the short grass with them.” “Are you sure this is the way to dial a number?” Kit-Fox asked. “Sure I’m not sure,” the lady said. “If you know a better way, do it that way. Worth a try, kid, worth a try.” Kit-Fox numbered out his numbers in the short grass. “Now what do I do?” he asked. “Oh, talk into the telephone here.”
“That buckskin bag is a telephone?” “Try it, try it. Drop a badger coin in and try it.” Kit-Fox dropped the coin into the telephone. “Hello, hello,” he said. “Hello, hello,” the lady answered. “That’s my number you called. You want a date, I wait for you awhile. Believe me, I get pretty tired of waiting pretty soon.” “I don’t think this is a telephone exchange at all,” Kit-Fox grumbled. “How else I can get guys so easy to drop badger-coins in a buckskin bag,” the lady said. “Come along, lover man, we will have a grand time this day.” The lady was full-bodied and jolly. Kit-Fox remembered her from somewhere. “Who are you?” he asked her. “I’m your wife in the straw days,” she said, “but this is a grass day. They’re harder to find, but they’re more fun when you find one. They have something to do with grandfather’s brother and that wrestling of his.” “Days of grass, days of straw,” Kit-Fox said as he embraced the lady passionately. “How about a hay day?” “You mean a heyday? Those are special. We hope to make them more often, if only the wrestle is better. They’re fuller of juice than the grass days even. We try to make one now.” They made a heyday together (together with a whole nation of people); and it went on and on. Day-Torch (that was the lady in the glad rags, the lady who was Kit-Fox’s wife during the straw days) bought an eagle-wing-bone whistle from a dealer, and she whistled happy haunting tunes on it. The people followed Kit-Fox and Day-Torch out of town, out to the oceans of buffalo grass and blue-stem grass. They torched everything that was dry and set the blue-black smoke to rolling. But the fundamental earth was too green to burn. All mounted horses and took lances. They went out after buffalo. Word was brought to them that some of the newly armed buffalo bulls wanted to schedule battle with them. And the battle was a good one, with gushing blood and broken-open bodies, and many on each side were killed. Strange Buffalo was killed. That big boisterous man died with a happy whoop. “Strange Buffalo, indeed,” one of the buffalo bulls said. “He looks like a man to me.”
When the ground there had become too soggy and mired in blood, they adjourned the battle till the next day of grass, or the one after that. Bloody battles are fine, but who wants to spend a whole day on one? There are other things. Kit-Fox and Day-Torch and a number of other folks went to higher ground. There was a roaring river on the higher ground, the biggest river ever and the loudest. “Oh be quiet,” Day-Torch said. “You’ve got the tune wrong.” The great river ceased to roar. Day-Torch whistled the right tune on the eagle-wing- bone whistle. Then the river resumed its roaring, but in this right tune now. This mightiest of all rivers was named Cottonwood Creek. Henry Drumhead added his beat to the tune. Then the folks had a rain dance till the sharp rain came down and drenched them through. They had a sun dance then, till the sun dried up the mud and began to burn the hides of the people. They had a cloud dance then. They had an antelope dance till enough antelope came to provide a slaughter and a feast. They had a pit dance, a fire dance, a snake dance, and an ashes dance: the ashes from pecan wood and hickory wood are a better condiment than salt to go with roast antelope. They had a feast dance. Then (after a while) a shakedown dance. They had a thunder dance and a mountain dance. Say, it is spooky to come to the foot of the mountain itself and see the great gap between it and the ground! Rocks and boulders fell off of the bottom of the mountain and killed many of the people below. And, from the mountain itself, a broken, bloody, and headless torso fell down to the earth. Helen Hightower—ah, that is to say the glad-rag lady Day-Torch—set up a rakish screaming, “The head, the head, somebody forgot the head!” There was a thunderous grumbling, a mountain-shaking irritation, but the bloody head did come down and smash itself like a bursting pumpkin on the earth. “A lot of times they forget to throw the head down if you don’t remind them,” Day-Torch said. The meaning of the fallen torso and head was that there was now one less prophet or wrestler on the mountain; that there was now an opportunity for one more man to ascend to glory and death. Several of the men attempted it by various devices, by piling cairns of stones to climb upon, by leaping into the air to try to grab one of the dangling
roots of the mountain, by hurling lances with trailing lianas to fasten quivering in the bottom of the mountain. They played it out in the garish day there where all the colors were so bright that they ached. Many of the men fell to their deaths, but one ascended. There is always one who is able to ascend to the great wrestle when there is an empty place to receive him. And the one who ascended was—no, no, you’ll not have his name from us yet. Something was mighty odd here. There was just a little bit of something right about things. 2. Draftsman, draftsman, what do you draw? Dog days, draggy days, days of straw. —Ballads, Henry Drumhead 3. Indian Summer. A period of warm or mild weather late in autumn or in early winter. —Webster’s Collegiate
So Webster’s Collegiate defines it, but Webster’s hasn’t the humility ever to admit that it doesn’t know the meaning of a word or phrase. And it doesn’t know the meaning of this one. There are intervals, days, hours, minutes that are not remembered directly by anyone. They do not count in the totality of passing time. It is only by the most sophisticated methods that even the existence of these intervals may be shown. There are whole seasons, in addition to the four regular seasons that are supposed to constitute the year. Nobody knows where they fit in, there being no room for them anywhere in the year; nobody has direct memory of being in them or living in them. Yet, somehow, they have names that have escaped these obliterations. The name of one of the misfit seasons is Indian Summer. (“Why can’t the Indians have their summer in the summertime like the rest of us?” comes a high voice with a trace of annoyance. Not a high-pitched voice: a high voice.)
But all that is neither here nor there. It is yonder, and we will come to it.
Christopher Foxx was walking down a city street. Things were mighty even
here, mighty neat. There was just a little bit of something wrong about their
rightness.
The world was rubbed, scrubbed, and tubbed; it was shaved, paved, and
saved; it was neat, sweet, and effete. Ah, the latter was possibly what was
wrong with it, if anything could be wrong with perfection. The colors were
all flat (flat colors had been deemed best for nerves and such), and the sounds
were all muted. Christopher, for a moment, wished for a color that shrieked
and for a sound that blazed. He put the thought resolutely out of his head.
After all, he had for wife Helen Hightower, and he suffered much criticism
because of her gaudiness and exuberance.
Christopher took a paper from the slot on the corner, noted that it was a
day in May (he had a queer feeling that he had been uneasy about the date,
and yet all that registered with him was that it fell within a familiar month).
He entered the North Paragon Breakfast Club. It was there that the
Symposium would begin (it would last the whole day and into the night, and
be held at various sites) on the multiplex subject “Spatial and Temporal
Underlays to the Integrated World, with Insights as to Their Possible Reality
and Their Relationship to the World Unconscious and to the Therapeutic
Amnesia; with Consideration of the Necessity of Belief in Stratified Worlds,
and Explorations of the Orological Motif in Connection with the Apparent
Occurrence of Simultaneous Days.” It would have been an exciting subject if
Excitement had not become another of the muted things.
Buford Strange was already at the North Paragon, and with him were
Adrian Montaigne and Vincent Rue.
"I have already ordered for ourselves and for yourself, Christopher,"
Buford said. “It is sheldrake, and I hope that you like it. They will not prepare
it for fewer than four persons. 'We can't go around killing quarter ducks,
they say.”
“That is all right,” Christopher said meekly. He glanced at the other three
nervously. There was surely something familiar about them all.
Great blue mountain thunder! Why shouldn't there be! He had worked
>
with these men daily for several years. But, no, no, his edgy mind told him
that they were familiar in some other and more subtle way. He glanced at the
paper which he had taken from the corner slot outside. Something like quick
flame ran across the top of it and was gone too quickly to verify. But was it
possible that the flame had said “You want a date, honey? You phone” Of
course it was not possible. Clearly, at the top of the paper it was printed A
DAY IN MAY. Clearly? Was that clear enough for a date?
“What date is this?” Christopher asked the three of them.
"May the eighth, of course,” Adrian answered him. "You've got today's
Journal in your hand and still you ask?”
Well now it was printed clearly there, May 8, and there was no nonsense
about "a day in May"; still less was there anything like "You want a date,
honey?"
Some wild-looking children burst into the North Paragon Breakfast Club.
"Straw-Men! Straw-Men!” they cried at the four gentlemen there. "Straw-
Men! Straw-Men!” The children buffeted the four men a bit, did other
extravagant things that are since forgotten, and then they went out of the
Breakfast Club again: or at least they disappeared; they were no longer there.
"Why should they have done that?” Adrian asked, puzzled. “Why should
they have called us that, and done the other things?”
“Why should who have called us what?” Vincent asked, even more
puzzled.
“I don't know,” Adrian said dryly. “It seemed that someone was here and
said or did something."
"You're witless, Adrian," Vincent chided. "Nobody was here."
"Straw-Man,” Christopher Foxx said softly. “I remember the word now
and I couldn't remember it before. I woke up this morning trying to
remember it. It seemed to be the key to a dream that was slipping away in
spite of my trying to hang on to it. I have the key word now, but it fits
nothing. The dream is gone forever.”
"We will come back to this subject later in our discussions," Buford
Strange said. “I believe that your word ‘Straw-Man,’ Christopher, is a part of
the underlay, or perhaps of the overlay, that pertains to our world and our
study. There is a good chance that certain children, or perhaps dwarfs or
gnomes, entered here several moments ago. Did any of you notice them?”
"No," said Vincent Rue.
"No one entered," said Adrian Montaigne.
“No. I didn't see anyone,” said Christopher Foxx.
"Yet I believe that a group did come in,” Buford Strange continued
suavely. “It was a group unusual enough to be noticed. Then why didn't we
notice it? Or why did we forget, within a short moment, that we had seen it at
all? I believe it was because the group was in a different sort of day. I am
nearly sure that it is a group that lives in either St. Martin's Summer or in the
Kingfisher Days. Ah, here is the sheldrake ready with all the trimmings!
Drool and be happy. We shall never know such moment again."
It was a momentous fowl, no question of that. It was good, it was rich, it
was overflowing with juice. It was peer of the fowl that are found in the land
named St. Succulentus's Springtime. (What? What? There is a land named
that?)
The four noble men (they were ennobled by the circumstance) fell to
eating with what, in days of another sort, might almost be called gusto. It was
a royal bird and was basted with that concoction of burst fruits and crushed
nuts and peppers and ciders and holy oils and reindeer butter that is called-
(wait a bit)
“Do you know that the sheldrake is really a mysterious creature?” Buford
Strange asked as he ate noisily (nobody eats such royal fare in quiet). Buford
acted as if he knew a secret.
“It is not a mysterious creature at all,” Adrian countered (he knew it was,
though). “It is only the common European duck.”
"It is not only the common European duck," Buford said strongly. "In
other days it may be quite uncommon.”
"What are you saying, Buford?” Vincent Rue asked him. "In what other
days?"
"Oh, I believe, possibly, in what the Dutch call Kraanzomer, Crane-
Summer. Are we agreed that the other days, the days out of count, are topic
rather than temporal?”
"We are not even agreed that there are days out of count,” Christopher
objected.
“Drakes' teeth, by the way, while rare, are not unknown,” Adrian
Montaigne popped the statement out of his mouth as if in someone else's
voice. He seemed startled at his own words.
“Drake is really the same word as Drakos, a dragon,” Christopher Foxx
"
mumbled. “Ah, I was going to say something else but it is gone now.”
“Waiter, what is the name of the excellent stuff with which the drake is
basted and to which it is wedded?” Vincent Rue asked in happy wonder.
"Dragons' sauce," said the waiter.
"Well, just what is the mystery, the uncommonness of the sheldrake,
Buford?” Christopher asked him.
“I don't seem to remember," that man said. “Ah, let us start our discussion
with my, our, failure to remember such things. Vincent, did you not have a
short paper prepared on 'Amnesia, the Holes in the Pockets of the Seamless
Garment’?”
“I forget. Did I have such a paper prepared? I will look in my own
pockets.”
Meanwhile, back on the mountain, back on the thundering mountain there
were certain daring and comic persons rushing in and out and counting coup
on the Wrath of God. It is a dangerous game. These were the big prophets
who prayed so violently and sweated so bloodily and wrestled so strongly. It
was they who fought for the salving or the salvation of the days, in fear and
in chuckling, in scare-shaking and in laughter-shaking. The thundering
mountain was a funny one this morning. It didn't reach clear to the ground.
There was a great space between, and there were eagles flying under it. And
the day, the day, was it really the first Monday of Blue-Goose Autumn? Was
it really a Monday at all? Or was it a Thursday or an aleikaday?
It was like another morning of not long before. The eagles remember it;
the clouds remember it; the mountain wrestlers remember it dimly, though
some of the memory has been taken away from them.
Remember how it is written on the holy skins: “If you have faith you shall
say to the mountain 'Remove from here and cast thyself into the sea' and it
will do it.” Well, on that morning they had tried it. Several of the big
prophets and wrestlers tried it, for they did have faith. They groaned with
travail and joy, they strove mightily, and they did move the mountain and
make it cast itself into the sea.
But the thunders made the waters back off. The waters refused to accept or
to submerge the mountain. The prayer-men and wrestlers had sufficient faith,
but the ocean did not. Whoever had the last laugh on that holy morning?
The strivers were timeless, of the prime age, but they were often called the
“grandfathers” brothers' by the people. They were up there now, the great
prophets and prayer-men and wrestlers. One of these intrepid men was an
Indian and he was attempting to put the Indian Sign on God himself. God,
however, was like a mist and would not be signed.
“We will wrestle,” the Indian said to God in the mist, "we will wrestle to
see which of us shall be Lord for this day. I tell you it is not thick enough if
only the regular days flow. I hesitate to instruct you in your own business,
and yet someone must instruct you. There must be overflowing and special
days apart from the regular days. You have such days, I am sure of that, but
you keep them prisoned in a bag. It is necessary now that I wrest one of them
from you.”
They wrestled, inasmuch as a man slick with his own sweat and blood
may wrestle with a mist: and it seemed that the Indian won the lordship of a
day from God. “It will be a day of grass,” the Indian said. “It will be none of
your dry and juiceless days.” The Indian lay exhausted with his fingers
entwined in the won day: and the strength came back to him. “You make a
great thing about marking every sparrow's fall,” the Indian said then. “See
that you forget not to mark this day."
The thing that happened then was this: God marked the day for which they
had wrestled, but he marked it on a different holy skin in a different place,
not on the regular skin that lists the regular days. This act caused the wrested
day to be one of the Days out of Count.
Prophets, wrestlers, praying-men of other sorts were on the mountain also.
There were black men who sometimes strove for kaffir-corn days or ivory-
tree days. There were brown island men who wrestled for sailfish days or
wild-pig days. There were pinkish north-wood men who walked on pine
needles and balsam; there were gnarled men out of the swampy lands; there
were town men from the great towns. All of these strove with the Lord in fear
and in chuckling.
Some of these were beheaded and quartered, and the pieces of them were
flung down violently to earth: it is believed that there were certain qualities
lacking in these, or that their strength had finally come to an end. But the
others, the most of them, won great days from the Lord, Heydays, Halcyon or
Kingfisher Days, Maedchensommer Days, St. Garvais Days, Indian Summer
Days. These were all rich days, full of joy and death, bubbling with ecstasy
and blood. And yet all were marked on different of the holy skins and so they
became the Days out of Count.
*
ور
“Days out of the Count,” Buford Strange was saying, “It's an entrancing idea,
and we have almost proved it. Seasons out of the count! It's striking that the
word for putting a condiment on should be the same word as a division of the
year. Well, the seasons out of the count are all well seasoned and spiced.
There are whole multiplex layered eras out of the count. The ice ages are
such. I do not say 'were suchʼ; I say “are such.”
"But the ice ages are real, real, real,” Helen Hightower insisted. (Quite a
few long hours had passed in the discussions, and now Helen Hightower, the
wife of Christopher Foxx, was off her work at the telephone exchange and
had put on her glad rags and joined the scholars.)
“Certainly they are real, Helen,” Buford Strange said. “If only I were so
real! I believe that you remember them, or know them, more than most of us
do. You have a dangerously incomplete amnesia on so many things that I
wonder the thunder doesn't come and take you. But in the days and years and
centuries and eras of the straight count there are no ice ages.”
"Well then, how, for instance, would local dwellers account for terminal
moraines and glacial till generally?” asked Conquering Sharp-Leaf—ah,
Vincent Rue.
(They were at the University, in that cozy room in the psychology
department where Buford Strange usually held forth, the room that was just
below the special effects room of Professor Timacheff.)
“How did they account for such before the time of modern geology?”
Buford asked. “They didn't. There would be a new boulder one morning that
had not been there the day before. The sheep-herder of the place would say
that the moon had drawn it out of the ground, or that it had fallen from the
sky.”
"You're crazy, Buford,” Adrian Montaigne said with a certain affection.
"
“Why the ice ages then? Why should they have happened, even in times out of count? Why should they have left their footprints in the times within the count?” Adrian had very huge and powerful hands. Why had they not noticed this before? “I believe there was a dynasty of great and muscular prophets and ghost- wrestlers who wanted to call out the terrible days of Fimbul Winter,” Buford said in a hushed voice. “I don’t know why they wanted such things, or why they sweated blood and wrestled prodigies to obtain them. They were men, but they are remembered as the frost giants.” “Oh my grand, grand uncles!” Day-Torch—Helen Hightower, rather, cried out. “Days of snow! Days of ice! Millions of them!” “You are saying that certain archetypes—” Kit-Fox began. “Shook the pillars of Heaven till the snow and ice fell down for a million days, for a million days out of the count,” Buford Strange finished. “Strange Buffalo, ah, Buford, you are crazy,” Christopher Foxx chided much as Adrian had. Christopher was talking, but the queerly smiling Adrian had now become the presence in the room. Adrian had the curious under- rutile of the skin of one who has sweated blood in prayer and buffoonery and passion. Why had they not noticed that of him before? “I could almost believe that you were one of the great challengers yourself, Strange,” Christopher said to Buford, but he was looking at Adrian. “You strike me as with a lance, Kit,” Buford said sadly. “You uncover my mortification. For I failed. I don’t know when it was. It was on a day out of the count. I failed a year ago or ten thousand years ago. I could not make it among the great ones. I was not cast out to my death: I was never in. There was room for me, and an opportunity for the ascent, but I failed in nerve. And one who has aspired to be a champion or prophet cannot fall back to be an ordinary man. So I am less than that: I am short of manhood. But, sadly, I do remember and live in other sorts of days.” “I believe that the aberrant days are simultaneous with the prosaic days,” Adrian Montaigne mused. Adrian was quite a large man. Why had they not noticed that before? “No, no, they are not simultaneous,” Buford was correcting him. “There are the days out of the count and there are the days in the count. Those out of count are outside of time so they cannot be simultaneous with anything. You have to see it that way.”
“You see it your way and I’ll see it mine.” Adrian was stubborn. “Consider some of the aberrant times or countries: St. Garvais’ Springtime, St. Martin’s Summer (the saints in these names were mountain prophets and wrestlers, but some of them were not at all saintly in their violence), Midas March (the very rich need their special season also: it is said that, in their special month, they are superiorly endowed in all ways), Dog Days, Halcyon Days, Dragon Days, Harvest May (what in the world is harvested in May?), All-Hallow Summer, Days of Ivory, Days of Horn, Indian Summer, Wicklow Week, Apricot Autumn, Goose Summer, Giant-Stone Days, Day of the Crooked Mile, the season called Alcedonia by the Latins. I tell you that all these days are happening at the same time!” This man named Adoration on the Mountain, or rather Adrian Montaigne, had a reckless sort of transcendence about him now. “No, they do not all happen at the same time,” Strange Buffalo was saying, “for the aberrant days of them are not in time. They are places and not times.” “Are there no nighttime hours in the times out of time?” Vincent Rue asked. “No. Not in the same sense. They are in another province entirely,” Buford said. There was thunder in the special effects room of Professor Timacheff on the floor just above them, cheerful, almost vulgar thunder. Timacheff taught some sensational (sense response and also melodramatic) courses up there. But how did he get such special effects anyhow? “They do happen at the same time,” Adrian Mountain insisted, and he was laughing like boulders coming together. Quite a few things seemed to be happening to Adrian all at the same time. “They are all happening right now. I am sitting with you here this minute, but I am also on the mountain this minute. The thunder in the room above, it is real thunder, you know. And there is a deeper, more distant, more raffish thunder behind it which primitives call God’s-Laughter Thunder.” “This gets out of hand now,” Vincent Rue protested. “It is supposed to be a serious symposium on spatial and temporal underlays. Several of you have turned it into a silly place and a silly time. You are taking too anthropomorphic a view of all these things, including God. One does not really wrestle with God in a bush or a mist, or ride in wildly on a pony and
count coup on God. Even as an atheist I find these ideas distasteful.” “But we are anthropoi, men,” Adrian proclaimed. “What other view than an anthropomorphic view could we take? That we should play the God-game, that we should wrestle with a God-form and try to wrest lordship of days from him, that we should essay to count coup on God, I as a theist do not find at all distasteful. “Why! One of them is failing now! It happens so seldom. I wonder if I have a chance.” “Adrian, what are you talking about?” Vincent demanded. “How could you do it, Adrian, when I could not?” Buford Strange asked. “Remember me when you come to your place, Adrian,” Day-Torch cried. “Send me a day. Oh, send me a day-fire day.” “And me also, Adrian,” Kit-Fox begged. “I would love to do it myself, but it isn’t given to everyone.” There was a strong shouting in the room above. There was the concussion of bodies, and the roaring of mountain winds. “What in all the crooked days is Professor Timacheff doing up there this evening?” Vincent Sharp-Leaf asked angrily. “And what things are you doing here, Adrian? You look like a man set afire.” “Make room for me! Oh, make room for me!” Adrian of the Mountain cried out in a voice that had its own crackling thunder. He was in the very transport of passion and he glistened red with his own bloody sweat. “One is failing, one is falling, why doesn’t he fall then?” “Help with it, Kit-Fox! And I help also,” Day-Torch yowled. “I help!” Kit-Fox yelped. The room shuddered, the building shuddered, the whole afternoon shuddered. There was a rending of boulders, either on the prophet’s mountain or in the special effects room of Professor Timacheff above them. There was a great breaking and entering, a place turning into a time. There came a roaring like horses in the sky. Then was the multiplex crash (God save his soul, his body is done for) of bloody torso and severed limbs falling into the room from a great height, splintering the table at which the five of them sat, breaking the room, splattering them all with blood. But the ceiling above was unbreached and unharmed and there was no point of entry. “I am not man enough even to watch it,” Buford Strange gurgled, and he slumped sideways unconscious.
“Timacheff, you fool!” Vincent Rue bawled to the space above them. “Watch your damned special effects! You’re wrecking the place!” Unquestionably, that Timacheff was good. He used his special effects in classes on phenomenology that he taught up there. “The head, the head! Don’t let them forget the head!” Day-Torch cried in a flaming voice. “I just remembered that Timacheff is out of town and is holding no classes today,” Kit-Fox muttered in vulpine wonder. “Make room for me! Oh, make room for me!” Adrian Mountain boomed. Then he was gone from the midst of them. He would be a factor, though, “in days to come.” “The head, the head!” Day-Torch flamed and scorched. Christopher and Vincent tried to straighten up the unconscious Buford Strange. They shook him, but he came apart and one arm came off him. He was revealed as a straw-man filled with bloody straw, and no more. “Why, he’s naught but a poorly made scarecrow,” Christopher Foxx said in wonder. “He was right that one who falls back from it cannot become an ordinary man again. He will be less than man.” “That’s funny. He always looked like a man to me,” Vincent Rue said. “The head, the head! You forget the head. Let the head fall down!” Day- Torch cried. And the head fell down. It smashed itself like a bursting pumpkin on the broken floor. 4. Under the town is a woolier town, And the blood splashed up and the head fell down. —Ballads, Henry Drumhead
R. A. Lafferty began selling fiction regularly in the early 1960s and went full-time as a writer in 1971. His novels include Past Master (1968), Fourth Mansions (1969), and the Native American historical Okla Hannali (1972). You can sign up for email updates here.
About the Author
Thank you for buying this
Tom Doherty Associates ebook.
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
Sign Up
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.
TOR.COM
Science fiction. Fantasy. The universe.
And related subjects.
*
More than just a publisher's website, Tor.com
is a venue for original fiction, comics, and
discussion of the entire field of SF and fantasy,
in all media and from all sources. Visit our site
today- and join the conversation yourself.
Contents
Title Page
Copyright Notice
Not to Mention R. A. Lafferty: A Personal Introduction
Neil Gaiman
Slow Tuesday Night
(Introduction by Michael Dirda)
Narrow Valley
(Introduction by Michael Swanwick)
Nor Limestone Islands
(Introduction by Michael Bishop)
Interurban Queen
(Introduction by Terry Bisson)
Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne
(Introduction by Jack Dann)
In Our Block
(Introduction by Neil Gaiman)
Ride a Tin Can
(Introduction by Neil Gaiman)
Nine Hundred Grandmothers
(Introduction by Patton Oswalt / Afterword by Andy Duncan)
Land of the Great Horses
(Introduction by Harlan Ellison / Afterword by Gregory Frost)
Eurema's Dam
(Introduction by Robert Silverberg)
Selenium Ghosts of the Eighteen Seventies
(Introduction by Kelly Robson)
The Primary Education of the Camiroi
(Introduction by Samuel R. Delany)
Continued on Next Rock
(Introduction by Nancy Kress / Afterword by R. A. Lafferty)
Sky
(Introduction by Gwenda Bond)
Cliffs That Laughed
(Introduction by Gregory Feeley)
Seven-Day Terror
(Introduction by Connie Willis)
Boomer Flats
(Introduction by Cat Rambo)
Old Foot Forgot
(Introduction by John Scalzi)
The World as Will and Wallpaper
(Introduction by Samuel R. Delany)
Funnyfingers
(Introduction by Andrew Ferguson)
Thieving Bear Planet
(Introduction by Jeff VanderMeer)
Days of Grass, Days of Straw
(Introduction by Gary K. Wolfe)
About the Author
Copyright Acknowledgments
Copyright
Copyright Acknowledgments
“Seven-Day Terror” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, March 1962. “Slow Tuesday Night” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, April 1965. “In Our Block” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, July 1965. “Nine Hundred Grandmothers” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, February 1966. “Narrow Valley” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, September 1966. “The Primary Education of the Camiroi” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, December 1966. “Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Galaxy Magazine, February 1967. “Land of the Great Horses” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Dangerous Visions, Harlan Ellison ed. “Cliffs That Laughed” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in The Magazine of Horror, March 1969. “Ride a Tin Can” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, April 1970. “Continued on Next Rock” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 7, Damon Knight ed. “Old Foot Forgot” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 7, Damon Knight ed. “Interurban Queen” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Orbit 8, Damon Knight ed. “Nor Limestone Islands” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 1, Terry Carr ed. “Sky” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions I, Robert Silverberg ed. “Boomer Flats” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in If, July-August 1971. “Eurema’s Dam” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions II, Robert Silverberg ed. “The World as Will and Wallpaper” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Future City, Roger Elwood ed.
“Days of Grass, Days of Straw” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in New Dimensions 3, Robert Silverberg ed. “Funnyfingers” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Funnyfingers & Cabrito. “Selenium Ghosts of the Eighteen Seventies” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 8, Terry Carr ed. “Thieving Bear Planet” by R. A. Lafferty © The Locus Science Fiction Foundation. First published in Universe 12, Terry Carr ed.
This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in these stories are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
THE BEST OF R. A. LAFFERTY
Copyright © 2019 by The Locus Science Fiction Foundation
All introductions and afterwords are copyright © 2018 by their respective authors and are used with permission.
All rights reserved.
Cover photograph by Danny Xu / Shutterstock.com Cover design by Jamie Stafford-Hill
A Tor Essentials Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates 120 Broadway New York, NY 10271
www.tor-forge.com
® Tor is a registered trademark of Macmillan Publishing Group, LLC.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lafferty, R. A., author. The best of R. A. Lafferty / edited by Jonathan Strahan.—First edition. p. cm. “A Tom Doherty Associates book.” ISBN 978-1-250-79481-9 (hardcover) ISBN 978-1-250-77853-6 (trade paperback) ISBN 978-1-250-77868-0 (ebook) 1. Science fiction, American—Fiction. I. Title. PS3562.A28 813'.54—dc23 2020044266
ISBN 978-1-250-77853-6 (trade paperback) ISBN 978-1-250-79481-9 (paper over board) ISBN 978-1-250-77868-0 (ebook)
eISBN 9781250778680
Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
First published in Great Britain in 2019 by Gollancz, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group Ltd
First U.S. Edition: February 2021
1. I recommend Paul Kincaid’s excellent article in Through the Dark Labyrinth, https://www.google.com.au/amp/s/ttdlabyrinth.wordpress.com/2014/08/01/reprint-thus-we-frustrate- charlemagne/amp/
