AVON SCIENCE FICTION ORIGINAL V2406, 75c
A fantastic quest over the seas of Earth-and other unworldly places!
the devil is dead
ra.lafferty
A novel by science fiction's greatest talespinner
author of FOURTH MANSIONS and PAST MASTER
ra.lafferty
is a spinner of grand fantasies,
a creator of fine lies,
one of the great storytellers
of science fiction.
Here he tells of an astonishing band of adventurers
seeking the Devil himself. It is a tale of demons
and changelings, monsters and mermaids-and of how
it is not always serious to die, the first time
it happens....
Printed in U.S.A.
Here is Lafferty:
"Here is the devil himself with his several faces.
Here is an ogress, and a mermaid, both of them
passing aś ordinary women to the sightless. Here
is a body which you yourself may bury in the sand.
Here is the mark of the false octopus that has
either seven tentacles, or nine. Here is the shock
when the very dead man that you helped bury
continues on his way as a very live man; and he
looks at you as though he knows something you
do not....
Here are those of a different flesh: and may you
yourself not be of that different flesh?"
ra.lafferty
the devil is dead
AVON
PUBLISHERS OF
DISCUS CAMELOT
BARD
This is the first publication of
THE DEVIL IS DEAD in any form.
AVON BOOKS
A division of
The Hearst Corporation
959 Eighth Avenue
New York, New York 10019
Copyright © 1971 by R. A Lafferty.
Published by arrangement with the author.
All rights reserved, which includes the right
to reproduce this book or portions thereof in
any form whatsoever. For information address
Virginia Kidd, Literary Agent, Box 278,
Milford, Penna. 18337.
First Avon Printing, May, 1971
AVON TRADEMARK REO, U.S. PAT. OFF. AND
FOREIGN COUNTRIES, REGISTERED TRADEMARK-
MARCA REGISTRADA, HECHO EN CHICAGO, U.S.A,
Printed in the U.S.A.
Promantia
9
11
24
37
45
55
65
78
93
102
Chapter 1 Seaworthy and the Devil
Chapter 2 Mermaid and Ogress
Chapter 3 The Furtive Man
Chapter 4 The Wives of Sindbad
Chapter 5 The Unaccountable Corpse
Chapter 6 Luluway is the plural of Diamond
Chapter 7 Habib, I Have Found Something
Chapter 8 Anastasia Demetriades
Chapter 9 Diana Artemis
Chapter 10 Down With the Dead Men
Chapter 11 Thirty-Six Thousand Pieces of Paper
Chapter 12 Crest and Shatter
Chapter 13 Biloxi Brannagan
Chapter 14 Company of Fifty
Chapter 15 Basse-Terre
Chapter 16 Liars' Paradise
Chapter 17 Angela Cosquin
Chapter 18 Fin in the Graveyard
Chapter 19 The Devil Is Dead
111
123
135
150
162
174
183
197
206
215
the devil is dead
PROMANTIA
And they also tell the story
of Papadiabolous the Devil and his company, and of
two of the hidden lives of Finnegan; and how it is not
always serious to die, the first time it happens.
Here is one man who was buried twice and now lies
still (but uneasy of mind) in his two separate graves. Here
is another man who died twice-not at all the same thing.
And here are several who are disinclined to stay dead:
they don't like it, they won't accept it.
Given here, for the first time anywhere, are the bear-
ings and correct location of the Terrestrial Paradise down
to the last second of longitude. You may follow them.
You may go there.
Here also will be found the full account of where the
Devil himself is buried, and the surprising name that is on
his tombstone boldly spelled out. And much else,
a
We will not lie to you. This is a do-it-yourself thriller or
nightmare. Its present order is only the way it comes in
the box. Arrange it as you will.
Set off the devils and the monsters, the wonderful beau-
ties and the foul murderers, the ships and the oceans of
middle space, the corpses and the revenants, set them off
in whatever apposition you wish. Glance quickly to discov-
er whether you have not the mark on your own left wrist,
barely under the skin. Build with these colored blocks
your own dramas of love and death and degradation.
Leam the true topography: the monstrous and wonderful
archetypes are not inside you, not in your own uncon-
sciousness; you are inside them, trapped, and howling to
get out.
Build things with this as with an old structo set. Here is
the Devil Himself with his several faces. Here is an ogress,
and a mermaid, both of them passing as ordinary women
to the sightless. Here is a body which you yourself may
9
bury in the sand. Here is the mark of the false octopus
that has either seven or nine tentacles. Here is the shock
when the very dead man that you helped bury continues
on his way as a very live man, and looks at you as though
he knows something that you do not. Here is a suitcase
with 36,000 pieces of very special paper in it. Here is Mr.
X, and a left-footed killer who follows and follows. Here
are those of a different flesh; and may you yourself not be
of that different flesh?
Put the nightmare together. If you do not wake up
screaming, you have not put it together well.
a
Old Burton urged his subscribers to keep their copies of
the Nights under lock and key. There are such precipices
here! Take it in full health and do not look down as you
go. If you look down you will fall and be lost forever.
Is that not an odd introduction? I don't understand it at
all.
10
Chapter One
SEAWORTHY AND THE DEVIL
In fact, give a Neanderthal man a shave and a haircut,
dress him in well-fitted clothes, and he could probably
walk down New York's Fifth Avenue without getting
much notice.
-ASIMOV
1.
Finnegan met the eccentric millionaire early one mom-
ing. At least he said that he was a millionaire and eccen-
tric. Finnegan told him that he was dull.
"You only believe me dull because you don't know me
well,” the millionaire said. “I am one of the true eccen-
trics. Stick with me and you will see that I am."
Finnegan doubted also that the man was a millionaire.
He was unshaven and shabby, and he had the shakes. A
millionaire will sometimes have one or two of these disa-
bilities, but seldom all three.
The conversation may have begun when Finnegan asked
what town they were in.
"The license plates are mostly Texas," said the man.
“That is, you can see only one license plate from here, but
it's mostly Texas."
They were sitting on the sidewalk in front of a bar
waiting for it to open. They were across the boulevard
from the graveyard. The millionaire had a scar or tattoo
on the inside of his left wrist, and Finnegan looked at it.
"You have the same mark," said the man. “I wouldn't
have trusted you otherwise.”
“No. I haven't that mark,” Finnegan objected.
"It is still below the skin, but I can see it," the mil-
lionaire said. “Say, it's chilly for Texas. I wonder what
month this is."
11
99
1
“I would guess either spring or fall," Finnegan haz-
arded. “Probably fall. I remember a summer not long
ago. But I am usually in the North when fall bits. Then
I have to migrate, often at great pain. You really are a
millionaire?”
“Oh yes. As soon as the bar opens we can have a drink.
"
Then we will be well enough to look for other bars and
have other drinks. After that we can make plans. By that
time I should remember my own name, and you may
Temember yours. Possibly we will be well enough to look
for a bank, and as the day goes along they will be open.
When I am in funds I will buy you a pair of shoes."
"If you don't know what town this is, how do you know
that you have money in the bank?” Finnegan asked him.
“I am known," the man said. “I even begin to know
myself again now.'
“Which of us was sitting on the sidewalk first?" Finne-
gan asked him. “Or which came first, the sidewalk or the
people?”
"I don't know. I don't remember how I got here. We
were already here and in conversation when I became
aware. Your shoes are very bad and your feet have been
bleeding. I have compassion on you."
"You are in near as bad a shape," said Finnegan.
"It is different with me. I have always the means of
succor. It is just that I am preoccupied when I forget to
get a place to sleep, or when I do not eat, or change
clothes. When I have been guilty of such a shattering
drunkenness as this, I usually have something heavy on my
mind. Is the clay and loam of this place not peculiar? It is
mixed with sand and old oyster shells. We are both caked
with it, you know. We should brush off a little."
Finnegan looked deeply into the man's face, as he had
not done before. It was dull, but there was a bottomless
depth to that dullness and Finnegan knew that a deeper
word would be needed to describe it. It was a lined face
made out of old granite. The millionaire was a much older
man than Finnegan.
"My cognomen is Finnegan," Finnegan said finally. “I
do not yet remember my proper name, but it will not
matter; I use it seldom. This amnesia is not new to me. I
often have it when I move from one life to another. I
have an upper and a lower life, you know."
”
12
"Who hasn't! All of our sort indulge in amnesia, of
course. With you it is almost as though you do not know
what you are. All of us changelings arrive at the under-
standing late. Finnegan, this is a seaport, it has the atmo-
sphere of one. That being the case, I have some sort of
ship here. We will fit it, if it needs fitting, and we will
take a trip around the world immediately. I have often
found that this clears the head. Will this not prove that
I am an eccentric?"
“No. It will prove only that you remember what you
were about. Do you remember your name yet, millionaire,
or where we are?"
"Saxon X. Seaworthy is my name. I was pretty sure it
would be. Yes, I remember everything now, and there is
one thing that I forget again quickly."
Well, Finnegan didn't. He didn't remember the pre-dawn
adventure, the fearful thing he had been engaged in with
Seaworthy before they came to themselves sitting on the
sidewalk. The forgetfulness of this event antedated itself
considerably; Finnegan realized that there was a gap of
several months in his memory before that climax which he
could still savor but not remember. 'All of our sort indulge
in amnesia,' Seaworthy had said, 'It is an indulgence I had
better give up,' Finnegan told himself. But he didn't really
want to remember the recent adventure; it had too garish
and unnatural a savor.
The bartoom opened. Saxon and Finnegan went in and
drank beer, Texas beer only, nothing else was cold. And
Saxon was angry.
“There should be a punishment to fit the crime,” he
said. “We did but ask a drink in the name of Christ and
you gave us this. It were better in that hour, it were better
in that hour”
"What were better in that hour, little granite face?" the
bargirl asked.
"For less than this they did penance in Ninevah. God
will punish you for this, young lady."
“Bet He don't. Some of the places handle beer from the
states, but I don't know why they bother. Drink it, Mr.
Seaworthy. We will calk you up with it and see if you will
float. Bet you don't. What have you two been doing to get
so bloody and dirty?”
"We don't remember," said Finnegan. “Really, we don't
13
remember.” He wanted to ask the girl how she knew
Seaworthy's name and how well she Inew both of them.
An hour went by. The club opened, so they went into
the club.
Saxon Seaworthy cashed a check. 'Knew he could,'
thought Finnegan. He gave Finnegan five twenties, and a
little reality trickled into the Finnegan head. There are
men who will hand out money to a stranger without
reason, but there are not millionaires who will do it.
Finnegan was being paid, but he did not know whether
for past or future service.
The bargirl ran a wet cloth over the Finnegan face.
Then she rinsed it out and did it again. Well, it got some
of the blood and the sandy clay off, but that was all. It
was a grotesque face and washing could help it only a
little. Most of what was on it would not come off.
“Does all this service come with the drink?” Finnegan
asked her.
“Yes, Finn the gin, all for free. You are one sony
looking tramp.” She led him to a stool behind the bar, She
plugged in an electric shaver and went to work on him.
"We don't mind tramps here," she said, “It's just that we
like clean tramps. Oh, we love clean tramps.
Reality? This was not reality that was trickling back in.
Reality was too pale a word for this girl. She was flesh
and ichor, but she was also transparent, translucent, tran-
scendent. A conjurer's trick, but not a cheap conjurer's
trick.
"Are you always here, or do you sometimes go away?"
Finnegan asked,
“Not till the other girl comes."
That wasn't what he meant. He knew that she was real,
that she belonged to one of the only two peoples who have
ever been civilized, and she wasn't French. But she was
something else at the same time. She was a chameleon,
and she changed every time he looked at her.
“Where did you meet Mr. Seaworthy?" asked the girl, if
she were a girl. Finnegan remembered hearing of another
sort of creature that sometimes took that form.
"I don't know how we met, girl. We were sitting on the
sidewalk talking together when the sun came up. That
may have been the beginning of the world, but I can't
prove it. Something like it happened to me on a night
14
3
several years ago. I talked all night with another man
then. It was all strong talk with the hords and hooves still
on it. This was up in the north woods and he was a young
hobo. He seemed to change in voice and manner as the
night went on. We had an open fire there, but the light
from it was tricky. But when it was moming, the sun
showed that he was a different man entirely from what he
had been the night before. He was about forty years
older."
"Don't stop there, Finn. What did you
do?"
"I got away from there fast, girl, and left him mum-
bling to himself. Then a curtain came down over it and I
forgot all the tall things that we had talked about during
the night. But I had not gone a hundred yards from him
when I heard a terrible wailing. He had discovered, look-
ing into a pool there, that he had become an old man
overnight. It rended my heart to hear that wailing."
"I know that it did, Finn, but what happened last night?
I have reason for asking."
"I do not remember last night. I do not remember
anything for several months, now that I see the date and
month on that arty piece on the wall. But this moming I
was with Seaworthy. When I came to myself I was al-
ready talking and in the middle of a sentence. If I could
know the first part of my sentence it might clear things. I
don't know how long we were sitting on the sidewalk. Was
Saxon Seaworthy a young man before we had our con-
gress, of whatever sort, last night?"
“No, Finn. He didn't age forty years in the night. He
was the same. Oh, Finn, Finn! Look! He's just aged forty
years in three seconds now! What is it? He's shaking to
pieces."
“So am I,” Finnegan shook. Finnegan did not have to
look at what presence had just come into the club. He felt
the fear of it melting his bones. 'He can't be alive,'
Finnegan moaned to himself, 'he has no business being
alive.' He didn't remember the thing, but only the aura of
the thing. He looked at the now ashen and very old
granite face of Saxon Seaworthy, and at the shaking of
the millionaire's hands and lips.
But Seaworthy pulled himself together quickly, regained
his hard granite color, threw off his deadly old age, and
quelled his quaking. He nodded shortly to the presence
15
9
that Finnegan would not look at. And he was the mysteri-
ous and controlled Saxon Seaworthy again.
“Are you drinking, Papa-D?" the bargirl asked the
presence somewhat nervously,
“No. I looked in only for a moment,” sounded the
almost-human voice. "Ah, that all be well even as I am
well!"
There was something about the opening and closing of
a door. And the presence was no longer present.
“Is he a phoney?! Finnegan asked after a very long
pause.
“Papa-D?" the girl asked,
“I don't know any Papa-D," said Finnegan. “It is here
that amnesia has its advantages. I mean Seaworthy."
“I suppose he is. How do you mean?"
"Is he a millionaire?”
"He spends like one. Which is to say that he seems to
spend a great deal, and doesn't. He carries weight, what-
ever that means. I guess he is one."
“Does he have a boat in every port?"
“I don't think so. But he has a ship in this one."
"Will it go around the world?”
“It has, They say that he is going again."
"He says that he will take me with him."
"If he says that he will, then he will, Finnegan. I'm
going to try to get on too. He will need a barmaid. He
had a young Negro boy for bartender when he came to
town, but he's disappeared off somewhere. Nobody knows
what's happened to him. Will you put in a word to Mr.
Seaworthy for me?”
"You must know him much better than I do, girl. I've
known him only for an hour and a half."
"It had to be quite a few hours longer than that,
Finnegan. And it won't hurt to give me a boost. Just
remark what a remarkable little girl I am."
“Yes, you washed me when I was filthy and anointed
my wounds with gin and bitters. What is your name?"
?
“You know it. Anastasia Demetriades. You've been
here before. Which will it be, amnesia or me?"
“Oh. Yes. I did know your name. Anastasia, what more
apt! I was dead and you gave me life. You brought back
my respectability with an electric shaver. Anastasia, the
resurrection!"
16
Finnegan got an odd look at Seaworthy the millionaire.
He hadn't, for all his looking, seen him this way before.
He had the mark on him, and 'twas not simply the mark
on the wrist. A long time before he had met Seaworthy, it
had come to Finnegan what the mark consisted of. Finne-
gan was clairvoyant. Since he had understoood it, he had
seen the mark that is not actually a mark on many others,
sometimes on a man in a crowd, sometimes on a man
alone, But he had never before seen it on a man he was
committed to. Seaworthy had that mark.
'He has killed a man, or men,' Finnegan said to himself.
'And he told me that I have the same mark, but what he
meant was only part of it. Have I killed a man or men
also?'
But Anastasia was talking:
“There is one reason I want to go on the voyage," she
was saying. "We will surely go to the Old Country. How
go around the world without it? One cannot go around the
world and miss the place where the world began. I have
never been back, and I was small when I left. There's
been trouble there. We aren't sure who of the family is
still alive. We aren't a family who writes to each other.
It's all a long way behind me, but my mother nearly dies
thinking of it.
"There is another reason I must go on the voyage, and
you will not understand it unless you have the same
reason, Finnegan."
Saxon Seaworthy came over to them.
“I am sorry," he said, “but there is some business that I
must take care of, business that I thought was already
taken care of. I have seen a man that I had not expected
to see. So there will be business that might take me
several days. But soon, very soon, we will go on the
voyage.
He gave Finnegan another hundred dollars, and he left.
'He buys me and he buys me,' Finnegan thought. And
he had another thought. 'I believe that he does know
where his Negro boy disappeared, and where others have
gone. But there is one thing he doesn't know, one man
who didn't stay disappeared.'
91
Finnegan went and got a room while it was still mom-
ing. He had a bath. Then he went out and bought a
17
satchel and a few clothes to go in it, and shoes. He had a
good meal at a seafood place. He went to a man who had
loaned him money on his seaman's papers, and paid the
money, and got them back. The name on them was John
A. Solli. 'Knew it would be,' said Finnegan. 'Solli I was
born, but I'm Finnegan for all that.'
He remembered almost everything now, his upper life
with its certain occupations and sets of friends, his lower
life with other sets. He remembered the strange division in
himself that was not new. But he did not remember
anything about the last several months, and he sure did
not remember what had happened last night. He went to
his room to sleep.
And when he woke he was excited. It wasn't really the
smell of Seaworthy's green money that had come to haunt
him pleasantly. It was the heady smell of adventure, the
high salt aroma of far travel and the iodine tang of
menace. He knew already that Seaworthy had a sinister
aspect, and that it would not be a bloodless adventure,
The world was Finnegan's coconut and he would have
it open. He hadn't lost any of his urge to go everywhere
and be embroiled in everything. He was like the old Norse
hero who cried out for still more towering oceans where
one must always sail uphill. He'd crack the world, he'd
have that big fish by the tail!
2.
"Finnegan said that, Dotty? Did he really? I wonder
why he said a thing like that? . .. I never really knew
him, Dot. He is my brother and only a year younger,
and he was with me more than anyone else. I sort of
raised him, but we were always strangers. It's as though
he was a changeling."
ARCHIPELAGO, Chapter Seven.
The next time they met, Saxon Seaworthy was sober
and he passed Finnegan by without seeming to recognize
him. This was a disappointment but not a mortal one.
Finnegan could open the golden coconut without Sea-
worthy. He had been busy doing it for several years
18
before he met the man, and his adventures had been more
wondrous than any lies that could be told about them. He
had felt the tide rising in him, and he could ship out on
almost any ship he wished,
Finnegan was working while he waited. He cleaned out
bars in the mornings. He had five bars that he opened,
with staggered hours, that took him from seven in the
moming till noon. At each place he worked about half an
hour. Then he would drink a beer and rest till he went to
open the next place. He washed dishes from twelve till
two and from six till eight, sometimes at the Crystal
Palace, sometimes at the Sea Breeze, or at Pier Eleven.
He had a dollar for each shift and a dollar for each bar.
He snoozed on the beach every aftemoon, and he drank
in the evenings. He had two meals where he washed
dishes, and his room rent was paid ahead; though often he
did not use his room. Finnegan seldom slept in beds.
For the rest, he had never let himself go completely
broke, and he had not been broke when he met Sea-
worthy. He had had Miguel; the life of Miguel had been
saved by the advent of Seaworthy.
Miguel was a hundred dollar bill. Whenever Finnegan
was down to that he knew that he would have to go to
work. There had been other bills to bottom his adven-
tures. Before Miguel there had been Jose-Ramires, there
had been Hernandez, there had been Aloysius, there had
been Gottfried von Guggenheim, a baron. There had been
one bill that was never baptized and that had lived for
less than thirty-six hours. That bill is now in limbo and
Finnegan often thought of its short life with sorrow.
Finnegan was not thrifty, but he understood the
economic law of the cushion and the absolute minimum,
There were other intoxicants for Finnegan. He was
alive and winning, though he was not sure in what curren-
cy. That was the week when all the people were interest-
ing and all the jokes were funny. He won eight hundred
dollars dicing at the Little Oyster, and he had a girl
straight out of the Arabian Nights. Finnegan had had
these intervals before, returning to the world as a com-
plete stranger, believing himself an alien (no matter what
his various papers showed him of his past), finding no one
he recognized in the world at all. But this time he recog-
nized Anastasia Demetriades. He had known her before
19
.
he knew her, she was more kin to him than his kindred.
He didn't know a thing about her. Well, he didn't know a
thing about himself.
They were together a lot that week. They exulted in the
town and the beach. She was wry and friendly, often
pretty, and sometimes a sort of burlesque of the pretty,
for she still changed. She was so wiry that Finnegan could
hardly wrestle her down when they clowned on the beach;
yet she was very small. A fortune card-weighing machine
on the beach showed her at a hundred and thirty pounds,
though Finnegan would have guessed her at ninety. He
could feel the bones in her, and it was like an electric
shock. There is nothing wrong with having bones the way
she had them. There is nothing wrong with having a touch
of sea-green in the olive and gold complexion, or the
paradoxical soft-hardness and cooling-fever that Anastasia
always maintained.
When she spoke she set up harmonics as though she
were in tune with every shell of the ocean. She spoke
now, but as always her first half dozen words tumbled into
Finnegan's mind before the sound began.
“The beach isn't quite the same, but the sea is the sea,"
she said. "I was ten years old when I came to this
country. I was bom on an island; there is a bill in the
center of it, and from there you can see twenty islands
and two parts of the main-land. We will go there, I am
sure; Seaworthy will not be able to pass it by; besides, I
believe that he has mysterious business there.”
“The voyage? There will still be a voyage, Anastasia?"
“Yes. And we both will go. Marie showed me both of
our names on the ship's papers. You will have to give her
more information on yourself, though."
"But Seaworthy didn't recognize me yesterday."
"I know it. When he meets people drunk, he doesn't
recognize them again when he's sober. But he remembered
your name (if that is your name), and that I knew you.'
“He does have a boat, and it is going?”
“She is the Brunbilde. I used to have an aunt who
looked just like that ship. We'll go see her now if you
want to, Finn. The ship I mean. The aunt is dead.”
They took a cab across to the bay side with a cabby
named Joe Sortell. The Brunhilde (you knew her already
though you had never seen her before) was a rakish
20
queen, a water-going woman, a real old crow of a ship.
Long ago she had been the steam yacht of a famous
millionaire. Now she was the diesel-snufiling pride of an
infamous one.
She was a girl. She had been there and back. If she
accepted you, and she accepted Finnegan immediately, she
was the friendliest ship in the world. True, she consorted
with killers and cutthroats; but she had not to account to
anyone for her cronies. There were five crewmen aboard,
and Finnegan already knew several of them from fooling
around the town. He knew Joe Cross; but the Brunhilde
was not the ship that Joe had said he was with, and Joe
was an open sort of fellow, And Finnegan knew Don
Lewis. Don had several times tried to tell Finnegan some-
thing, and always had thought better of it.
Anastasia opened the bar. Well, she was bargirl for the
ship. Finnegan and Sorrell and Cross and Lewis went in
with her. Two other crewmen stood outside and refused to
join them. And a fifth one went away to inform on them.
This fifth crewman was Art Emery, and there was
enmity between Emery and Finnegan. "It's pretty, but is it
art?" Finnegan had asked someone only the day before as
the crewman came into one of the places. Finnegan had
already heard the first name. And Art Emery had given
Finnegan a look of hatred, and had meant it. And the
crewman was pretty in an unpleasant sort of way,
The bar was small, six foot long, with four stools; and
most of the remaining room was taken up by three huge
easy chairs. Anastasia opened the liquor cabinets and fixed
their drinks for them. And they spent a quality half hour
there.
Then it became very chilly; but it was not with cold
that Finnegan was shaking. This was the presence that had
affrighted him in the club on the moming when Finnegan
had last retumed to this world. This was the thing that
should not be alive, the thing that aged Saxon Seaworthy
forty years in three seconds by a mere glimpse, and turned
the granite face ashen.
It was the Devil who came into the ship's bar and put a
stop to their quality half hour.
"One drink is enough," said the Devil. "Close the bar,
Anastasia. Everybody get back to work.'
"Who says so?” That was Finnegan, tempting fate. The
21
Devil looked at Finn as though he were an idiot. It's a
red-eyed trick of his.
“An inane question," said the Devil with some scom. “I
said so. You just heard me. And we don't need you on the
ship now, Finnegan. If you do go along, you will come
aboard the night we leave, not before.”
“Did Mr. Seaworthy put you in charge?” Anastasia
asked the Devil.
"Never mind. I am in charge. I don't want to have to
remind anyone of it. Now get off the ship, Anastasia, and
take Finnegan with his bugle nose, and the curious cabby
with you."
)
“I was told to check the bar and the stock and see that
everything was in order before we left," Anastasia ex-
plained.
“You have checked the bar and sampled the stock, and
everything will be in order as soon as you three leave.”
They debarked, they debouched, they got back into Joe
Sortell's cab and fled from dockside.
"Who is he anyhow?” Finnegan asked. He knew, and
yet he didn't.
“Why, he's the Devil,” said Anastasia. “I thought you'd
know that, Finnegan.”
"Well, I did in a way. I had heard of the Devil, of
course, and he is much as I pictured him. But I didn't
know that he was in town in his proper person."
(There are those who have seen him and not known
him. Yet he is distinctive, and they should have known.
He is large and well—but very heavily—made. He has a
high purplish complexion and wears expensive purple
shirts. He is all but bald; yet there is a reddish fringe
around that purple pate. Nor is he really unbandsome; but
one would not be inclined to argue with him unless just
for the hell of it.)
“He is Mr. Papadiabolous, and we call him Papa Dev-
il," Anastasia explained. “That's really what his name
means. He is a devil really, and he may be the boss even
above Mr. Seaworthy."
"I thought that Seaworthy was a millionaire.”
"One of them is, Finnegan. And they use the same set
of pockets.”
“If they are associates, why was Seaworthy so startled
22
when Papa Devil came into the club the other moming?"
“I don't know, Finnegan. They were in there together
the evening before, and Papa D said that he would look in
on Mr. Seaworthy there the next moming."
“Well, why was I so startled when Papa Devil came
into the club?”
“I don't know, Finnegan. I don't know why."
"If the Devil is going, then I might not want to go,
Anastasia.
“Of course you want to go, Finnegan. What bugle-
nosed, salt-blooded young man would miss the opportunity
of sailing with the Devil himself?”
“No, no, of course I won't miss the chance. I don't
know what I was thinking of."
"I always love to have somebody to hate,” Anastasia
said. “But Papa Devil may not be so bad nowadays. I'd
known them when they were in port once before. He was
a real heller then. But this past week, when I talk to him,
Papa Devil seems much nicer than he used to be. He used
to be kind of mean."
"I like him better when he's all devil," Finnegan in-
sisted. "Do not destroy my impression of the only com-
pletely evil man I ever knew. The only except-just pos-
sibly one."
It came to Finnegan that Papa Devil might not be as
evil a man as his friend Seaworthy. And it came to him
that he might have some connection with them both; that
he might under certain conditions defend them both; that
the two of them seemed like shady uncles of his.
23
Chapter Two
MERMAID AND OGRESS
We suffer from the disease of abstraction and generali-
zation, and it blinds us to facts. The fact is that persons
themselves overlap, as do species. There are degrees of
the human and the inhuman, and there are individuals
between. There are diverse bloods that stand separate
for centuries, and then mingle. There is also a mingling
of the ghostly and the flesh. We are many of us pos-
sessed by devils, and they cannot be exorcised without
our deaths. The children of Ahriman come back onto
us like monsters from the beginning, or fearful mu-
tations.
-ARPAD ARUTINOV, The Back-Door of History
1.
a
The Brunhilde sailed on November 7, a Friday morn-
ing. The year is uncertain, but it was quite a while ago.
Finnegan did not keep accurate account of years, nor did
he remember the sailing or getting on the boat.
Finnegan had a premonition that someone had decided
to kill him that night. The premonition was a true one.
Cannily, Finnegan hid in a bottle, and after a few hours of
it he disappeared to himself. He had not been on the stuff
seriously since that night one week before when he had
become entangled with Saxon Seaworthy. He went on it
now, but quietly; he went underground.
At midnight the order had gone oút from Mr. Sea-
worthy that they were to sail at dawn. Anastasia could not
find Finnegan. She had left him and gone to work at
midnight at the club. Then the call had come, and she had
sought Finn at once. He was not in his room. He was not
with any of his cronies, but they said that he was on the
stuff heavily. He might be in any alley in town.
24
One hour before sailing time everybody was on board
except Finnegan. Seaworthy told Papa Devil to go get
him. And he told Anastasia to get his things.
"What if I put his gear on board and he doesn't show
up?” Anastasia asked. “He might need his things.
"Papa Devil will bring Finnegan. You bring his things.”
In half an hour Anastasia came with a sea bag, a
satchel, and a big suitcase, about a hundred and fifty
pounds of Finnegan's things. Finn had picked up quite a
bit of stuff that week. Anastasia carried them easily, and
came on board whistling anamoné.
And ten minutes later, Papa Devil came out of another
direction of darkness carrying Finnegan over his shoulder.
He dumped the Finn heavily on deck, and Anastasia put
an old tarpaulin under his head.
Well, Finnegan had made it after all. And he wasn't
supposed to. What had gone right?
When the tide is rising in a man you can't keep him
down; by his very nature he will come to the top. They
were under weigh; they were out in the channel. The ship
lurched, and the wheel of fortune took an unaccountable
tum. Finnegan was on the top again and some of them
were on the bottom.
Almost immediately after they had turned the comer,
out of the harbor and around the shoulder of the island, it
became very rough. There is sometimes an early morning
choppiness there and it is vicious. Some of them were not
sailors, and the sailors among them were no better. There
was sickness and retching and sudden gloom.
But Finnegan woke to the rhythm of the ship and felt
wonderful. The sky was scarlet and the ocean steep and
black, and everything was all right. All those not on duty
had gone below, and Finnegan went below to resurrect
Anastasia.
“Wake up! Wake up!" She wasn't asleep, but he landed
on her stomach to be sure she was awake. “Let's open the
bar, Anastasia. Let's celebrate. Lord, it's great to have the
water under your feet. All is not lost. As long as that old
monster can pitch, all's right with the world."
“I'm sick,” Anastasia moaned, "and your sitting on my
stomach doesn't help. How can you feel so good when you
were carried on here only a couple hours ago?”
“Clean living and natural resiliency is the answer,
25
Anastasia. Let's go topside. It's like being bom again to go
to sea, Better be sick than be on shore. Seasickness be-
comes you. I never realized you were so beautiful, but
with your new green complexion you are enchanting."
“Off, off, oafl Oofl” She Aung him off and they went
out and up a ladder. She hadn't really been so sick. She
had seen the rest of them carrying on with it so she did it
too.
She opened the bar. They drank sea-green magic of a
French name and an ancient flavor while the old witch the
Brunhilde pitched and tossed. Then the ship subsided. It
hadn't really been as rough as all that either. The ship
had just been having fun.
Finnegan mixed a drink and took it to Saxon Sea-
worthy. It was a subservient thing to do, but Finnegan
was a deep enough man to allow a little subservience. He
would have done it for the meanest man in the world,
Why should he not do it for an unfortunate millionaire?
But the fact was that Seaworthy seemed quite startled to
see him, one third as startled as he had been to see Papa
Devil one week ago. It may be that Seaworthy startled
easy, but apparently not in anything except encounters.
But he took the drink, thankfully but nervously.
"It's all right now, Finnegan," he said when he had
downed it. “I'm glad it's you and not another one, howev-
er it's happened. I won't be bothered with any sickness for
the rest of the voyage. It only comes on us to remind us
that we're mortal; which being the case, I wonder how the
other sort took it? Get Papa Devil up if he's down. Get
my two cronies also and have them all meet me in the
bar."
Yes, Papa Devil was down, but he did not seem to be
sick. If the Devil is mortal, he is not bothered by seasick-
ness at least.
“Mr. Seaworthy says for you to come to the bar," said
Finnegan, suddenly feeling more like a boy than he was.
“Papa Devil says for you to go to Hell,” said Papa
Devil, but he arose to go. Now was the time to mention
it, quickly, for Finnegan did not believe in allowing ques-
tions to fester.
“Why didn't you kill me last night, Papa Devil?”
"I'll kill you when I get ready to, boy,” he said looking
at Finn suspiciously.
26
"You were supposed to kill me, and another fellow was
supposed to assume my papers and identity. Why didn't he
come on board?”
"He did. But he isn't on board any more. Who have you
been talking to?"
"To nobody on this. I get hunches and premonitions."
"Forget it, forget it. We'll all be killed in due time.
You talk too much, boy."
If possible, Papa Devil was of an even more ghoulish
purple hue this morning. And if possible, he was bigger
and more menacing than ever. But Finnegan had always
wanted to needle the Devil.
"Papa D,” he said, following the Devil, "did you kill a
man before breakfast this morning?”
“That I did, Finnegan, that I did.”
The two cronies of Saxon Seaworthy were William
Gerecke and Peter Wirt. Finnegan knew very little about
them. They partook of the mystery of the Devil and of
Seaworthy. Seaworthy and the Devil and Gerecke and
Wirt went into the bar, and Anastasia and Finnegan were
dismissed. The Captain, whose name was Orestes Gonof,
also went into the bar with the great ones.
9
2.
The five crewmen of the Brunhilde were Harry Scott,
Don Lewis, Joe Cross, Art Emery, and Chris McAbney.
And Finnegan was also carried as a crewman.
Don Lewis and Joe Cross were people who belonged,
belonged with such as Finnegan and Anastasia, belonged
with all good people everywhere.
Harry Scott, Art Emery, and Chris McAbney were
people who do not belong, the other sort of people. There
are only two sorts of people in the world, and they are
these two sorts. Unless you understand this, you belong to
the wrong sort, and you can go to Hell with Harry and
Art and Chris, and nobody will care; you belong in Hell.
Harry was neat, Art was pretty, and Chris was worse.
A name like that, and he wasn't even Irish. He was Scotch
("Scotch and shoder, I shoder every time I see him,"
Anastasia said; she didn't like him); he was a blue-nosed
27
sinner, the worst kind. It was Chris McAbney who had
informed on them to the Devil that first day that Finnegan
had come onto ship.
But Don Lewis and Joe Cross were princes: shoddy, it's
true, and compromised (as are many who live in the
world), but true princes. All of one's friends are princes if
one belongs to the first sort of people. It was with Don
and Joe that Finnegan cabined.
Joe Cross had burt-short red hair. You'd bet you could
strike matches on the top of his head, and you'd be right.
Don was dark and handsome, the most handsome man on
the ship, just as Finnegan was, well, not the ugliest, just as
Finnegan was the most unusual-looking man on the ship;
and you must remember that the ship's company included
the Devil himself.
A couple of years later, Finnegan doubted that he had
ever made this voyage around the world. This was after
he had dreamed up many lives and his memory had
become confused by his bouts. Then it seemed that these
two hundred days were just something from a sequence of
bottles, that he had only dreamed of the death of the
beautiful Anastasia and of the sinister Papa Devil. Pos-
sibly they had never lived at all, and only in that sense
were they dead. A lot of things, which he then knew
weren't real, seemed realer.
But it was real, and Anastasia was real. She was a
water-witch and she was real. It hadn't been her aunt who
looked just like that old ship; it was herself. Finnegan
began now to understand her true form.
She was not beautiful when you looked at her; she was
even comical looking. But she was beautiful when you
thought about her. In retrospect and in prospect she was
beautiful. Her complexion was olive, and it went from
green to golden and was sometimes both at one time.
Often her eyes were black, and sometimes they were
purple. She was small and slim and particularly full of
life.
Anastasia Demetriades! She looked like one of those
carven women on the fore of old sailing ships. They dug
statuettes of her out of Cretan cenotaphs. Touch her with
two fingers and she was real, but what was she really?
28
3.
a
But it was not all Anastasia. There was another girl on
ship. She was one of those who are very hard to place
among the two kinds of people in the world. Oh, she
carried a latch-key to Hell, there was no doubt about that.
But before she went she would be the pleasant companion
of princes. For a while she was both kinds of people. Not
everyone liked her, but everyone had to pay attention to
her.
Finnegan had seen her before, several nights before the
sailing, but he had believed it a dream, the dream of the
Golden Ogress. She had simply come and found him in his
cups and gotten information from him for the ship's
register. It was a simple business, but nothing she did was
simple. Like Papa Devil, she had the aura of great power
about her. It seemed to Finnegan that when he wrote
down his name for her he had signed a mortgage on his
soul rather than certain ship's papers; and it seemed that
the soul might be forfeit. But he had the memory that she
spoke to him with affection.
Finnegan had never seen anything like her. She was
Seaworthy's seagoing secretary, Marie Courtois, a mag-
Dificent young woman. That the girl was evil was insisted
upon by Anastasia who had a better than average percep-
tion of good and evil. And Marie also had a distaste for
Anastasia, more for what she stood for than for herself.
Believing that good and evil are superstitions, Marie
could not ascribe evil to Anastasia; she ascribed instead
ideological immaturity, chauvinistic disorientation, and
neo-fascistic indoctrination. For that is one of the kinds of
girl that Marie was.
But, if you think that's all she was, how wrong you are!
She would have made two of Anastasia, and there was no
letdown in quality. The girls were roommates in a cabin so
small that, had it not been for the pleasure and interest of
feuding, it would have been confining. As it was, they
sharpened their wits and claws, quarreled with spirit, and
schemed and devised. And yet they were pretty good
friends, except for Anastasia's jealousy of Marie's beauty.
29
"It isn't that I object to a woman who thinks or tosses
the lingo,” Anastasia told Finnegan, “but it is unbecoming
to one bom without brains. With all that other equipment
she has it wouldn't be fair if she had brains too. She isn't a
lady; she says that lady is a bourgeois conceit. But I am
one, even if of the Mehitabel variety, so I can't say what
she really is, but the Greek word is skylla. She's on a
rampage now because I put crotin oil in her martini; I
thought she'd like it. Crotin oil is good for sick cats and it
should be good for her."
"Little Miss Resurrection, you're supposed to love your
enemies," Finnegan said.
“Love them maybe, like them never. The Lord doesn't
expect that; He never meant to take all small pleasures
from us. Hey, there is a lot of her, isn't there, Finnegan?"
There was at least a foot and a hundred pounds more
of Marie than there was of Anastasia; she was the Golden
Giantess.
4.
They were going coastwise, and much of the time
Finnegan was at the wheel. He knew this stretch, from
land, from deep gulf, from shallow coasting, from mixed
fishing. They put into port every night. Seaworthy was a
man with much mysterious business in many little ports.
They put in at Freeport, at Palacios, at Port O'Conner, at
Aransas Pass, at Corpus. And Wednesday they anchored
off a desolate strip of Padre Island. It had not then
become a tourist place, and there were no settlements on
the Island. Most of them went ashore in two small boats
for a beach party and fish fry. A pit was dug, and
mesquite cut and bumed down to its aromatic coals. It
had a weedy smell with a touch of incense.
They swam in the gulf all moming. Most of them were
at home in the water, and all swam well. Anastasia swam
like a mermaid. She was a mermaid, a real one, which
from a distance resembles a seal. This is the comparison
that Anastasia herself made.
And there is this further that Anastasia told about
30
a
mermaids, some of it at other times, but most of it that
morning in the lulls of the swimming:
The legendary depiction of the mermaid as a breasty
creature with flowing yellow hair has long been known to
investigators in this field as erroneous. The mermaid is
actually close-cropped and boyish in form, and the
features are invariably island Greek. The legend of the
blond mermaid is just that, a legend. Nobody has ever
seen a blond mermaid. Neither can the mermaids live
permanently nor breathe under water. Anastasia could
not, and neither are those who are fish-tailed. They must
breathe air like a porpoise. They are not fishes.
They do not smell any more strongly to people than
people do to them. We sniff at the statement (it is
Anastasia's) and we are not sure what it means. Do they
smell fishy? Well, they announce their presence, said
Anastasia. Why should they not? Finnegan realized that
this had always been true with Anastasia, but with her
it was not an offense.
They do not live in palaces under the water. They live
in water-level caves on rock islands. Those who have
married landsmen often live in houses.
(How Anastasia could swim, all in full bodily motion!
How she could swim.)
Their original home was in the Cyclades only, but very
early they were also in the Dodecanese. By the beginning
of the eighteenth dynasty there were mermaid beaches on
the island of Kos; there is documentation of this. The
early mermaids of Crete were captured ones from Naxos.
There was not a separate Cretan variety.
By the time of Alexander they were in the Red Sea, but
it is not known how they got there. Still less is it under-
stood how they arrived in the Persian Gulf, but they were
there by the time of Haroun-Al-Raschid.
(How she could swim, that girll)
There were Christian mermaids of a small island be
tween Patmos and Lipsos in the second century. They had
a chapel dedicated to Our Lady of the Dolphins. The
chapel is still there, but not in good condition.
In the Middle Ages they were off Sicily, especially at
Salina and Filicudi. They were at Minorca, but no further
West. They were not in the Atlantic. They lie who claim
to have seen them in the Atlantic.
31
What the Norse called mermaids and netted in the
North Sea and the North Atlantic as late as the tenth
century were not mermaids but sea-Cows. They were
blond and undoubtedly mammalian, but their tails were
tapered vertically instead of horizontally as with the true
mermaids. There are no New World varieties. Some of the
giant Mississippi catfish have human eyes, but that is as
far as it goes.
At the tum of the high Middle Ages the mermaids were
at their most numerous. Then they began their mysterious
decline. Mermaids are no longer in the Persian Gulf, nor
in the Red Sea. There has not been an authentic sighting
at Rhodes for over three hundred years. They retreat
from sea after sea and from beach after beach. Such as
are left of them now are found only in the Cyclades, their
ancestral home, mostly off Naxos, and the rocks between
there and Amorgos. Possibly eighty percent of them are
two-footed now, and the fishtail is disappearing. In anoth-
er thousand years it will be gone.
This information is all from Anastasia Demetriades
herself, who knew a lot about mermaids; she herself was
of a mermaid family of Naxos. She was a mermaid
though she hadn't the tail; the Demetriades had not
thrown a fishtail for six generations now.
“It is claimed that sports tum up in the seventh gener-
ation," Finnegan said. “I wouldn't give odds on whatever
you might give birth to."
“Maybe," said Anastasia. "Wouldn't it be fun, Finne-
gan, if we got married and threw a fishtail? Finnegan
sounds like a fishy name anyhow.”
“I have now heard the mother of all fish tales," said
Marie, “or of fishtails. Those sea-cows, you didn't put
them in for my benefit, did you, Anastasia?"'
“Naturally you reminded me of them. But I always
have sea-cows in it when I tell the story. I might add a
red-headed variety, though."
"Wasn't Lorelei an authentic mermaid?” Marie asked.
“ "She had red-gold hair, probably about the color of
mine."
"No. She was a sea-cow. A damned Dutch sea-cow!"
Anastasia, how wrong you were!
a
32
5.
For, if Anastasia was boyish of figure, Marie Courtois
was not. But there is something to be said of a form such
as hers; curvaceous and stately, tall and ample, strong yet
willowy, indescribable except by motion of hand; light
golden, and topped by that red-gold hair. Marie was
stronger than a circus woman, and produced an excite-
ment very like that of a circus.
Though Anastasia called her a giantess, yet it was not
so. She might have been twelve inches over Anastasia, but
Anastasia couldn't have been much more than five feet.
And if Anastasia the mermaid was supreme in the deep
water that moming, Marie was so that afternoon on the
beach and in the swelling surf. Proud of her strength, she
invited the seamen to dive off her shoulders as she stood
indomitable, breasting the breakers. Marie also was a
legend, and one that all the men remembered with sudden
stirring. Larger than life, and of a beauty that has been
forbidden for centuries, she was a red-haired primordial
creature of limitless strength and dazzling color. Her hair
came below her shoulders, too thick to become straggly in
the water.
For a while it seemed that a shore and surf goddess was
at least equal to a mermaid. Even Finnegan, in momen-
tary disloyalty, abandoned Anastasia and exulted with the
iridescent Marie Courtois, losing himself in her hair, and
riding on her shining shoulders.
When he went back to Anastasia she was jealous and
sulky..
“I thought you were my pet," she said, "and here you
go riding that nightmare. You can't be my pet if you do
that. What are you looking at? Why do you keep looking
at her?"
“It's the color. It cannot be caught except in oils. That
old sand shore, and the green shallows, and the blue deep
beyond, and that golden movement that is central to it
all.” (Finnegan was a painter.)
"You forget golden movement,” said Anastasia. "See,
she's forgotten you.”
33
a
9
The seamen were involved in beach acrobatics, and
Marie was the sturdy understander for a human pyramid.
"You will have to admit she is beautiful,” said Finne-
,
gan.
"She is beautiful, and it hurts me. Am I not beautiful?”
"You are an urchin."
"Well, am I a beautiful urchin?"
"You are a beautiful urchin, Anastasia. That is better
than to be no urchin at all."
A fish broke water, whistled at them, and disappeared
with a great splash. Well, it had been Joe Cross and not a
fish, but it was as funny as if it had been a fish.
They were in a cove, Finnegan and Anastasia, where
the surf came over the sand strongly, leaving cryptic
,
markings and then obliterating them.
“There are letters on the sand between the waves," said
Anastasia. "There are words, and the next wave wipes
them away. The wave after that writes the next phrase. I
think the waves write in Chaldee. If I could read Chaldee
I would tell you what they say.”
“I can read Chaldee,” said Finnegan. "All clairvoyants
can read Chaldce. I know what they say. I am afraid of
what they say.”
6.
)
Finnegan and Anastasia were walking inland through
the dunes and brush.
“Who are you?” Anastasia asked suddenly. "Your name
on the ship's papers is John Solli. Why do you hide behind
Finnegan?”
“I don't hide. It's just a nickname I picked up.
"You always look as though you were someone else,
Finn. The nose and all."
“The nose is sadly real. It won't come off. I am a
gargoyle."
“I knew a story about a gargoyle. I forget how it goes.
He had a good heart, though."
"Oh, we have that, we have that."
"Finn, you are a little like Papa Devil. Both of you are
so unusual-looking. Maybe he has a good heart too."
34
9
.
“It may be. But he certainly has a vicious liver."
"Are you some kind of spy, Finn?"
”
"No kind that I can think of. Is everybody supposed to
be a spy?"
“Some of us might be. I think Don Lewis is one kind of
spy. I think that I am another kind. You were supposed to
have been killed, Finn, and another man slip into your
identity. Something changed. Now you are taking the
place of the man who was supposed to take your place."
“What is this voyage, Anastasia?"
“I don't know. How would I?"
"What is Saxon Seaworthy, and his company, and the
Devil?"
"They make these circuits and they check on the ap-
paratus and the men in different towns. It is deep and it is
murderous. And you are in it on some level.”
“Who is in it deep, Anastasia?"
“Oh, Seaworthy and the Devil and Wirt and Gerecke,
They own the captain and the rest.”
"And the seamen?"
“They own the seamen too. But Don Lewis is against
them and they will kill him when they know it. They own
you too, or they will kill you."
"Nobody owns me."
"Seaworthy and the Devil own you. There are no free
people on this voyage.”
They came back over the dunes to supper.
Papa Devil had an ice chest and drinks and mixes. He
had been compounding atrocities, and Anastasia took
over. Papa Devil was in a gay mood for him. His eyes
lightened up and his gestures were florid.
They ate barbecued pork and fried pork. They had
boiled shrimp and fried shrimp, and red snapper and
pompano. DePolis the cook left them with it; he hated
beach parties and hated anyone else to be cooking.
Joe Cross had worked in a Baltimore raw bar and he
knew a lot about seafood. Anastasia had two uncles who
ran a restaurant, and she had once been cashier for them,
so there was no limit to her knowledge. Finnegan used to
hang around oyster bars in New Orleans so he knew a lot
about fish and stuff. There were other experts. It was all
good. There is really no wrong way to cook a fish.
35
They ate and talked. Papa Devil spread blankets on the
beach and built a camp fire.
And a quarter mile down shore a man entered the
water and swam silently out to the Brunbilde.
I
36
Chapter Three
THE FURTIVE MAN
Now, there are certain persons who are trying to take
away the knowledge of singulars from the perfection of
the divine knowledge.
-ST. THOMAS AQUINAS, Summa Contra Gentiles
Don Lewis told a campfire story:
"There was a furtive little man I just saw in the gloam-
ing," he said. “Several of us saw him, for all that he was
furtive. He reminds me of another furtive little man I
once buried."
"Where is the first furtive man?" Finnegan asked.
"Never mind. He cannot have been unseen. Papa Devil
is watching from the dunes and he sees everything. The
other furtive man I will tell you about; for the fact is, that
after I had buried him, I myself became the furtive man.'
Saxon Seaworthy sat and watched them with a face
made out of tired granite. There was no real interest in
that face, but he would weigh all the words of Don Lewis.
“On the morning of October 1, 1944, between ten and
ten thirty in the morning, on an island that is sometimes
called Pulau Petir and sometimes Willy Jones Island, three
American soldiers disappeared, and have not been official-
ly seen since. The three soldiers were Sergeant Charles
Santee of Orange, Texas; Corporal Robert Casper of
Gobey (Morgan County), Tennessee; and PFC Timothy
Lorrigan of Boston. I was one of these three men, for my
name is no more Don Lewis than the names of some
others here are their real names. These three disappeared
from a routine patrol. One of these boys was a coward;
37
two were not; for this reason I do not say which one was
myself.
"I have heard that one of these soldiers got out of the
thing alive, that he has told the main part of the story in
an unlikely version, and that that soldier is not me. So
perhaps I am not of the living; I have felt like a dweller of
the middle world since that time. Besides, I do not tell the
main part of the story, but only the outré little introduc-
tion.
“We saw that day, at the distance of about three hun-
dred yards, a ragged little man who seemed to be a
Japanese soldier. He beckoned and the three soldiers
beckoned, and they jabbered at each other distantly. Then
Corporal Casper said 'Keep the little idiot chattering. I'll
get behind him and we'll have him in the sack. I can get
behind anyone.'
“Casper went, and he was good at this. In a very few
minutes he appeared on a rise another two hundred yards
behind the little man; he motioned us to come on. So we
closed in on the little bugger.
“But he wasn't in the sack when we pulled the string.
We came all the way up to Casper without finding him.
And then the little man was standing, as if he had simply
reappeared, on another height yet three hundred yards
beyond us.
“ 'I don't know how he did it,' Casper said, 'but I bet he
can't do it again. It's narrower from here on. If I can get
behind him again we'll have him sure.'
"We did it again. Casper passed and outflanked the little
man and appeared behind him. The little man stood mo-
tionless till we were nearly on him. Then he vanished. As
we came up to Casper, the little man appeared again, still
a long three hundred yards ahead of us.
" 'He couldn't have,' said Casper. 'Nothing could have
got by me.' 'We might as well settle him,' said Sergeant
Santee. 'He's acting too odd to leave, and we don't want
to be led too deep. I don't miss, even at this distance.'
"He didn't, not completely. Sergeant Santee's shot had
the little man somewhere. The 1.m. shuddered as he was
hit and wobbled back out of sight. 'We will have to get
him,' said Santee. 'I don't believe in leaving winged game.'
'Oh, let him go,' I said, “he isn't game.' 'He is to me,'
Santee said.
38
"We followed him a long ways, and most of the time
we had him in sight. When we stopped for a short rest, he
also stopped, four hundred yards ahead, and sat on a
rock. 'We will wait him a while,' said Santee. 'He will
stiffen up as he sits there.' We waited quite a while, and it
was now late in the day. Santee was right; the little man
had stiffened up and was unhappy. He couldn't move with
our speed after we started out once more. It wouldn't take
long to get him. I lagged behind. I didn't want to see it.”
"Not want to see it!" Marie cried in amazement. "All
that way and then to miss it? How could anyone not want
to see it or do it?"
“Did I say that I did not want to see it? That was surely
a slip of the tongue. It was PFC Lorrigan who lagged
behind and did not want to see it. Santee and Casper went
on ahead and killed the little man.
'Well, let's make the start back,' Santee said, 'it's late.'
'Not that way, that's not the way,' said Casper. I didn't
know the way either. We were lost. We stayed lost. There
were a lot of valleys there: there were Cotton-Picker
Valley and Pepper-Belly Valley, Hound Dog, and Horse
Collar, and Dog-Dirt Draw. There were Rang-Dang-Doo,
and Jackass Flats (the most precipitous region I have even
seen). There was Little Joker Canyon, and Aching Back,
and Slit Trench, and Sore-Head Gulch; there was Little
Fat-Head and Big Fat-Head. We knew all the valleys, but
we didn't know this one.
"We were still arguing the way when it got dark. We
quarteled. Casper said that he would not spend a night in
a valley with fools; he went up the walls of the valley to
spend the night on one crest. Santee climbed an opposite
height to another aerie. I slept in the valley with the little
dead man."
"You slept in the wrong place," said Finnegan. “In a
valley is in a trap."
"I know it was the wrong place,” said Don Lewis. "I
had a short-handled pioneer shovel. Yokipoki (likely not
his real name) had a little double-edged butcher knife.
With those I dug his grave in the mud. 'It isn't the best
grave in the world,' I told him, 'but it is the best I can
give you. I had better take your boots off; you'll sleep
better with them off, and you're going to sleep a long
time. And I had better gag you.
better gag you. A corpse is supposed to
39
19
have his mouth tied. If you began to talk in the night it
would make me nervous.'
Finnegan had reason to remember this part of the
story, for, when some weeks later he buried Don Lewis in
the sand, he did much the same things for him.
"I put the gag in his mouth," continued Don Lewis,
"and also tied his wrists and ankles from some old seem-
liness. I then bandaged his eyes and covered him up in the
mud. 'Requiem,' I said, and lux perpetua and all that.'
Then, as I had a little left in a bottle, I drank it to him,
giving him Christian burial. I bedded down on a little
hummock that rose out of the mud.
“I always sleep well, but with a few quick dreams. 'It's
a good thing I put the gag in his mouth,' I dreamed. 'If I
hadn't, he would be too noisy to tolerate. As it is, that
squealing of his is likely to make me nervous.' It did make
me nervous, and it woke me up. The little man in the hole
was squealing and grunting as he fought with gag and
bond. On the threshold of terror one passes into a cold
sweat, just before the limbs are completely unstrung and
the hair rises entirely off the head. I knew that the tough
sergeant or the big corporal would not be afraid of any
little man dead or alive, or even half and half. There was
no doubt that Yokipoki had been dead, cold dead for
several hours. And I was afraid.
“There was a slashing sound down there now with the
squeals and grunts. He had his butcher knife down there
and was cutting his bonds. I shouldn't have buried it with
him, but it was all the property he had. I switched on my
flashlight and went to the grave. But when I saw the loose
mud heave and pitch, I was completely unnerved. I
backed away and fell down and lost my flashlight. The
noise became more various. It worked to a climax.
“ 'He will be out of there in a minute,' I thought, 'and
he will slide along the ground like a snake. He will slash
me with the butcher knife, and I will be too paralyzed to
do anything about it.'
"And that is what happened. He was out of there and
brushed my foot, and I froze. There are ice crystals in my
blood from it to this day. Then he slashed me painfully on
the ankle,
“ 'Be off! I cried. I knew what it was then, but I was
still too scared to laugh. I kicked the rats away, and I
40
knew it had been the rats at the body. They had big mean
rats there."
“And rats is all it was!" Marie demanded in incredible
disappointment. “He didn't come alive at all? It was only
the rats making all that fuss?"
“Do not say 'only the rats.' The reason there are no
tigers on those islands is that the rats are too large and
fierce and will not tolerate them. Yes, it was only the rats.
I have not loved rats since."
"Did you find your way back somewhere in the moming
when it was light?" Anastasia asked.
“No. We never did find our way back. I told you that
we were officially missing. The next day I was taken into
a peculiar custody. I do not know what happened to the
other two. I heard that both were killed. I also heard that
they retumed separately, and each spread a story too tall
to be believed. But I came back to my own country by a
different way and under a different name; and with a
different orientation in my mind, for I am no longer my
OWO man.
"Now I am also a furtive man. I have appeared several
times on the hill beyond, and yet it is certain that I will be
hunted down and killed. But I have a question about us
furtive men. Does anybody know: Are we really forgotten
behind God's back? We are singulars: Does God have
knowledge of singulars?”
There were fires up and down the coast every mile or
so. People liked to come to the sandy place. There were
cattle on the island, and horses also. A boat whistle
sounded far away. Saxon Seaworthy sat and smoked by
the fire. His face was still made out of granite, but more
relaxed now; and the fire flickers lighted up the old cliffs
of it.
"Were there no happy stories of those islands?"
Anastasia asked.
“All island stories are happy," Don Lewis said. “Here
is another one that happened on Willy Jones Island, the
story of the Big House. Nobody who lives in the Big
House ever dies or gets any older; but the visitors who
come there are always killed the first night. The people of
the Big House take their kidneys and hearts and brains
and other organs and make a broth of them. On this they
live forever, and they will not die as long as they get one
41
1
new visitor a year. But if for a year they do not get a
visitor, they all age one year.
"A boy named Ali came to the Big House. But first he
put two ta'a nuts in bis pocket. He planted one in front of
the door of the Big House. He kept the other one. Then
he went in.
“Ali was given a feast of bird and fish and nuts and
fruit, and was made drunk on palm wine. Then he retired
with the beautiful daughter of the house. 'I love you,' said
the daughter, ‘I will feast me on your heart.' 'It is a
pleasant sentiment,' said Ali, ‘so will I on yours.' 'I will
feast me on your brains,' said the daughter. 'Now wait a
turtle-egg minute,' said Ali, 'I don't use them much but I
would like to keep them inviolate.' 'I would feast me on
your kidneys,' said the daughter. 'If this is the way you
make love here, you can do without me,' said Ali.
"They came to kill him then, but you can't kill anyone
who has a ta'a nut in his pocket. You may not have
known that."
“But of course we all know it," said Anastasia. “Why do
you think we all carry them?"
"So Ali ran to his room and shut the door and put a log
against it. Then he snapped his fingers three times, which
made it be morning. He looked out the window; he saw
that the ta'a nut he had planted was now a great tree, and
one branch came right to bis window. So he climbed down
it and escaped."
"Knew he would, knew he wouldı” Anastasia jingled.
"Stop him! Don't let him get away!” Marie cried. She
was of a white seriousness.
“What? It is only a story, goldie,” Don Lewis said.
"That doesn't make any difference. They shouldn't have
let him get away. They shouldn't ever let anyone get
away,” Marie insisted. She meant it.
“That was the year that they all grew a year older at
the Big House," Don Lewis finished it.
“They shouldn't have let him get away," Marie still
insisted. "I liked the rats one better."
There was a shocking strength in many of them there as
they lounged in the flickering darkness. The strong earthy
power in Seaworthy and the Devil, in Gerecke and Peter
Wirt, in Marie, even in Anastasia shook Finnegan as he
felt it in them. They were people growing out of the
42
9
ground, full of some old black blood. They were the
peculiar people, the other human race.
Was he also? Finnegan had known that many people
were startled or afraid of him at first meeting, even at
subsequent meetings. There were times when he was even
startled at himself: when he had gone through Amnesia's
woods and encountered Amnesia herself in the clearing;
when the shocking gaps in his memory of events and times
could only be filled by dark parable. There had been the
weeks in the Green Islands when he had forgotten his own
name and personality. There had been the hours with
Saxon Seaworthy before the remembered hours with Sea-
worthy.
Was Finnegan himself one of the under-thing people, in
which he himself did not yet believe?
A night-dune imaginary: there was a world full of
people with pumpkin-heads for heads, and candles burning
inside. Then Seaworthy and the Devil and their spooky
crew came along, lifted the top off each bead, blew out
the candles inside, and put the tops back on. The pump-
kin-headed people seemed to get along about as well as
before; yet there was a difference.
A furtive man had swum out to the Brunhilde. Another
furtive man had been buried in the mud on Willy Jones
Island, and Don Lewis had then become a furtive man. So
was Finnegan, And now one more whom Finnegan di-
vined about:
In the cabin that Finnegan shared with Don Lewis and
Joe Cross on the Brunhilde, behind an upper balk and
visible only to one lying in Finnegan's buok, there was the
edge of an envelope. Finn had had many opportunities to
take it and see what was in it, but he had not.
And yet the contents had been coming to him, bit by
bit, for several days, for he was clairvoyant. It was the
writing of the man who was to have replaced Finnegan,
assuming his papers and person, after Finnegan had been
killed; the papers of the man who had unaccountably been
killed instead, leaving Finn to be his own surrogate's
surrogate.
"—it is all right you make a bargane with the devil,
that you come on here, be the devils finger man. How is it
then when the devil change when he be different where
43
are you then. The bugle nosed dago with the irish monikor
why is he not dead yet. There is not room for the both of
us
There was a lot of it there that Finnegan had been able
to read without opening it, and some of it he read now,
lying in the dunes. The man's name was Pinne, Doppio di
Pinne, the seaman known as Dopey. Finnegan had known
him slightly.
It had become chilly. All wrapped up in their blankets
and went to sleep.
Except Papa Devil who never slept.
44
Chapter Four
THE WIVES OF SINDBAD
There is a further mystery about Bassorah which is
called a port, even the port of Baghdad, in the Nights
and other folk-lore. But Bassorah could never have
been a port, could hardly have been a town. It is no
more than a great rock slab set in the mud shallows,
scarred by old fire. It's as though it were used as
launching pad for space fleets before they were even
dreamed about. It is said that one of the missing Nights
recounted Sindbads of space trading from other worlds
with the great caliph when the way was more open than
now.
-MOISHA EL-GAZMA, Legends of the Persian Gulf
1.
The discovery of Manuel on board was gradual, for he
was still furtive. The seamen figured he was none of their
business. Finnegan knew that Manuel didn't belong there,
but the ragged latino looked like his kind of man. Sea-
worthy surely knew he was there, but assumed he was a
creature of the Devil. The other personages didn't even
know how many seamen there were supposed to be, nor
had they noticed what they looked like.
Anastasia asked Manuel who he was. He was a stowa-
way, he said. Where did he want to go? she asked.
Wherever the ship was going, he said. Besides being a
stowaway, he was also a spy, he told her.
It didn't seem too serious to be a stowaway on a little
boat drifting down coast. If they threw him overboard he
could swim to shore. He could get off the same way he
got on.
Papa Devil picked Manuel up, held him out at arm's
length, stared him in the eye, and then dropped him. Papa
45
D did not seem to notice Manuel at all for two days after
that.
Papa Devil had seen Manuel before anyone else had.
He had seen him come out of the dunes and lie flat on the
beach. He had seen him swim out to the ship. He had
trained his rifle on the man's head as he swam in the
gathering darkness. Papa often sighted his rifle on men,
men at a distance, men on shore. He himself had planted
the story that he was the best rifle shot in the world, but
he seldom shot. It was the aiming, though, that added to
his reputation of being sinister.
And yet Finnegan thought that he once caught a flicker
between Manuel the furtive man and the Devil himself, as
though they were of previous acquaintance.
9
The Brunhilde stopped at Port Isabel, and the next day
at Brownsville. Seaworthy had associates at every stop.
"But what does he do for a living?” Finnegan asked
Anastasia.
"He's a ship owner.”
“How can he get rich from the Brunbilde?"
“I don't mean the Brunhilde. I mean ships, ships.
Greeks always own a lot of ships. They don't own any-
thing else, but they do own a lot of ships."
"Saxon X. Seaworthy is a Greek?”'
“The X isn't for Xavier. But I don't know what these
voyages are about, Finnegan. He does a lot of work that
isn't legitimate. Or he may just be making contacts for
something, or setting his trap lines. He does haul funny
cargoes, or have them hauled, anything, anywhere in the
world. And he's in the deeper business. Often they are
people-cargoes he hauls. He makes that pay too."
They were in the estuary of a great river. Manuel came
to them, very much afraid.
“But what are you afraid of?” Anastasia asked him.
“That the Devil Papa will kill me and bury my body.”
“It's the only decent thing he could do after he kills
you," said Finnegan.
"You are joking, but to me it is not a great matter to
be killed,” said Manuel. “It is only that, if it happens, it
will be lost my coming on this boat. I am here as a spy,
and I must find out what these evil men are about."
“You keep telling people you are a spy and someone
46
1
>
will believe you," Anastasia cautioned. "Spies and confi-
dence men always pass themselves off as traveling sales-
men.”
"Coming as I did, ragged, it would not be believed that
I was a traveling salesman," Manuel explained. “Besides,
sooner or later, you would ask me what I sell. And then
what would I say? I would be stunked."
"Stumped."
"The word is stumped and not stunked? There is so
much I do not know. But it is only my friends I tell that I
am a spy.
"You told Marie,” Anastasia protested. “She is a devil
of devils."
"The Marie has compassion on me. She may turn out to
be my contact. If, that is, Papa Devil does not kill me and
bury my body this day."
"Who do you spy for?” Finnegan asked him.
"For myself and others like me. We are a society, a
futile society, in my country.”
"Mexico?"
“No, no, mas adelante, farther south. There is a force
there now, as it seems to be everywhere. It runs the guns.
It also runs the men. These men are devils. They are not
merely anti-clericals and reds; some of them do not even
work that road. They are devils literally, and there is a
source that turns still more men into devils. There is a
source, but we do not know what country it is in or where
it gets its particular venom.
"I will find out what the apparatus is and infiltrate it. I
am a committee of one to do this because I am the only
man I know to be incorruptible. But I will entertain only
today's trouble today.”
"Which is that Papa Devil will kill you and bury your
body?”
“Yes. That would negate any further action by me in
this world.”
"You aren't what I thought you at first, Manuel," said
Finnegan. "You aren't a poor and ignorant man."
“Among my people I am fairly rich and am a lawyer.
But I go to infiltrate as a poor man.'
Seaworthy and Gerecke and Peter Wirt had gone
ashore with a party. Now another party went ashore on
47
the Mexican side in an oar boat: Manuel and Papa Devil,
Finnegan and the two girls, Joe Cross who was to stay
with the boat. Marie, though she was dressed sumptuously
today, took an oar. She used it with amazing power.
“Ah, la giganta dorada!" Anastasia breathed.
Marie liked to be called the giantess. She was proud of
her power.
Ashore, Finnegan and the two girls trailed after the
Devil and Manuel. The Devil said he was looking for a
notary, but it was more than a notary he wanted. It was
Finnegan, when Papa was at a loss, who correctly supplied
the word un falsario, a forger; and they were directed to
one at once. In some lands it is better to ask a thing
directly and with the common word. Finnegan spoke bet-
der Spanish than did Papa Devil, who spoke it perfectly
but with a stilted perfection that missed the heart of it.
Papa Devil told Finnegan and the girls that they would
not be needed there. The second time that he told them so
he did it rather testily; so they left the Devil and Manuel
with the forger and went on the town.
A crowd of children followed them, and all who fol-
lowed them were not children. Marie Courtois drew the
attention. She was dressed in the high manner today, and
her red-blond coloring had never been more vivid. Even
Anastasia, in spite of her jealousy, was proud of her.
"Magnífica," breathed an admiring male, “maravillosa.”
"She can carry a man on her shoulders,” Anastasia told
him.
"Interesante," breathed the man.
Finnegan bought from a lady, who cooked over char-
coal on a corner, what he said were fried lizards; and
they all ate them. They were no such thing as lizards.
The lady had affinity with Finnegan; she caught the joke
and went along with it, her face like laughing leather.
And now Finnegan was the envy of every man on the
street as he walked like an Arabian pirate with his two
favorite wives. They went to the Cadillac Bar which was
dingy outside and rich within. Most of the customers were
Texans. The bar-boys wore white jackets and presided
amidst chrome and crystal. The three drank and nel-
lowed.
They left the Cadillac and went to a more Mexican
place. It was fly-specked, American, south-of-the-border
48
9)
Wester. The walls were solidly covered with affixed pa-
pers, notices, posters, and placards. All of these were very
old. None was ever taken down, and there was no room
for any to be added. The proprietor was Demetrio, a
gray-headed old bandit. He lived wrapped in the mantle of
his own great experiences, but he was glad to talk to
visiting notables.
"I am a man of the world,” Demetrio glowed. "You
might not notice this, seeing me here in my little place,
and yet you might well have guessed it. In my youth I
traveled all over the world and the United States: Alice,
Eagle Pass, Uvalde, Beeville, San Angelo, Weimar, even
Port Isabel.
"I followed every occupation. I milked goats, I kept
bees, I worked in the pickle factory. By all this I leamed
much of the world. Now in my age I am home again, and
have my own bar and am my own man. All sorts of
people come to my place, river rats, seamen, cattle and
goat men, fruit jobbers, sewing machine salesmen, the
factors in the great traffic of two nations. All come to
drink in my place."
Demetrio's face was lined with great character, like an
old Roman, like an old Aztec at the same time. His was a
face off an old coin, and Finnegan could not see a great
face without wanting to record it.
Finnegan drew Manuel in ink on the back of a poster.
It was not just a sketch; it was a fine portrait, and it took
two hours. It hangs behind that bar yet, and some day an
art man will come in there and will look at it twice. When
he sees the signature he will know it is genuine, one of the
random Finnegans, and the heirs of Demetrio will have
more for it than the bar takes in in a week.
Even in that present time, everyone acquired a lot of
prestige from the portrait: Old Demetrio with the striking
and forceful head of himself to hang behind his bar;
Finnegan the artist at work; the two girls who were
friends of everyone in the place, and of the artist, and of
the proprietor. After this, Demetrio gave Finnegan a fine
belt, and gave each of the girls a silver ring, all of which
he had made himself; for Demetrio also was an artist.
Late in the afternoon they went back to the Brunhilde
in the oar boat. It happened that Papadiabolous had not
killed and buried Manuel after all. Instead, he had gotten
49
him a complete set of papers, and now Manuel was a
member of the crew.
They fished as they went down coast, taking Spanish
mackerel, four and five pounds, and very good. During the
days they made fair time; but every evening they an-
chored, and Seaworthy and his group went ashore to the
little Mexican ports. They seldom retumed until daylight,
and sailed immediately thereafter.
They were off Paraiso this day, a little earlier than they
usually anchored, and Finnegan was sketching on deck.
For a week now he had been working on a project for
Saxon Seaworthy: painting the barroom of the Brunbilde.
The walls had been readied. There would be nice panels.
The paintings were to be of the Voyages of Sindbad the
Sailor.
There was a mystique about this. Seaworthy was Sind-
bad. And Sindbad was not so upstanding a fellow as he
appears in story. The murky mystery of him has been felt
from the beginning.
Finnegan painted in the barroom only in the early
momings, with the doors and shutters open. The bar was
port side, and was flooded with morning light as they
headed south. But after the sun had risen a while, Fin-
negan would put away his paints and go to drinking and
sketching in his notebooks. And in the afternoons he
sketched on deck.
“I cannot draw the roc. I cannot picture the roc at all,”
he complained.
“Why, it's all in proportion,” Anastasia told him. “If
you draw Sindbad very small, then you can draw a roc as
easily as a robbin."
"No. A roc as big as a robbin could not fly. It would be
aerodynamically impossible. It is hard to make a really big
bird that can fly. Even God would have trouble doing it.
It would have to be built like a pterodactyl, and reproduc-
tions of that from skeletons are repulsive. The roc must
not look repulsive, even though it is an evil force. Evil
with grace and balance is what I want.”
“Don't be so fussy. Evil can't have grace. And it does-
n't have to be able to fly."
.“Of course it has to be able to fly. And evil can have
grace and balance. Consider Papa Devil.”
50
"How will you do the sea stallions?" Marie asked.
“They're in one of the voyages. Aren't they unnatural
too?"
“I will just have deep-chested stallions, and have them
coming onto the land. But I have to put some signature of
the sea on them. I might be able to do this with the
convolutions of their manes and hair, and the surge of
their lunges. A stallion breaks to a gallop in a manner
different from that of a colt or a mare or a gelding. It
lunges up and over like a breaker; it's as though every
stallion were a sea stallion. It would be impossible to have
a sea gelding, of course. I can do the sea stallions, but I
can't get the roc off the ground."
“Will you draw me as the fourth wife of Sindbad?"
Anastasia asked.
"He didn't have four wives.”
“The wife of the fourth voyage, I mean.'
"But she died. Shall I paint you dead?”
?”
"Sure. Paint me dead. I want to see how I look. If I
don't look good dead, then I'm not ever going to die."
Finnegan suddenly saw Anastasia dead. He often got his
pictures all at once. He fixed it in his mind, and he shivered
when he did it. She would look good dead. And she was
going to die.
"Where will you put me, Finnegan? Down in the com-
mon grave with the dead men?"
“Yes, Anastasia, down in the grave with the bodies. I
will pull a Dante; he put all his enemies in Hell; I will
paint all mine dead and rotten. You, however, I won't
paint rotten; just a little bit high. Do you know, Anas-
tasia, you're the only one I'll hate to see dead.”
"Take it easy, Finnegan. This isn't for real.” "
"It is, girl. When I paint them dead, they're dead."
"Finnegan is going to paint me as the wife of the
seventh adventure,” said Marie, "and she's the happy-
ever-after one."
“I thought you thought happy-ever-after was a bour-
geois concept," Anastasia protested.
"You thought I thought a lot of things, but this one I
intend to be. Sindbad is Seaworthy, and Sindbad was very
wealthy when he retired; possibly it was only one of his
secretaries who knew just how wealthy. Seaworthy has
been to more places than Sindbad ever heard of; he's been
51
1
}
shipwrecked more times, in one way or another; he's
traded more bales of goods, and talked to more kings and
wheels. He has sailed out of more Bassorabs than Sindbad
would understand. And I will be the wife of the seventh
and last adventure."
"Why don't you paint Marie as an ogress?" Anastasia
asked. “Isn't there a place for an ogress somewhere?"
“Paint me as an ogress too,” Marie said, "only paint me
as I will be when the adventures are over.'
"You girls will have to be the wives; you're the only
girls I have to paint," Finnegan said. "There were only
two women in all the adventures of Sindbad, for his were
not ordinary adventures. I'll paint Papa Devil as a man-
eating ogre, and William Gerecke will be the Old Man of
the Sea. He looks like an incubus."
So he painted Anastasia as the wife of the fourth
voyage; and Marie of the wonderful shoulders as the wife
of the seventh.
But there was one thing wrong with the sketching, one
thing more unnatural than the roc. Finnegan could not
draw Papa Devil; and Finn was a man who could draw
anything. There was something very wrong when he came
to do Papadiabolous. That great purple pumpkin that
Papa Devil wore for a head was not unattractive; it was
distinctive even; but it was impossible to get it right.
For a long time Finnegan did not realize what the
trouble was. There was an inconsistency of color of pro-
portion, an unreality of facial muscle. But it came to him
as he analyzed it:
Papa Devil did not really look like that. The Devil was
wearing the living face of someone else. Somebody had
looked like that, but it wasn't Papa Devil.
It took Finn nearly a week to figure out what Papa
Devil did look like. But Finnegan had a very shrewd
pencil and brush. He made a sketch; then he made a
picture. It was the picture of what Papa Devil really
looked like. He was very curious to see just who would be
startled on coming onto that picture.
All were startled to see it, but it didn't seem to be the
startle of recognition, even in Papa Devil himself. All
were startled by the power and scope of that face, the
face behind the flesh-mask. But none of them seemed to
have seen it before.
52
Many weeks later, when Finnegan saw Papa Devil dead
and wearing his own face, it was the same face drawn on
the panel in the barroom. It did startle them all then,
when they saw the man dead, and then came back and
saw the same face on the wall; but none of them under-
stood it, even at the end.
If Finnegan had not earlier solved this appearance, he
would not have known who the dead man was, for nobody
else knew.
2.
"Do you know who had your bunk for the two days
before you had it?” Joe Cross asked Finnegan suddenly
one day.
"Sure. It was Doppio di Pinne. Dopey the Seaman."
"How do you know the name, Finnegan?”
“I read it in the air."
“Well, do you know what happened to him?"
"He got himself killed."
"Did you read that in the air too? Do you know how?"
"I can't fake it any longer, Joe. I don't know. I want
to."
"Finnegan, you won't believe this. You can whip me.
You'll have to if you laugh at this tale. With that nose of
yours, you ought to be able to smell it yet."
“The blood? And the fear? Yes, I do smell it yet. After
all, this is my bunk here now, this is where it happened."
"Finnegan, Dopey was alone in that bunk in this cabin.
I know that. There is only the one door to this cabin. .
There is no other way in or out. I was standing outside in
the passage. Papa Devil came by me. He looked like a
ghost in a passion. He went into this cabin. It scared me
liverless. He looked like a blind man who knew just
exactly where he was going. It was chilly insanity on him,
I tell you. He's weird enough in bright day. It had just
come on dusk then, and the passage light wasn't on yet.
“Papa Devil went in here and closed the door. Dopey
screamed. He screamed a second time, like a terrified
animal, like an ass taken by a lion (I have seen that).
“His third scream was cut off short. I stormed in then.
53
Dopey was no friend of mine, but I will not have a
cabinmate murdered, and I am not afraid of the Devil.
“Papa Devil was alone in this cabin, and there was no
way Dopey could have gone out. 'What did you do to
him?' I gobbled, and swung on him, but he cupped both of
my wrists in one of his big hands. 'Boy, there was no one
here,' he said, and he looked through me rather than at
me, 'Whose blood is that then?' I croaked. “That little bit
of blood? Bug blood, I guess,' he said. He let go me and
went out. And it was only the veriest dribble of blood
there, to tell the truth. But, Finnegan, there was no way
Dopey could have gotten out of this cabin!"
"Maybe he's still here, then, Joe. I feel him sometimes."
"Dammit, Finnegan, did you know him? Dopey?”
"Had him pointed out to me once. We never spoke that
I remember. I had been told that he resembled me, that
he was sometimes mistaken for me, or I for him. I
couldn't see much resemblance, other than our being
about the same size and shape and coloring.”
"That's because you can't look at yourself sideways,
Finnegan. You scare me livid sometimes, when I catch
you just in the comer of my eye. I jump like I saw dead
Dopey in the cabin here again. But I look at you straight,
and you're not too much alike.”
"What makes you think I can't look at myself sideways,
Joe? I can."
"Finnegan, Finnegan," Joe Cross moaned. "There is
only one way out of this cabin.”
1
54
Chapter Five
THE UNACCOUNTABLE CORPSE
There is one thing that thwarts the highest principle,
that of non-contradiction: bodies. And thereby it also
negates the ontological principle of sufficient reason.
There is not sufficient reason for bodies.
IGNACE WOLFF, Gedanken von Leibern
1.
This may have been at Paraiso, or it may have been at
Campeche, or at still another stop. There was a shallow
harbor there, with a very old town, and parts of another
town only half as old. The Brunhilde had not docked the
night before, but had anchored off. Los Grandes, Sea-
worthy and his associates, had gone ashore in a boat with
two of the seamen.
And the next moming, Finnegan and Anastasia went
ashore in the other boat, and the Devil also, and the
titaness Marie, and Joe Cross the red-headed seaman.
They had coffee at a compassionate little place, after
which Joe and the iridescent Marie went to find a smooth
beach. Finnegan and Anastasia got an amphora of rum,
or a little less, and went up past the cigar factory to climb
over the ruins and old walls. The Devil meanwhile went
about the Devil's own business.
The old walls were luxuriant, overgrown by a perversity
of grass and brush, full of lizards and small snakes and
angry birds. Then the two climbers found a giant's chair
up in the old walls, and from there they spied on the
world. Anastasia commented on everyone.
"Art Emery is picking his nose on the fantail of the
Brunhilde. It doesn't need it: he picked it yesterday. He is
desolate. He used to be the Devil's catamount, and now
the Devil rejects him. Harry Scott is scrubbing out his
55
T-shirts in that little tub but what he is trying to scrub
out isn't on his T-shirts. Manuel is saying his prayers,
and the cook De Polis is putting garlic in the stew, so
both are gainfully employed. Prayer and garlic are the
only two things that can change the nature of the world.
"Chris McAbney is filling his pipe as he waits for Los
Grandes. He counts every grain and shred that goes in. He
knows just how many little pieces of tobacco there ought
to be in a can of crimp cut. Why don't Joe and Marie
walk on the open beach instead of under the trees? How
can you spy on people if they walk under the trees?”
“It narrows further down, and they will have to come
into the open,” Finnegan said. “Then you can spy all you
wish, Anastasia."
"Where the Devil did the Devil go?"
"I don't know. He seemed lonesome. There's a story
that he loves company, but he abuses it."
"Ten days ago I knew all the answers, Finnegan. I knew
whose creature everyone was, how much blood was on
everyone's hands, and where most of the bodies were
buried. Now it has changed."
"What changed it?"
"The Devil changed it. There is something the matter
with the Devil, Finnegan.”
"That has always been the opinion."
"That isn't what I mean! He isn't like the old Devil he
used to be. When you can't depend on the Devil, who can
you depend on? And I don't even know where you come
in, Finnegan. Everyone thinks you are Seaworthy's crea-
ture. I think you are the Devil's."
“I am nobody's creature, Anastasia. It all happened as
casually as I told you."
"You may not know it yourself, Finn, but there is more
than that to it. Do you understand that the Brunhilde is a
plague ship, and everywhere it touches it infects."
“I think I understand that."
"It wasn't casual that I came along, Finnegan. I told
you several sets of lies as to why I came. The truth is that
I decided to deal myself a hand in this."
“Who are you, Anastasia? And aren't you awful little to
be dealing yourself a hand?"
“I am your sister, which you do not understand. And I
still deal me a hand.”
56
"What is between you and Don Lewis?"
"Nothing. How could there be? We hardly ever speak.”
"You are so careful to stay apart, there is something
between you. Is Marie also a part of the plague?"
"Of course she is. And she can read me like a book; I
am her patsy. I can't make a move she doesn't know. She
seems so transparent, and she isn't. She's clear mad, you
know. I mean it. She's crazy.'
The giant's chair was a rock slab eight feet wide, dished
and backed. It was all that was left of an old rock flooring
and an old wall.
“I don't want us to be at cross purposes," Finnegan
said. “I may have to play a hand too, and there are too
many jokers and one-eyed jacks in this deck. It frightens
me that I have seen you dead."
"Everyone to his own premonitions. I trust my own,
and it will take more than a premonition to kill me.
Listen, little brother, we are very close without ever talk-
ing about it. You call me an urchin and a tramp, but I
know how much you're taken with me. But it will have to
wait."
Papa Devil came up the old walls and appeared like a
spook. He was a big man who could move without noise.
With the Devil was a Descalced who also moved noiseless-
ly. But he had natural advantages for that.
"What have you two been watching?" the Devil asked
them with the voice that seemed to come out of the
bowels of the green earth.
“We watch everyone,” Anastasia said. "We have been
watching Joe and Marie, but they keep going under the
trees."
9
"Don't watch too many things. There is a sickness, it
might even be a fatality, that comes to those who see too
much. Don't stay here long. We leave almost at once.”
Papa Devil went down again, over the rough path. The
rocks and creepers stayed out of his way, not daring to
interfere with him.
“He is a remarkable man,” said the Descalced. "A
priest sees every sort of evil in the course of his life, but
this man goes beyond all that, in the aura of him."
“Are you sure he is a man?” Finnegan asked the bare-
foot priest.
"A man? Oh, I understand what you mean, but we must
57
assume that he is. We all have something of the unnatural
and unmentionable in us. But he is remarkably evil, as-
tute, satanic. Partly, of course, he was having fun with me
because I am a religious; and I was having fun with him.
The Devil is not so purple as he is painted, nor am I so
naive as I seem. But withal, he is very evil."
“Withal, he is that,” said Finnegan. They gave the
Descalced the last drink. He blessed them for it with his
eyes, and he walked down to the boat with them.
Chris McAbney did not sail with them from that place.
Finnegan heard that he was dead.
2.
Finnegan swam a lot beneath the surface of the water
wearing a face mask. At least one of the bartoom panels
would be an underwater picture, and he was studying the
lights and color. That, and the sunlit swarms of peanut-
sized fishes,
It was while swimming underwater that an episode
came back to Finnegan like a grotesque dream, an episode
of the vague night on which he had first met Saxon X.
Seaworthy.
Freud was not acquainted with underwater swimming
as a trigger for dream or suppressed incident recall; and
nobody else has treated the subject properly. But there is a
submarine parallel to the unconscious, and many divers
have mentioned the effect on themselves.
Finnegan had begun to remember it that very morning
when Seaworthy had had a long talk with him. It had set
the basis for the recall.
"I had a dream last night," said Seaworthy, "and this
was it:
"I was in India. India is often the site of my dreams,
and it is the land of my unconscious. India is a night
world, however bright it may be; it is the unconscious
counterpart of the rest of the world. Did you know that
there is a sect of Hindus who believe that India is itself
Purgatory? And that they are already dead and expiating
their sins? This has been taken by some as subtle attack on
life under the British, but the sect is authentic.
58
1)
"Anyhow, Finnegan, I was in India, and in a great and
crowded city which I could not and cannot identify, but to
which I have often been in my dreams. My dream was
monotone, all in gray, with no real color in it at all. I had
with me a corpse, and I was trying to get rid of it.
"This was a vivid dream, but there was a mystery about
the face of the corpse. It sometimes had a very definite
face, and then mercifully it would have no face at all."
"I like them better without faces,” said Finnegan.
"So do I, but I know that it cannot be. That face will
still confront me."
Saxon Seaworthy had had a curious look on him, the
look of a man who will not scare in a situation where he
has the right to be scared. He continued in his intricate
voice that always surprised Finnegan, coming out of so
dull-appearing and stony-faced a man.
“There is a certain embarrassment in being burdened
with a corpse, Finnegan, even in a dream in India. I
,
believe that the word embarrassed itself means to be
burdened with. It is also very difficult to dispose of a
corpse through irregular channels, any time, any where.
There is a stickiness about corpses. You cannot let go of
them.
“I had a small cart on which the body was loaded. One
wheel was always coming off. This is a disability of those
small Asian carts: the wheels are not wedged on properly.
I was irritated with the poor construction, even though I
knew I was dreaming.
"I also had a small shovel. I would start to dig a
shallow grave in a little garden; and there would be such
protest about it as if I were burying my own mother
shamefully. The corpse was a male figure; it was not that
of my mother.
“I would sometimes dump it into a gutter and start to
run away with my clattering cart. But they would always
catch me and make me load it up again. I pushed it
several times through open windows, but persistent hands
always pushed it out to me again. 'Take it along with you.
It's your own fault,' they said, 'Ye tumhara hi kasur hai.'
The dream, of course, was in Hindi."
“The hands said that?"
“ “This was a dream, Finnegan. Subjects change in
dreams, and grammar is unstable. I tried just leaving the
59
corpse on the cart on the street and walking away whis-
tling softly. I was brought back sternly this time and told
'If you don't get it out of here, people are going to start
asking what you're doing with it in the first place.' After
that it seemed that everyone looked askance at me and
my corpse and drew away from us a little. And now I
tried to recall where I had gotten the corpse, and I could
not remember. What was I doing with it? And why was I
responsible for it? Finnegan, did you ever try to get rid of
an unaccountable corpse?"
"Not that I remember. Not in India. Not in a dream.
What did you finally do?”
"I don't know. In the dream it seemed as though the
corpse itself grappled with me when I had escaped all
surveillance and was about to get it covered. 'Ab well,
you can bury me, it said, 'but who is going to bury you?'
That is my dream, Finnegan. Do you know what it
means?"
“No. I am not Joseph."
“I was hoping that you would know, Finnegan. For the
dream is inextricably connected with the night on which I
met you and at the end of which we ended up sitting on
the sidewalk together. I wish that you would try to
remember it for several reasons."
Seaworthy had a burrowing look. He meant that Finne-
gan had better remember it.
Finnegan had thought about it that moming with
growing apprehension. He thought about it while he also
considered the shoulders of Marie and the knees of
Anastasia. He thought about it that afternoon as he swam
underwater with a face mask.
He had read a little about dreams in both Gypsy Dream
Books and in Freudian literature and had found about an
equal sagacity in both. Now, a corpse may mean a lot of
things. It could mean a wish for death, or a guilt of death,
or any guilt. It could mean a violating or a corrupting. It
could mean a terrible drunkenness. In all such cases the
corpse would seem attached to one.
Finnegan got the answer while he was swimming. A
dream object may be an euphemism for something more
shocking than itself. But what, to a worried man, is more
60
shocking than a corpse? And somewhere was the warning
against overlooking the obvious.
The corpse was a corpse, that was all. It was literally
itself. Saxon X. Seaworthy bad been embarrassed by a
corpse and had tried to dispose of it. And if India was his
antipodal land, then it had probably happened in Western
lands.
When?
It was inextricably connected with the night on which
Finnegan and Seaworthy had met.
Finnegan gazed jowl to jowl with a little fish. Then he
remembered about it and wished that he had not. There
had been a corpse, and Finnegan had been involved,
3.
For, as a matter of fact, Finnegan had helped Saxon
bury a body. It was odd that he had forgotten about it,
and odder still that he could not now remember more.
He had been drinking to the point of oblivion—but no,
that had been later, that had been after the burying. .
Finnegan had been drinking only a little, but his mood had
been a drunken one before he started. He had felt then
that he was going to have a bout with his old girl Amne-
sia. Seaworthy had already acquired the corpse when they
met. The corpse, in fact, was not yet quite still. It had
begun to move again, apparently long after Seaworthy had
believed it finished. Seaworthy had quieted it with a
shovel. He had broken the skull and spilled part of the
brains.
It had been at night in a graveyard. Yes, it was in the
graveyard that they met. Saxon had been startled, even
displeased, at the encounter with Finnegan. He had been
working at the grave before the corpse showed its last
flicker of life, and he was working at the grave again,
ineptly, when he saw Finnegan and turned ashen.
But Finnegan was at least neighborly. He would help
any man in any situation.
"You call that the way to dig a grave?" Finnegan had
asked. “You look like you don't know how to dig a grave.
Let me dig now and you rest.”
61
He remembered yet the quivering emotion of Sea-
worthy's face, and he could account not at all for his own
conduct. He had been completely mindless, more than in a
daze, in an emptiness. That poor old white-faced man
needed help, Finnegan had reasoned unreasoningly. He
had taken the shovel from him and dug.
Finnegan had dug it a little deeper, and had then
broken through for a foot or so. It was an old digging,
and there was air-space there below rotten wood splinters.
Finnegan fumbled around with his hands in the crevices
out of curiosity. His hands had not lost their deftness,
even if his mind had done so. He appraised size and
shape. He could have drawn every bone he handled. He
could have made a good reconstruction of the thing there.
When Finnegan straightened up, Saxon Seaworthy was
standing over him with the shovel raised and with an
almost evil look on his face. Finnegan was scared of that
look when he remembered it now, but he hadn't been so
at the time. He realized that his innocence had saved him
then; and that an unresolved incident of the event still
kept him alive.
"It's deep enough," Finnegan had said. “Let's bury
him."
"“Yes. Hurry," Saxon Seaworthy had said.
And they completed the job swiftly.
"I wonder,” Finnegan had said, “how they will get on?”
“Who?''
“The old one and the new one. The two men in the
grave. We should have introduced them. They might be
English, and they'll go a long time without speaking if
they're not introduced,"
“They—they have met before," Saxon had stammered,
"and they are not English.”
And now the face of that man he had helped bury came
over Finnegan with real horror. He wished, as Saxon had,
that the corpse might have no face at all. There was a
cold current in the water, and Finnegan was at once very
chilly. He left the water and climbed back on the
Brunhilde.
Now the question was whether his friend Saxon had
been as drunk as himself on that memorable night-he
hadn't been, not till later, neither had Finnegan been—and
62
9
whether he did not remember at all, or whether he remem-
bered too well.
Had Saxon really had a dream? Or had he made up the
dream to tell Finnegan, as an insistent hint that he would
be called on to remember?
(Saxon Seaworthy had had the dream. Screaming dead
men! but he had had that dream! He had had it for three
nights running, but he didn't need to ask Finnegan what it
meant.)
But he had asked Finnegan to remember, and now
Finnegan had remembered. It might not be tactful, it
might not be safe yet for Finnegan to tell that he had
remembered.
Anastasia had said that she had once known where all
the bodies were buried, but she hadn't meant it like that.
She didn't know where that one was buried, even though
she had worked only two hundred yards from it. No, it
was not safe to know where or what was buried; and
there was anotber aspect of it more frightening than
merely burying a dead man.
The sequel to it had been hair-raising. Finnegan had
been there, and he had missed it. But he didn't miss it
DOW.
Finnegan went to the banoom now, and painted the
face of the man they had buried, and the face of one
other. Someone was going to be taken aback when he saw
those two faces together.
4.
Another corpse, one that hadn't been seen, and should
have been. The body of Dopey the seaman was not to be
found, dead or alive. Somebody knew how to get rid of a
corpse when there was no way at all to do it. And a man
should have more blood in him than a bug, particularly a
man with such a strong invisible residue as had Dopey the
seaman. Finnegan sensed that dead but still hovering man
every time he lay in his bunk.
And another short snatch read itself to Finnegan out of
the envelope behind the overhead balk.
"I will rise high in this if I play it right, I will be rich, I
63
will be power, I will rub peoples noses in it. I make people
I
shake if I get into this I like that part. They will not laugh
at Dopey then. Even now they laugh nervous at me. I
spook lots of people. Why is bugle nose not dead yet as
was suppost. There is not room for both. What if I am the
one die trapped. I die here, I bet I die hard.”
But apparently the seaman Dopey had died easy. Any-
how, there is always an incoherence about the writings of
dead men.
64
Chapter Six
LULUWAY IS THE PLURAL
OF DIAMOND
We speak now of the physical areas of dreams, particu-
larly of sea-dreams. There are the ineffably sad dreams
of seamen on the passage between Patrai and Taranto
that are referred to in classical times. There are the
howling horny dreams, obscenely murderous and of a
towering sexuality, that have always possessed those
going out of Trondheim fjord to the Faeroes. There is
the terrible introspection akin to death that creeps into
the dreams of those going from Port of Spain to the
African Hump. Dreams do have a topography. Men do
dream the same dreams when going through the same
sectors.
How will it be when they go through the sectors of
space?
-IAN MCFREANN, Psychologia Nugarum
1.
They drifted down the Mexican coast and beyond.
They stopped at Campeche, at Progreso, at Cozumel, at
Ciudad Chetumal, at Belize, at Puerto Barrios, at La Cei-
ba, Trujillo, Cabo Gracias a Dios, Blue Fields, Limon,
San Cristobal. They made from one hundred to two
hundred miles a day. They went ashore at every port.
Sometimes Saxon Seaworthy took Finnegan along. Sax-
on was more friendly now. This day he was very friendly,
and he talked.
“When a man has been very evil, Finnegan, he gets
ideas. And I have been very evil. Never meant to be,
really. It seems to be in my nature. Then I developed a
taste for it, like a hunter after special game. When it's run
65
its full, it gets a clamp on you. Do you believe in the
Devil, Finnegan?"
“Oh yes. And he believes in me. There is no question of
either of us not existing."
"You cannot kill the Devil, Finnegan. Is it possible that,
if we both got as loaded as we were the night we met, we
might both of us remember a little more? That was a
well-orchestrated orgy. Did you ever kill a man, Finne-
gan?”
"I doubt it. I was on provisional patrol a few times, and
we used to pot shot a couple hundred yards across a valley
at our friends. But they never killed me, and I don't think
I ever killed them."
"I think that I killed one man in particular, Finnegan. I
am more sure that I killed him dead than that I am now
alive. But he didn't stay dead.
"Finnegan, this has been puzzling me. A thing like that
sticks in the back of your mind. Did I only imagine that I
killed him? But there is a veracity that sticks like tar.
Besides, I had a witness. If I have any sanity at all, I
know that I killed him. Ah, but it does chill me every time
I see him alive!"
Finnegan and Seaworthy got lit. Even themselves had
hardly done it so thoroughly before. This was in San
Cristobal. It was on either December 9th or 10th. They
may have spent two days at it; it hurries things to try to
do it properly in one.
They drank a great quantity of rum for a night and
day, or possibly two nights and days. They exhausted the
social possibilities of all the drinking places in that time,
and were driven to the formation of a drinking club for
themselves only.
They were lying in a garden or park. Saxon Seaworthy
had bought this pretty plot of land from its owner for one
thousand dollars American, and he had a deed to show for
it.
Every hour or so a boy would come across the square
to their garden to see how their rum was holding out. The
boy was well paid for his trips. An official, who may not
have been genuine, collected from them a special property
tax on the land. Another official collected a tavern tax
from them, as they were using the plot for a tavern.
Afterwards, feeling that he had been taken advantage of,
66
Saxon refused to pay any more extraordinary taxes or
assessments,
They did some deep talking. Saxon explained how it
was possible for a man to fall into evil habits, and how it
could be fun; but that it required ever-increasing partici-
pation for satisfaction.
Saxon explained that he himself was a consummate
philosopher, and that he had the money in the bank to
show for it. Never trust in the philosophy of a man
without money, he said. A sound philosophy will always
pay its way.
"No. Some day you will meet the confutation of your
philosophy,” Finnegan said.
“Yes, you are right,” Seaworthy suddenly agreed. This
was late in the afternoon of the second day. "The confuta-
tion of my philosophy has just appeared,” Seaworthy said.
"It is walking towards us from about a quarter of a mile
away. It is coming up the road from the port towards us.
I shrink a little, Finnegan, but I do not abandon my
position."
“But that is only Papa Devil coming up the road to-
wards us.”
“Yes. Do you remember when you first saw his face,
Finnegan?"
"There's three different recollections. One is when I
went onto the ship with Anastasia for a drink and he
ordered us off. One is of his bending over me; this may
have been the night when he found me and brought me
onto the ship before it sailed, but it seems as if I was
seeing him for the first time. There was something wrong
about his bending over me, as though I were in the wrong
body and he were the Devil indeed. And he killed me
then. I remember that clearly."
“He is, Finnegan, he is. He's the very Devil."
"I was terrified of him then, but I had no feeling of
terror the night I was carried onto the ship. The other
time, the third or the first time I saw him, is the memory
of me bending over him. This is the version out of con-
text. It has its hazy elements.'
“Like a dream, Finnegan? Something like the dream I
told you a couple of days ago? Something like the night
we first met?”
67
9)
“Yes, it is the same thing, Saxon. I have known it for a
couple of days now.”
“Then to the point, Finnegan, to the point! There could
not be two faces like that?"
"Papa Devil's face is a great original, and there is
something in all great originals that shocks us. Some
things are not meant to happen twice."
“Finnegan, I am not crazy. Did you not help me bury
that man Papadiabolous?"
"Yes. That is what happened.”
"It couldn't have been a dream?"
"We could not both have dreamed it, Saxon.”
"And we could not both be crazy on that point. Two
people may be crazy, but they cannot be crazy on the
same thing. To be crazy is to be singular. You were there!
You do remember!"
“I do remember Papadiabolous dead. May I spend my
life trying to forget it!"
"You will have a short life if you ever consider forget-
ting it. We did bury that man!"
"I buried Papa Devil. You couldn't bury a cat. You just
don't know how to dig a grave, Saxon."
“And he was dead!”
“Papa Devil was dead. There are certain oozy details of
gore and brain that should have insured that he stay
dead.”
“Ah, but he didn't, Finnegan. That's the whole pointless
point of it; he didn't. What do you say to that?”
"That silence you hear is myself. I say nothing.”
“But don't you think it odd that he should still be alive
and coming up the road to take us back to the ship?"
"It is unusual. As you say, a thing like that sticks in the
back of your mind. You killed him all right. I saw him
dead, I saw him dead!"
“Yes, damned dead, Finnegan, damned dead. And he is
here the second time. But I tell you, nobody drinks at my
spring three times!”
Papadiabolous took them back to the ship and cleaned
them up.
They went to Portobello and Mañana. They went to
Cartagena and Santa Maria, Willemsted,
Willemsted, Caracas,
Cumana, Port of Spain. They were at Port of Spain eight
68
or nine days. They were there Christmas and New Year's.
It was on New Year's that Finnegan stopped drinking. He
did not drink again till they were in Freetown, Sierra
Leone on January 26. He had never been able to go all
the way through January, but this time he was very near
it.
2.
Now this was the situation at Port of Spain:
Finnegan knew, and Saxon X. Seaworthy did not know,
that the Papadiabolous they had buried was not the same
Papadiabolous who sailed on the Brunhilde with them.
And yet he had the same face. He had the same every-
thing. He convinced those who had been intimate with
him for many years.
When Finnegan had painted Papadiabolous dead in the
common grave in the Sindbad sequence, and shown him
atop another dead man, it had attracted only amusement
on board. Nobody except Saxon Seaworthy and Papa
Devil understood the meaning. And everybody rather
liked to see Papa Devil dead.
And when Finnegan painted another dead man with the
real face of Papa Devil, it attracted no notice at all, other
than for the startling strength of that face. Nobody could
have recognized that face except Papa Devil himself, so
only the Devil knew what Finnegan meant.
But some months later it would cause a wonder, when
they saw that man dead on the dock, and then came back
and saw his face in the cabin painting. Even then they did
not know who he was, and Finnegan had escaped and was
not there to tell them.
They were at Cayenne, at Belem, at São Luis, at Camo-
cim. They were at Fortaleza and Natal. They were at
Natal six days while they checked and stowed for the
Atlantic crossing. They sailed from Natal on January
18th.
Finnegan believed that it was time to have a talk with
the Devil. He felt bis life to be in danger, though he had
never prized it very highly. If Saxon Seaworthy had killed
69
one man for unknown reasons, he might kill another man
who knew about it. Finnegan believed that Seaworthy was
keeping him alive as confirmation of his own sanity, as
confirmation that the thing had actually happened. When
he finally discovered that the man he had killed was really
dead, he would no longer have any reason for keeping
Finnegan alive.
But Papa Devil, the key to everything here, would be a
hard man to get anything out of. He hadn't even blinked
when Finnegan had painted him in his real appearance
which was unknown to anyone else on the Brunhilde.
Papa Devil should have been curious about how Finnegan
knew his appearance, and he didn't seem to be.
Besides, Finnegan was still a little bit afraid of the
Devil, even though he knew that part of that sinister face
was a mask. A man as big as Papa Devil was, and one as
often on the edge of anger, was a man to be a little afraid
of. And every encounter with the Devil raised more mys-
teries than it followed.
"What is the Devil up to? What is his aim?" Finnegan
said loudly, coming on the Devil suddenly during the
Atlantic crossing. It was on a dark deck and Finnegan had
come up behind the Devil silently, but he certainly hadn't
slipped up on him.
"Ah, the first aim of the Devil is to convince people
that he doesn't exist,” the Devil said easily, "just as the
first aim of all conspirators is to convince people that
there are no conspiracies. It is by this tactic that he
achieves his goals. Oh, you mean myself? I am up to
nothing, Finnegan.”
"Papa Devil, you can play smoother games than I can.
I will have to talk to you directly. A week or so before we
sailed there was a man who was killed and buried and
who looked very like you."
"He must have been a handsome fellow, Finn boy. I
didn't know that such a masterpiece could occur twice.'
"Neither did I. That is the trouble, Papa. Such a mas-
terpiece has occurred twice."
“Are you sure that he was dead and buried?”
“Yes. I handled him dead. And I buried him. There is
at least one who believes that man was you."
“He must be a gullible sort.”
70
“He is the least gullible man in the world. He also
believes now that you cannot kill the Devil.”
“That is for God and St. Michael to worry about, Finn,
not for us. We haven't the equipment for it.”
"He halfway believes that you are the Devil.”
"I halfway am, Finnegan, but not in the literal sense.
But I can understand the effect it might have on one to
kill a man, and then to encounter him alive the next day;
quite early the next day it was, before he had recovered
from his bout. I try to enhance the effect in him as much
as I am able. It should worry him a lot, and you a little.
You must be putting in some sleepless nights, now that
you are not drinking. That's the time to catch up on your
thinking."
"Yes. I try to catch up. There is a mimicry here beyond
all believing. How can you do it so well as to fool even
those who knew him for many years?"
"Knew who, Finnegan?"
“The original Papadiabolous.”
“But I am Papadiabolous, and there has never been any
other. You surely don't think you have come on the
answer, do you, Finnegan?"
“It is sheer art, and there is no more than an ounce of
filler in your face. And the voice, the gait, the handling of
the body, the habits, the knowledge of details, they must be
more than perfect. You have never slipped once, it seems.
Where had you observed him? Your real face isn't known
to any of them on the Brunhilde, and some of them knew
the original Papadiabolous for many years. How do you
do it?"
"You speak in riddles, boy. There is no me but me."
"Your face is part mask, Papa Devil."
"Perhaps it is, Finnegan, and perhaps it has been so the
many years. You are shopping for easy falsehoods, and
the truth is more wonderful. Is it not wonderful, Finne-
gan, that I was dead and that now I live? That was a fine
portrait that you painted of me dead, Finnegan. Quite
good of me."
“Which one, Papa Devil, which one?"
"I saw but one. Did you paint two of me, Finnegan?
Are there two of me?"
“Not only are there two of you; you make it seem that
71
there are two of me. Papa Devil, how did you kill Doppio
di Pinne and leave no trace?”
“I kill a man, Finnegan? Why, I am like a lamb. Dopey
the seaman was your double, your fetch, Finnegan. I
suspect that you killed him, if he ever lived. Perhaps you
are Dopey with only an ounce of filler added to the nose."
Well, Finnegan knew he wasn't, but how do you argue
with the Devil?
2)
They left Natal January 18th. They arrived at
Freetown, Sierra Leone on January 26, quite a few years
ago. It was a smoky old crossing. A ship should never go
from Brazil to Africa, only from Africa to Brazil. It is
much easier to drift West.
According to Papadiabolous, the westward drift had
been accomplished by every people who ever lived on the
east shore of the Atlantic. For, once caught in the current
and the winds, it is hard for a small boat to get back to
Africa or Europe. When they had given up, they would go
west and southwest, straight on; and in from four hundred
to five hundred and fifty hours they would be off the
Brazil coast.
“But the returns were difficult,” said Papa Devil as he
talked to several of them. "They were almost impossible,
like a return from the grave, which is difficult and nearly
impossible. Only a few have made either retum, and these
have been regarded askance.”
· Saxon Seaworthy was uneasy when this discourse was
given by Papadiabolous, but he said he believed that very
few primitives had ever arrived alive on the Brazil coast,
just as few arrived alive into the grave. And he gave it as
his measured opinion that even fewer had retumed from
those latter shores, and that they retumed at their peril. It
could be a very dangerous trip back, he said.
Finnegan was interested in this duel between Seaworthy
and the Devil, especially when Seaworthy gave his consid-
ered opinion that nobody was likely to make the retum
trip twice.
.
the terrible introspection akin to death that creeps
into the dreams of those going to the African Hump ..
Oh well, it wasn't as extreme as that, but the apprehension
did creep into the dreams of Finnegan.
72
>
“I have never felt myself to be a person," he said as he
sat and talked to himself across a table. "I have never
been able to touch any human person in any way. I have
never had a friend in the human flesh.
"Oh, there are those who are friendly enough to me in
my normal life, Vincent and Casey and Hans and Henry,
Show Boat and Dotty Yekouris and Marie Monaghan,
Mary Schaeffer, Loy Larkin and Tom Shire and Freddy
Castle, the Howlands, Absalom Stein and Melchisedech
Duffy, Mr. X and Hillary Hilton and my sister Patty. Oh,
they like me and perhaps they love me (some of them
do), and I would love them if I knew how it was done,
But there is a barrier between myself and the human kind,
"The only human I was ever able to touch was my own
father. That was for only a short moment, and it was
many years after he was dead. And my father also had
this difficulty all his life. He was not able to make contact
with the human kind. What do you think of that, Finne-
gan?”
Then Finnegan shifted his mind into the other Finnegan
across the table, went over and looked out of his eyes and
talked out of his mouth. He talked back across the table
to the Finnegan he had just inhabited:
“Well, Finnegan, if I am not people, what am I? We
know that I do not remember my own childhood except
as a derivative thing, as though told me of someone else.
The world began for me when I was walking down a street
with Vincent Stranahan in Sydney Town back in the war
years. It began that sudden moming, but it has also begun
at other times. I am newbom out of the oblivions time
after time, but is there anything, other than memory once
removed, that links these separate existences of mine?
“Finnegan, I have passed, nearly, for a human person
all the days of my life, except for the great unremembered
gaps in that life. Here on the Brunhilde I sometimes catch
a phrase out of the air 'the other human race', and I am
not sure whom I catch it from. Well, is there another
human race? What am I? There is, I know, an animal
inside me, but it isn't a human animal in the regular sense.
Perhaps it is the other sort of human animal. Say, I do
look more like Dopey the seaman than I believed. I'll slip
across the table and find out if the me here looks like
Dopey too."
73
a
Finnegan skipped his mind over and looked out of the
other Finnegan's eyes. Sure enough, the Finnegan he had
just been in looked quite a bit like Dopey also.
»
)
Quite a few of those introspective ocean dreams, quite
odd ones. There was one that involved Marie Courtois,
and Finnegan was not sure whether they both were bodily
present or how much of the dream was a waking one.
Marie said that she was Demeter, and that she was also
her own daughter Persephone, that she lived in Hell in her
one person, but that she returned to Earth every year in
her own reincamation.
“This retum of the earthy ones is the only immortality
there is, Finnegan,” she told him. "All the rest is up in the
air, and we are of the Earth. I will make you understand
that there cannot be anything else."
"You are wrong, but the proof isn't here," Finnegan
said. “We will all cross that bridge in our own time. And
what good is it then to say I could have told you."
"Believe me, Finnegan, that bridge has only one shore.”
"We would have to ask someone who has been over it,
Marie.”
"I have been over it. There is no other side."
"Your Demeter was only a com goddess, Marie, and
you are full of com."
“We are all of us that, Finnegan, and you are one of
us. And this old earthiness, which you still call evil, is a lot
of fun. Until you have blood on your hands you cannot
know how much fun it is."
“And you have?”
"Finnegan, the blood on my hands is what sings me to
sleep at night."
They were on a jungle-crowded beach (for all that they
should have been on the Brinhilde in mid-Atlantic) and
Finnegan lay with his head in Marie's lap, and entirely
encircled with her hair. She looped it clear around him
and tied him in with knots.
She talked to him a mystic bit about kopolatry, and the
gremium matris, which is the Earth itself, and which is the
lap of Marie also; about the pietà form of the thirteenth
station which, in the old Roman Way of the Cross, was
located on Aventine hill where earlier was a representa-
tion of Demeter and Pontos in such a grouping. “Oh, it is
74
a
9
earthy!" she said, “and it is so childish to seek for a chaste
element in it."
Well, well, was there a seduction scene then?
Enjoy or abhor such things according to your inclina-
tion, as the sage says, but it is contemptible to seek such
vicariously.
3.
Finnegan fell from grace on January 26, the day that
they landed, and went back on the drink. This was in
Freetown.
“This reminds me of a joke of my own making," he told
Joseph. “One man said 'Did you ever try to sit on a girl's
lap?' and the other one said 'Sure. That's how I fell from
Grace.'"
"That's an interesting story," said Joseph. "I hadn't
known that was the origin of the phrase.”
Joseph was a Haussa boy, and Finnegan was getting
drunk with him. Joseph himself had a very hard head and
was not affected. Joseph was from further south, Nigeria
or the Gold Coast. He was much traveled. He had been a
caravan boy and a seaman. They were drinking bam,
which is a palm wine.
"You are a low-lifer like me," Joseph said, “or you
would be in the hotel bar drinking whisky or Holland gin
with your shipmates, the golden goddess and the little
sparrow. You are Bature?"
?
"Yes. Italian is my ancestry."
"You could almost be black. Mi ke ran. Surely you
have been taken for black before. Kava sunan ka?”
“Kaka whatta? Oh, my name? I am Finnegan.”
"What is your Christian name?"
"John."
“John, we will be friends. If you are tired of bam, we
will go to my room where I have a bottle of gin. We will
go into the garden and drink it. Then I will make you a
proposition."
Joseph the Haussa boy had gone far. They were drink-
ing the.gin in the garden.
"I have the languages,” Joseph told Finnegan. “My
75
English, while not perfect, is better than your own. Arabic
I have long ago when I am a caravan boy, and Ful is like
my own Haussa to me. Do you know that there are
twenty-five million people who understand these two?
French I have when I am with the caravans also. Af-
rikaans I know, but not proper Dutch. I will have to leam
this; I need it in my business.”
“What business?” Finnegan asked. “Why would anyone
need Dutch? And why in peanut picker's heaven would
anyone need proper Dutch?”
“It is difficult to find trustworthy partners, Finnegan. I
myself do not cut too good a figure in Paris or Amster-
dam or New York when I must market there. There are
those who would take advantage of a black man, particu-
larly one who walks awkwardly in shoes. I need someone
like you, suave and worldly and honest, and who will not
spoil a deal by haste or nervousness. It is sometimes years
before we can realize on a consignment.”
“You sound like a businessman, Joseph."
“We Haussa have been called the Jews of Africa. My
father was a merchant, and I also am a merchant of a
rare commodity."
“What is the commodity? What are you, Joseph?”
“I am a diamond smuggler. That is my trade and the
way I make my living. That is my way of life."
"This would seem an odd stop-off place for diamonds,
where they are neither produced, nor—if that is the word-
consumed."
“But here they are produced. Not all African diamonds
are South African. Sierra Leone is a big producer. Out of
here are many pedlars, and in some ways I am the most
unlikely. But I do well.
"I can still do the back-country boy, with the simple
come-on story, and the raw stone in my little black hand.
And I can do the dandy. But the big deals aren't here;
they are where the foreign marketing is done; distance
multiplies the value of this merchandise remarkably. You
will work with me in this and we will prosper."
“Joseph, I know very little about the lulus."
"All this will come to you. And luluway, not lulus, is the
plural of diamond. Each man must have his own tech-
nique. It is better to take no models, for all the master
pedlars have made mistakes. Simply forget that you have
76
»
91
the stuff with you and follow other apparent business. You
will find in you a talent for this. You do not look like a
diamond smuggler, Finnegan, but I am at a loss to say just
what you do look like. By the way, why do you, a good
man, travel with these evil ones?"
"Do I look like a good man, skunk drunk here,
Joseph?”
"Yes, you are a good man.'
“And are you sure that they are evil?”
"John, even the carrion birds would not touch them
when they are dead. I know what they are."
Finnegan was with Joseph for several days. When he
left him he had a very heavy leather sack full of rocks.
For the next few years, until his death, Finnegan mar-
keted from that sack, and from two others, and sent
drafts to Freetown. Though he starved and went all the
way down sometimes, this was a source of many of his
amazing comebacks.
But in the meanwhile he was on the drink again, and
could only break off from it once or twice a year, and
then for only a few days at a time. And he was in peril,
and traveling with wicked men on a plague ship.
They started up coast on the first day of February.
They went to Bissau, Bathurst, Dakar, St. Louis. They
went to Memrhar, Port Etienne, Villa Cisneros, Las Pal-
mas. They went to the Grand Canary where they stayed
two days.
77
Chapter Seven
HABIB, I HAVE FOUND
SOMETHING
But I have dreamed a dreary dream Beyond the Isle of
Sky; I saw a dead man win a fight, and I think that
man was I.
CHEVY CHASB
1.
"This is fantastic," Finnegan said to Don Lewis. They
were on the Grand Canary, and Finnegan had a pack of
newspapers in English, Spanish, Portuguese and French. "I
always liked to be where things were happening, and I've
had pretty good luck in my life thus far. But we've been
missing everything! It isn't possiblel Riots, massacres, trea- .
sons, mad-man movements, genocides, mass rapes, mur-
ders of entire groups. The world is aghast, and yet the
world is delighted; it likes exciting things. Towns burned
down! Declarations!
“But, Don, we barely missed every damned one of
them. We were a little too early in every place. Here are
two dozen points in two worlds that have gone crazy, and
in every case the ruckus took place within several days of
our leaving. It's uncanny."
“No, it's canny enough, Finnegan," Don Lewis said. .
“The fires that have started in these coastal places will
bum till the whole little countries are consumed; and will
spread to others. The world is on fire, Finnegan. We've
been torching it with short fuses.”
“ "Will it burn up, do you think, Don?"
,
"I don't know. It hasn't quite before. They have better
technique every time they try it,” said Don Bamaby. No,
no! This was Don Lewis and not Don Bamaby! Finnegan
later became confused on them, but the historian must not
be confused on this point.
78
"Why do wethey—do it, Don? Don, you are looking
bad these days."
"I think we—they—are jealous of people, Finnegan.
Yes, I look bad; like a man who has not quite two weeks
to live, Finnegan? It's sad about my going so young."
It was luxurious here on the Grand Canary. They had
cleaned up and dressed. It was a night restaurant, grand
in the old manner, and they were the grandest things in it.
Papa Devil lacked only a monocle to look like Count
von Baummenbauch. Then Finnegan gasped. Papa Devil
popped the monocle into his face. He was perfect, the
great evil Count himself, the Devil masquerading as the
Count in perfect form.
Anastasia needed nothing at all to look like a high
Renaissance dream, Venetian surely (did you know that
Naxos was once Venetian?), as she had been in one of her
incarnations.
Marie Courtois looked like Lilith of the enchanted hair,
but much more exciting. Lilith had not such shoulders,
could not have stood out so golden in a crowd.
Finnegan was the very person of a Montenegran prince,
noble of nose and burned almost black. And nobody could
wear evening clothes like Finnegan.
Saxon X. Seaworthy could have been Merlin the
wizard, if wizardry paid as well as the line he was in.
There is something about high granite that not even traver-
tine marble can touch. What a face Seaworthy did have
when it came alive!
Joe Cross had his very youthful face now encircled with
a red beard. What younger brother of a king was he
anyhow?
Manuel the stowaway, clad by the bounty of Saxon
Seaworthy in evening clothes, was a distinguished and
weary old nobleman, one who habitually dined with cardi.
nals and ministers of state.
Orestes Gonof, the forgotten captain of the Brunhilde,
could have been a Phoenician sea captain come back to
the Grand Canary after a three thousand year absence.
Don Lewis, who already had the mark of death on him,
was attractive in his role. He had a fevered handsomeness,
and he would be the featured person in the next act of the
masque.
79
a
a
All of them were burned much blacker than their usual
color, and they had a sparkle on them as they talked
under the lights.
It happened that there were personages in the dining
room that night who would ordinarily be stared at. But it
was the personages instead who stared enraptured at the
party of Seaworthy and the Devil, and whispered about
him. For that was Saxon X. Seaworthy, the mysterious
millionaire (though some of the personages were as
wealthy), and that was the even more mysterious Papadi-
abolous. And these were likely some sort of exiled royalty
with them, for Seaworthy, among other things, had dealt
in exiled royalty. Whatever it was, some cabinet head in
some state would surely sleep less easily that night because
of them.
And they were an exiled royalty, exiled for thousands of
years, and returning and returning again and again. They
were timeless, and they were alive and vigorous.
So the personages gazed at the party from across the
room. And the waiter, who was a Guanche from before the
time of Spain, brought the brandy. They drank till it was
time for the dining room to close. Then they went to their
rooms in the hotel on the island that was once a volcano.
After this, things went rapidly. They went to Arrecife
on Lanzarote, and to Ifni; to Agadir, Magadar, Safti,
Mazagan, Casablanca, Rabat. They went to Tangier where
they stayed for three days. This was Tuesday, Wednesday,
and Thursday of the second week of lent.
2.
In Tangier something happened that had been hanging
like a storm, and it broke on the third day there. Dooms-
day morning was sullen, and it became an angry day full
of angry people.
Anastasia was sulky and scared. She would not go
walking with Finnegan, even to the casbah. “Oh, don't be
so damned childish,” she flared, and then she said "dear,"
as an afterthought. Well, of course it was childish, but all
80
travel and all new things are childish. She had been
crying. There was no getting at what was in her.
Finnegan met Joe Cross in the street and asked him to
come along and see if they could find anything exciting in
the town.
"Don't bother me, boy, don't get in my way," Joe
growled. “Stay out of the way or I'll show you something
exciting. It could be you."
This was unexpected. Joe was always friendly. Joe had
bulges. Joe was armed today.
Don Lewis had not been seen by anyone since early the
day before. Somebody said that he had jumped ship. And
yet there he was now, plain enough, standing in a little
lane and seeming to seek a shadow behind a group of
locals.
“Are you all right, Don?” Finnegan asked him, for
there did seem to be something different about Don today.
“You don't even know me, Finnegan!" Don croaked.
“My God, you don't know me. How could you know it
was me? Don't be near me. Don't even follow me. Just go
away somewhere. How do I know you're not the one?”
"I'm worried about you, Don.”
“Not as much as I am. But it can be you as well as any
of them. I'm telling you to stand off!"
Don was robed and hooded in what he must have be-
lieved was some native style, and his face was hidden. But
how does a man believe he can masquerade from those
who know him? Don Lewis also had a bulge on him that
even the robe couldn't hide. Everyone was armed and
unfriendly to Finnegan.
Either Finnegan had picked up a new stench unknown
to himself, or there was something odd afoot. Finnegan
did have the stenches that are common to casual travel,
but he didn't have any new ones.
And even the golden giantess was aloof.
“Darling, I would rather frolic with you than anyone
else in the world,” Marie said. “You know that. Ask me
again. Ask me every day, but not today. I have various
offices to visit and a tremendous amount of paper work to
accomplish. That is the penalty of being a secretary.”
Now Finnegan knew that the strangely talented Marie
Courtois could accomplish all paper work with amazing
speed, and she ate up agenda like apricots. What offices in
81
strange ports were visited were visited by Seaworthy and
his queer cronies. Work was unlikely to stand in the way
of pleasure with Marie.
And she couldn't be doing paper work strolling in the
street there, but at least she had no bulges other than
those normal to her,
Papa Devil was standing on a street comer and he
glanced icily at Finnegan.
“My God, Finnegan, I'd forgotten about you,” he blurt-
ed. "It had better not be you! How can I watch everyone
at once? I say it is not going to happen to him!”
"Why do you have to watch anyone, Papa Devil? Relax
a little. Come shoot a game of Kelly pool with me. I know
a place.”
But Papa Devil exploded with a profanity known only
by the Devil and used by him only in moments of stress.
Papa of the evil liver and disposition was in no mood to
talk to Finnegan or to anybody.
Seaworthy had taken hotel rooms for them these days.
He had more than usual business in Tangier.
It was a hunt today. The homs were blowing already if
you had ears for them. A death hunt, and Finnegan didn't
even know the predators from the prey.
Finnegan tried to keep track of his mates, but they all
scattered like a flock of blackbirds, and in all directions:
Don and Joe and Marie and Papa Devil and Manuel and
Orestes the captain and Art and Harry. The Devil himself
was loose in the streets, and it was the long last day of life
for someone.
So Finnegan wandered that day through the rich town
and the poor town, wondering how he could keep a friend
from getting killed, not knowing for sure which friend it
was, not sure what was going to happen, not knowing how
he knew that something was to happen.
He ate almonds and bumed sheep and drank lemonade
and Spanish wine. He talked to people in Spanish and
French. He also talked to people in Arabic, but they
looked at him in incomprehension, especially the Arabs.
Hell, Finnegan had been through a book on colloquial
Arabic on the trans-Atlantic voyage. It was put together
by a man named O'Leary. Would an Irishman do a man
wrong in this? But the Arabs did not recognize their own
language from the Finnegan mouth.
82
Finn played the finger-count game with a little Arab
boy. Finnegan had always thought the game was Italian,
but the boy said that they also had always had it. Finne-
gan and the boy pledged friendship for life, after which
the boy organized a valiant body of runners to keep
Finnegan informed. The little boys understood Finnegan
better than did the big people; they were smarter.
Fion bought small pieces of jewelry for Anastasia, and
a sort of white shawl or stole for himself. He wound it
around his head for protection from the sun, and let it
hang down.
He picked up the various spoors of his shipmates, and
noticed that some of them were following others. Three
who took one general direction were Don Lewis, still
robed in his inexplicable disguise as any sensor could
sense, and Marie, and Papa Devil; though they did not go
at the same time nor from the same places.
“I should be a tracker," Finnegan said. “I would be
good at it. I wonder if there is any money in the tracker
business today.”
Finnegan wandered out where the weeds were denser
and the shanties more sparse, hoping he would arrive at
the right place by the right time, not knowing if there was
a right time.
Why should Papa Devil have to watch everyone, and
who would watch Papa? If Papa didn't know what was
happening, who would know? Papa Devil knew every-
thing. Finnegan had to stop something, and didn't even
know where to start with it.
Then, with black apprehension, he knew that he was
missing it. Too late, he ran furiously where he was im-
pelled.
3.
Don Lewis was a coward. He had twice proclaimed
himself to be that. However, he was playing a rather loose
game for a coward, and he had been playing it for months
and perhaps years.
He had begun to assemble the nucleus of a resistance
on the Brunhilde itself, and he had established ingenious
83
communication to circumvent the directors of the ship. He
had brought about the appearance of Joe Cross, and
Manuel, and Anastasia, and done it deftly so that none
knew they were even a loose group. And it was Don's
communication that had brought about the resurrection of
the Devil, after he was murdered; but Don was totally in
the dark about a critical part of that happening. And Don
had brought about the appearance of Finnegan on the
scene, which Finnegan now dimly suspected. And Don had
also tilted the balance so that it was Finnegan who lived
and Dopey the seaman who died.
Don had misled the powers of the Brunhilde for a
while. At Campeche or at Paraiso, one of the seamen had
been killed and left behind, due to Don's careful shifting
on the suspicion from himself to that one. He'd had them
killing their own.
Now he had slipped, still not knowing how. They were
onto him, and it would be final. He had come to the long
last day of his life. He was loose in Tangier like a rat in a
burrow, and the snakes were in after him at every en-
trance. He must find sanctuary.
Don went to the consulate of his own country. He
wanted to claim protection from the stalking killers. But
he saw Saxon Seaworthy there, standing inside the build-
ing and talking to one of the officials. Don knew, as well
as if he had heard it, that Seaworthy was telling the
official that there was this seaman of his, and that he was a
looney. And Seaworthy would be believed. There was a
prime snake at this entrance of the burrow.
In rich town or poor town, in wide streets or narrow,
where can one best find safety? Would they hesitate to kill
him in a crowd, or would they kill him the more readily in
the confusion of the crowd? Some of the men of the
Brunhilde were not given to hesitating at all.
Art or Harty would kill him if they were told to kill.
Chris McAbney would have done it; but Chris, of course,
had long since been done for. Yet there was something of
that unpleasant dead man that followed Don Lewis now.
Must it be a hand of flesh that kills?
Captain Gonof himself might do it as his proper job, or
even one of Los Grandes, The Devil might do it. Was he
even sure of Joe Cross, now that Joe had become close to
Marie? Or Finnegan? But who was Finnegan really? Fin-
84
negan himself did not know that. What did anyone know
about Finnegan; what had he to recommend him, other
than that Anastasia trusted him? And that he had been
recommended by another man as shadowy as himself?
Finnegan may have been Seaworthy's man, and killing
may have been his specialty.
And who the devil was the Devil now? Papadiabolous
had once given Don Lewis the sign, known only to a man
Don had contacted distantly. How had Papa known to
give the sign? How had he intercepted? Anastasia had told
Don that the Devil might not be the same Devil. How
could be not be the same?
Don Lewis bolted in panic when he discovered that the
narrow street he had been walking during his introspection
was a dead end. He wouldn't be caught in a dead end;
he'd rather be caught in the absolute open. He retraced
his way, running, knocking into people. He came to a stop
in an open square.
"You are nervous?" a European man asked him. “You
are in trouble?” The man spoke in Spanish, but sounded
French.
"I am in deep trouble. It is for my life. I have to hide."
Don also spoke in Spanish, and sounded like an American
trying to sound like an Arab.
“There is such a place where you might go," the man
said. "Listen carefully.” Then the man told Don that there
was a man, at a certain junction of a certain street, who
would hide anyone for money. "You have money?” the
man asked.
“Yes. I have money. I will try anything. Thank you.'
Don found the street. He found the man who would
hide a man for money.
"You have come," said that man. "They said that it was
better to overestimate than to underestimate you. But they
didn't think you would know to come here."
“You know who I am?" Don breathed heavily. “You
know what I want?"
"It is my business to know. Naturally they contacted
me. I am the only one in this town who can hide a man,
and nobody can hide from me."
"Are you can hide me for money?"
“That is my business. I can hide you even from them,
for enough money. How much do you have?"
85
9
“Five hundred dollars American."
The face of the man twisted as if in a spasm. Don
thought that he was sick or stricken. Then he discovered
that the man was laughing at him.
"Five h-h-h-hundred," the man giggled. “Oh, it is such
light moments as this that I live for! Oh, you are the rich
one!”
“I don't understand,” Don gaped, shattered by his own
apprehensions.
“Five hundred dollars wouldn't be coffee money for me.
I wouldn't sell my own sister or betray my mother for so
small a sum. Five hundred dollars! That wouldn't keep a
nervous man in toothpicks one morning. Those who hunt
you would be shocked to know that you place so small
a value on your own life.”
“That's all I have!”
"Shall I phone for them to come for you here? I have a
room where they can take care of you with a minimum of
fuss. You can die clean. It will be better for everyone that
way. It's much better than dying with your face in the
dust."
Don bolted from that establishment. There was likewise
a snake at that entrance of the burrow. Seaworthy, of
course, would know about the man who could hide anyone
and who could not be hid from. Now Seaworthy would
know, likely he had already known, that his prey was
robed and hooded now.
Don's mind was working furiously and he missed no
detail. He worked to the shabby fringes of the city. He
knew that he had given Art and Harry the slip, and he
believed himself more than competent to deal with either.
Joe Cross seemed to be staying between the ship and the
hotel as though to watch both, and Don had no intention
of approaching either. And Don had lost Captain Gonof;
the captain had not seemed to be following seriously.
Papa Devil was following, but he was following uncer-
tainly; Don believed that he would be able to sense his
neamess. And he had tricked that damned Finnegan onto
a false trail for the moment.
Los Grandes, Seaworthy and Wirt and Gerecke, were
not likely to do it themselves, but they might have local
men do it. It was a chance to be taken. Don knew even
86
where were Manuel and De Polis, and every man of the
Brunhilde. Momentarily he was clear of every man of
them. He hoped to reach one of the near farmsteads
unobserved and to hide until darkness. He slunk through a
weed-grown shanty town. Every man was accounted for,
and he still might have a live chance.
Then one came down on him like a shimmering cloud
to kill him.
“Not you!" Don cried in unbelieving terror as he died,
"no, no, not you!"
4.
“Habib," said a little boy, one of the runners, “I have
found something."
"Habib, what have you found?" asked Finnegan, chok-
ing on his anger, afraid of what it was.
",
"Go to the bottom of the tell and look," the little boy
said. Then he ran away.
Finnegan went to the bottom of the tell. He had
already been heading there. He knew, with swelling frus-
tration and horror, what he would find.
At the bottom of the tell, in a weed patch, he found
Don Lewis dead. He was stripped of robe and hood, and
all his pockets had been turned inside out,
"They needn't have done that,” said Finnegan miser-
ably. "Whatever he carried, he carried in his head and not
his pockets. Don, I never knew you. We came so close,
and we never touched!”
There was no blood on Don except a trickle at the
mouth. He had been throttled and his neck was broken.
Hell, his neck had been wrung like a bird's!
Anyone from the ship might have killed Don, but who
would have the amazing strength to wring his neck like
that? Papa Devil could have done it. Papa was a giant.
But no other man of the Brunhilde could have done it. So
the game became very narrow.
Nobody was there except a curious goat, the only
eye-witness. The nearest shanty was fifty yards away;
there were only weeds, brush, and waste. But Finnegan
did not leave Don Lewis where he was. He looked for a
87
a
cleaner place. He carried Don a hundred yards to where
he found soft sand under the creepers, and he scooped out
a grave for him there.
This was clean sand here, and the creepers were from
aromatic bushes, not from weeds. It was soft, and Finne-
gan scooped and delved diligently, having only his hands
and a short hand-knife. But he had it about deep enough.
"Dig it deeper!" Papa Devil exploded like a crack of
thunder, his voice rumbling with hate. “Deeper, I say. It
will have to hold you both."
"Oh, go to Hell!” Finnegan told Papa Devil, himself
shaking with a conflict of emotions.
Finnegan was doubly upset. He hadn't suspected that
Papa Devil was nearly so close. He had thought that the
steps following him from the bottom of the tell were those
of the curious goat.
Not only was a friend murdered, but the Devil had
already come to claim both the friend and himself. Finne-
gan placed the body of Don Lewis in the shallow grave in
the sand.
"Go to Hell!” Finnegan told the Devil again. "Be off.
I'm cloudy in my mind. I can't wake from it with you
standing there.
“I wasn't sure you would be cool when you came to
your end,” said Papa Devil thickly out of a distorted face.
"Many are not cool. You seem to have a talent for
digging graves and burying people, Finnegan. Once you
buried me. Now I will bury you."
But Finnegan was too furious to be scared yet. He had,
moreover, a prior duty to perform. He ministered to the
body of Don Lewis, or Timothy Lorrigan, or whomever
the dead man was. He made him comfortable there, and
prayed quickly that the perpetual light should shine on
him.
"I wonder if he will be puzzled when the body isn't
found where it was supposed to be," said Papa Devil, still
talking tightly, “and I wonder if anyone will miss you at
all, Finnegan?”
“You're a fool, Papa, a fool,” Finnegan said with con-
tempt. "I couldn't have done it. But you could have. Look
out. I wake up from it now.”
And Papa Devil had become a little unsure. "Yes, I see
88
>
now that you couldn't have killed him like that, Finnegan.
You're not the man for it.”
“And you are, Papa Devil. I believe you did it. But if
not, or if I am able to call you to account here, then he
will be puzzled. He will think that another of his dead did
not stay dead.”
Finnegan had done all he could do for Don Lewis
except the last thing.
“I will leave it open,” he announced evenly. “It is going
to hold two all right. Either you go in the grave, Papa, or
I do. One of us dies right now!"
Finnegan was out of the grave like a shrike, his hand-
knife dangerously in his hand,
And encountered empty air!
Papa Devil was nowhere to be seen. Only the curious
goat was there. It was unsettling the way Papadiabolous
appeared and disappeared. Finnegan knew that Papa Dev-
il did not tum from goat to man and back again, but that
was the seeming of it.
Still trembling, Finnegan covered Don Lewis with sand,
burying him properly and alone. Then, as a little clarity
came to Finnegan, he knew that Papa Devil was not the
killer.
And he knew who was.
5.
Finnegan found Marie Courtois in her hotel room. He
could hear her ecstatic breathing inside, but she would not
answer his knock. She was cooing and making strange
noises.
When Finnegan broke in she did not see him. Lying
across the bed on her back, she was smiling in quiet
rapture, eyes half-closed and focused distantly. A bright
silver slaver like the trail of a snail ran down her chin. She
was in a transport of delight and gave little squeals of
demented joy. She was clear crazy.
Finnegan could not rouse her with blows or slaps or
choking. He knelt on her, he stood on her to break her
catalepsy. And it broke slowly.
Marie came half awake, stretching like a big cat, still
89
a
only half aware of who Finnegan was. He struck her
savagely, but she manacled him easily with her two hands.
"It was wonderful, Finn darling. I could almost have
eaten him also. In a way it was to be intimate with him,
who wouldn't otherwise be so with me, I have even
forgotten his name, and forever, but the thing itself I will
not forget. Nobody should know about it, and yet I want
the whole world to know. Oh, you'll never understand it if
you haven't done it! This will sing me to sleep tonight.”
No man of the Brunhilde except Papa Devil had the
strength to kill a man as Don Lewis had been killed. But a
woman, Marie Courtois, if she were indeed a woman, had
such strength when taken by the earthy passion. And the
titaness was completely insane.
She was still in transport, but now her eyes had the
alertness of a tigress. She was a great cat in the room and
watching Finnegan's every move. Finnegan was sick with
revulsion. Momentarily unarmed, he was powerless to kill
her.
He remembered Joe Cross prowling and puzzling in the
streets outside. Now he was sure of Joe. He went out and
found Joe and told him about it.
Joe had a gun, and they started back in to kill Marie.
But Papadiabolous, once more appearing suddenly,
disarmed Joe, and said that it wasn't the time for that yet.
Finnegan began to see the line-up, and to understand
for the first time that Papa wasn't a Devil, and that most
of the rest were.
Saxon Seaworthy was puzzled when the body wasn't
found where Marie had reported it was, where it was
supposed to be; and he did wonder whether another of his
dead had not stayed dead. There had been some embar-
rassment when he reported that one of his seamen had
been murdered by native toughs for his money, and the
seaman was not where he was reported to be, was not
anywhere at all. The little policemen wanted to know
who had started such a story and why. But soon the big
policemen disembarrassed the little policemen of their
curiosity, for Seaworthy was highly connected.
That evening there were flares and flashlights around
the spot where Don Lewis had died, but he was not found
there. And Finnegan who could do the Don Lewis voice,
90
who could do almost any voice, taunted Saxon Seaworthy
out of the dark in the voice of Don Lewis. Ah, there
would be tension in that man Seaworthy! Finnegan also
did the Chris McAbney voice a little later. There was
black fun in it.
They left Tangier in the morning.
Marie Courtois was now out of favor with almost
everyone. She was hated by one group because they knew
she was the murderess of Don Lewis. She was distrusted
by the other group because they were afraid she had
botched a job and had not killed after all. And it had been
a job that Marie had been asking for for a long time.
6.
After this, it was sheer travel along the North African
littoral, and the Mediterranean, and Sicily, and Greece.
These scenes of the last three weeks before the catastro-
phe were the scenes that Finnegan painted for the rest of
his rather short life, whenever he was in the condition or
mood to work at his trade: sky blue splendor, as seen
through the eyes of one who was member of both the
human races, and the aspect of death behind that beauty.
At Palermo Finnegan was in his glory and talked Italian
with every idler who would join him, unul he found that
Papadiabolous could do the Sicilian better than he. At
Palermo also Finnegan got his mail for the first time since
leaving the States. No matter how he got it, he got it:
letters from his other life, from friends in New Orleans
and St. Louis and Chicago; also one from Mr. X from
nowhere at all. But it was a thing peculiar here: Finnegan
now doubted that it was himself who had lived that other
life; these cherished friends were as those known at second
hand, Imown to somebody else and the knowledge merely
transferred to him. It seemed not the Finnegan here
present who had been in that other life; it was some other
Finnegan in some other context.
Then there was Messina, whence they jumped to Zakin-
thos, a Greek thing and thus within the sphere of
Anastasia. It was here that Finnegan first began to feel
that he was on alien ground and the rest were at home.
91
Then in a sudden change, Finnegan felt that he was
indeed of the oldest and most other people of them all.
This was the region where the duality was strongest.
For Saxon X. Seaworthy himself was Greek, though
nobody looked less so. Papa Devil was at home here; for,
though the Devil himself is of unknown nationality and is
a true cosmopolitan, yet Cosmopolis itself is the Greek
idea,
Orestes Gonof, at the first approach of a Greek island,
raised his head like a colt that smells rain and revealed his
origin.
After a few days they came to Naxos, the home of
Ariadne and the white wine. And also the home of Ana-
stasia Demetriades who claimed descent from the fishtail
people.
It was March 14th, Passion Sunday.
92
Chapter Eight
ANASTASIA DEMETRIADES
The Isles of Greece, the Isles of Greece,
Where Anastasia rose and shone,
Where others found another peace,
And I had found a peace mine own,
And if it lasted but a day
Then how much longer should it stay?
Was here the girl with purple eyes
And here the touch of Grecian fire;
And bound a day the Bel of lies
Who scuttled Nineveh and Tyre.
Eternal summer's not begun,
And we sit waiting for the sun.
Was here we walked in Paradis
Where we'll yet walk a later while,
For I had found the Isle of Bliss
That almost was on Naxos Isle.
And all my friends who here were led
Were with me, if they were not dead.
.
-Unwritten poems of Finnegan
1.
Now, as Finnegan had been a sinner since arriving at
Freetown, and as it was already Passion Sunday, he
wanted to make his Easter Duty and change his ways. As
this was Orthodox land, it would be hard to find a priest
to hear his confession before Mass, as it would require
one who understood English or Italian. Finnegan's Ro-
maic, in spite of close association with Anastasia since
early November, would not suffice for the shriving, nor
93
a
would any sort of pidgeon; for Finnegan had intricate sins
which required full expression.
But a young Capuchin priest was spotted at the first
sortee. He was a dagol He had to be. But he said he was
Greek; he must have been confused about himself. He
spoke the Italian well enough, but he chided Finnegan for
his ignorance.
"That a young man named Solli should not know better
Greek, that is too bad. Though the fault is History's and
not your own, yet it is a fault. Do you know that it is only
by an unfortunate accident that the Italians speak Italian?
They should talk Greek, like men in their full heritage.
“Did you know that there was once a Naxos on Sicily?
It was the first of all Greek colonies in what now pertains
to Italy, and was in the seventh century before Christ. The
colonists were from this very island, and it was for our
own place that the new Naxos was named. Who could
guess then that it would go wrong?
“Then, accidentally, that Rome thing got out of hand,
and moved down over all the peninsula and Sicily as well.
It was there, as you tell me, that your own people came
from; for the Naxos of Sicily was only sixty miles from
your Messina."
They went in then for the Capuchin to hear Finnegan's
confession, in spite of his being a barbarian of insufficient
Greek.
“Bless me, father," Finnegan said. "I have been on the
drink for some weeks and have lived as a bare sinner. Yet
it seems that it is not myself who does these things, but
another person inside me.”
“It is yourself who does them," the priest said. “It is a
common transference to blame them on another."
“I know that, but this is something else. My old mem-
ories are now once removed, as though they belonged to
someone else. I have a new set of memories now: that
I am of the Devil's kindred, that I belong on a murky
crusade, that I must tear down and subvert and inflame. I
am of a different blood than I had believed. There is an
old animal in me, and it begins to take me over, I doubt if
I am human in the accepted sense. I'm of another recen-
sion.'
“This is a much rarer state than the other, but it is not
unheard of. And I do not believe it is imaginary. There is
94
another kindred. I have been convinced of this for some
time. Well, we must assume that salvation is for that other
kindred as well, but nothing will ever be easy for you. I
absolve you."
"You can absolve me, but can you absolve the animal
inside me?”
"I absolve your person here present, in all its aspects."
After confession and after Mass in the very small
church, Finnegan met Anastasia, and they had breakfast
with Papadiabolous the Devil at a breakwater cafe. Papa
was cryptic today, and it seemed as though he and
Anastasia had a secret. This was peculiar, for the only one
of the Brunhilde that Anastasia ever shared secrets with
was Finnegan.
"There has been a bird on the main stack of the
Brunhilde for days," Finnegan said. "He sticks there and
will not leave."
“Yes, a bird, a gannet," Papa Devil said.
"Manuel says that it means someone else will die," said
Finnegan.
"Manuel knows that someone else will die," Papa said,
"and it wasn't a bird who told him."
“Will you answer me some questions, either you or
Anastasia, Papa?"
“A few. But everything will not be cleared up for you."
“Did Don Lewis know who you are, Papa? I don't
I
know, but did he know?"
"No. He didn't know, and there was no point in telling
him. Though he was the one who contacted me at a
distance, yet he didn't know me when I arrived; he didn't
know that anyone had arrived. I stepped into an old pair
of shoes when I came.
"I am a grown man," Finnegan said, “and old for my
age. May I not be told the plot?"
"Why, Finnegan, it's simply the old game of monsters
and men, of Policia y Ladrones, of the Beneficient and the
Maleficient.”
"You mean cops and robbers?"
"An apt phrase. I could never tum one. But the cops
and the robbers are only partly of the same species. It is
really a game of counter-agents and counter-counter-
agents. There are two groups of a different basic, and the
dialogue will have to be talked out in blood. We come to
95
99
a
>
the narrow way now. I have not played the Devil for a
game. Anastasia has only recently known that I am not
the old Devil. For a long time I was not sure that you
knew, Finnegan, even though you drew the face that I
will wear tonight, and perhaps will die in.
“That was a good old ship we were on, though she kept
bad company. I do not believe that any of us three will
ever board her again. However we leave here, it will be by
another boat, my own, or Charon's."
“I'm not as afraid as I was at Tangier,” Anastasia said.
"From what I overheard there, I thought that I was the
one to be killed. If I go now, I hope that the Marie goes
too, but not at the same time. I'd like to have a few minutes
start on her. I'd be afraid of her in the narrow way; I
understand it is very narrow just a few seconds after one
dies, and she would be waiting for me there. That's the
only thing I'm afraid of."
"Papa Devil, who was Dopey the seaman?" Finnegan
demanded.
"Why, he was your own fetch, your own double, Finne-
gan, just as I was the close double of another,"
“People do not have doubles literally, not ghostly ones
who disappear and are absorbed into one.'
"Well, maybe non-people have them, Finnegan, and we
all three here belong to the Non-people. I'm not sure how
close his duality with you was. But Dopey was also of the
strange blood, he was a seaman who was also a sometime
killer, and Seaworthy had sent for him to kill the man
named Papadiabolous. When you appeared, Seaworthy
mistook you for Dopey, and you do look remarkably
alike. There is quite a bit of confusion concering the night
that you and Seaworthy buried the first me, and if you
cannot clear it up, I cannot. You were there and I
wasn't."
“Papa, how did you kill Dopey and leave no body?”
"I'm not sure which of us killed Dopey, Finnegan. The
idea that you rejected may be the true one, that he was
your ghostly fetch, and that he disappeared and was
absorbed into you. Sometime, Finnegan, if you happen to
think of it, and if you find that you are alive at the time,
you may want to take a hand in this yourself. I hope that
you will be alive, but there is a mutually exclusive affair
here. Not all of us who came here on the Brunhilde can
96
13
99
be alive at this time tomorrow. Finnegan, do you know
.
what a tiger looks like turned inside out?”
“Yes, he would be a six-foot-four, three hundred pound
hunk of bologna encased in the membrane of his own
duodenum. In fact, he would look a lot like you, Papa.
"I'm glad you think so, for I'm talking about myself."
"But the converse isn't true, Papa. When you tum a
piece of bologna inside out, it doesn't become a tiger."
“I hope you're wrong. I was a tiger once, and I intend
to be again. I will disappear after dark tonight and try to
regrow my lost stripes. And when I come back as a tiger I
hope that they will not know me.
"Finnegan, there is a little boat which we call Shouakh,
and it is spelled Se-a-b-a-c-h. Isn't that a funny way to
spell it, Finnegan? And you use an Irish pickname, but
you wouldn't know that."
“I know that it means a hawk, but what is the hawk?"
"Oh, it's my little boat. It doesn't go very fast; but, like
the hawk, it is there suddenly. I wish that I could promise
you a ride on the Hawk, as a smaller man gave you a ride
on a bigger boat. We may all ride on her tomorrow, in the
event that all goes well with us. But it is very small; it
doesn't even have a bar."
“Tomorrow seems pretty uncertain," Finnegan said.
“I'll be surprised if the sun even rises.'
"There's the further difficulty that it may tum into a
double ambush," Papa Devil said. “My hawk may be
tangled by a Retiarius waiting for her. Our antagonist is
very clever, and he seems to be following into our trap
too easily. It's a risk that might kill us all."
"You are cheerful this moming, Papa Devil,” Anastasia
said.
"In rare good humor, the mark of a fool. I hope you
two children have a happy day of it. It is possibly your
last day on Earth, and it will be nice to have a happy one
to look back upon. I hear you are to have a sort of picnic.
"If I never see you again, Finnegan, and I doubt that I
shall, I will be sorry that we hadn't gotten better acquaint-
ed. My own personality is a sharper one than that of Papa
Devil, and it's a loss that you couldn't have known it. You
are the only one who learned without being told that I
wasn't really Papadiabolous. And perhaps I am the only
one who divines that there is more to you than Finn the
97
1)
Gin. You say that you have never been able to touch any
human person. But we are both partly human, and we
could have touched. I wish I were going with you today; I
haven't had a carefree day in years.'
“We wish you were going too, Papa,” Anastasia said,
"but with you, three would be a multitude."
a
9
2.
Finnegan and Anastasia had rented a donkey, loaded it
with two paniers, and gone to visit Anastasia's grandmoth-
er, the matriarch of the Demetriades. This was a winding
road, uphill for four miles.
Anastasia rode the donkey a while. Then Finnegan
a
knocked her off it, stood on her for mounting block while
she was on hands and knees in the dust, and rode the
donkey in her place. She pulled him off, rolled him in the
road, and trampled on him. Anastasia rode Finnegan a
while. Then Finnegan rode Anastasia. She was so little
that his feet dangled in the dust wbile he rode on her
back. Then they ran up the hill and whistled to the
donkey, and he followed them like a dog.
They were the three happiest people in the world.
People are often happiest when they are spooked or under
a cloud, just before it breaks open. It was mid-March and
the sun had been climbing for several hours. They ran
quite a ways and then stopped at a farm house.
"Thispo poly," Anastasia told the lady there, and they
and the donkey were given a drink at the well.
“Kathisate,” said the lady, but they had no time, and
went on up the road.
"Who of your family is left?” Finnegan asked,
“I don't know. My grandmother, at least, I think, I feel.
Maybe others. Surely there will be someone here."
"Will they understand about you and me, that it is all
right with us?”
“Oh yes. You are my brother now. We could give Plato
lessons, you and I. Plato wasn't very platonic bimself. It
takes people like us to develop his ideas for him."
“How do we explain to people about the donkey?"
"He does make us look like an old married couple. We
98
could pass off a child with some story or other, but how
do you explain a donkey? We'll just have to pretend that
we don't know him. Sorry, Papapaleologus, we love you,
but we can't let on that we know you. Stop walking
between us. You stay three steps behind."
The donkey was named Papapaleologus, being a lineal
descendant of the last Roman Emperors of the East.
“I think I'll tell Papapaleologus the story about the
donkey who married the lady zebra," Finnegan said.
“I have heard it,” the donkey signalled. He did this by
letting both ears drop wearily.
Naxos is twelve miles square and has a mountain in the
middle of it. There are figs and olives and lemons and
grapes. And honey. They make a white wine there. And
they mine emery. The farm of the Demetriades was up
the mountain road.
Hardly anyone still lived on the mountain except the
grandmothers. But even Finnegan knew the grandmother
herself when they came up to her. She was black-haired
and black-eyed.
“I am Anastasia Granddaughter," Anastasia said, but at
first the grandmother pretended not to know her.
“I have so many granddaughters, and such a lot of
them went to France and to America. Anyone can come
along nowadays and say she is my granddaughter, and
who is to know the difference? There must be a dozen a
week."
“But I used to live with you in the summer. I used to
play on that rock pile.”
“So they all say. There were so many, Irene and Helen
and Mary."
“But only one Anastasia. You know mel You know me.
We play a game in this."
And of course Anastasia Grandmother had known her
immediately. Anastasia Gyiagyia (grandmother) spoke
Romaic only, which Papapaleologus the donkey under-
stood perfectly, and Anastasia Engone (granddaughter)
almost all, and Finnegan whom Anastasia had taken for
her brother only about half. There was, however, perfect
understanding among the four of them, and no need for
translating
The house had once been larger, and not all of it was
now used. Some of the old rooms were fire-damaged and
99
had been boarded off. There had been some hardship here
and Anastasia Grandmother was the only one left.
But it hadn't darkened her mood. She was vital and
pretty, she had been prettier than Anastasia Granddaugh-
ter, though fairly destitute. She would have been able to
feed a small family of visiting mice, but that was all. She
wouldn't have been able to feed a large family of visiting
mice.
Finnegan unloaded the paniers that Papapaleologus had
carried up the hill; and spread out bread, oil, honey, eggs,
coffee, cheese, wine, pickles, sugar, rice, tea, milk, flour,
salt, chocolate, and tobacco. Then Finnegan and Anastasia
went to a neighbor and bought a kid.
Finnegan was a town boy and he had never killed a kid.
They put it on a flat rock, and Anastasia showed him
how. They skinned the kid, split it out, cleaned it, cut it
up, and left it in charge of Anastasia Grandmother. Then
they went further up the mountain, in company of the
donkey, while Anastasia Grandmother made the dinner.
They stopped and bought a skin bottle of wine at one of
the farms. Then they climbed to the top of the mountain.
“From here you can see all of the island, and half a
dozen other islands," said Anastasia, "and the smallest of
them over there is where I was born. You can watch all
the seaways from here. For a reason which I will not tell
you, but which you have guessed a little, I may spend
some hours up here tonight. We can leave the skin bottle
up here in the fork of the bush; then we'll have something
to pass the time if you want to keep me company. There
will be a moon all the early night, and then it will be
down a few hours before dawn. Then I must watch."
"For what, my eccentric little sister?"
"A boat that should come to the island in the very dark
A
hours, and I must signal it, if there is not another signal
from below first. It isn't hard to do, but it scares me. I
will signal out of this very narrow glen here, and my
signal can only be seen in a narrow sector.”
They went back down to Anastasia Grandmother's for
the dinner. They ate and drank outdoors at a little table.
Eating and drinking are ordinary things; everybody does
them. Yet this was somehow remarkable: to be eating
outside of a little farm house on the side of a blue
mountain on a Greek Island. There was a blue haze in the
100
a
air that was not a cloud, but only something to filter the
SUN.
"The sky is different over the different lands and is-
lands," said Finnegan. “It depends on whether they bum
brush or faggots or pine or hard wood or turf or coal or
gas or dung. Each of these raises a different haze. You
may not have noticed it, Anastasia Engone, but all this
fall and winter and spring, when we were going up and
down the coasts, we could always tell what they burned on
the shores. It's been centuries since anyone has seen the
sky as it really is, even here. But soon it will be all electric
heat, or solar, or atomic. Then the color of the sky will be
the one we have not seen since that morning when Prome-
theus came down. Do you remember that moming?"
"Sure. Gee, it was cold,” said Anastasia Granddaughter.
"You could not remember. You were too little," said
Anastasia Grandmother.
They stayed and talked with Anastasia Grandmother till
evening.
"You are one of the violent ones, those of the other
blood," Anastasia Grandmother said to Finnegan.
“I don't know what it is. It may be that I am.”
"I am of it,” said Anastasia Grandmother. “And my
granddaughter here is of it a little."
101
Chapter Nine
DIANA ARTEMIS
There are creatures who are of unredeemable species
and are denied the gift of eternal life. In place of this,
they are given very long sublunar life. Some of these
live for thousands of years, as flesh, as ghost returning
irregularly as flesh, and as continuing legend. Most are
evil. Some are indifferent or even helpful, but in no case
are they to be trusted. They are on shores and moun-
tains and islands. Some of them are on our own island.
SAINT BRENDON, Trachtas
1.
Finnegan and Anastasia went back up the mountain.
Finnegan had acquired a bottle of gin in addition to
another skinful of wine. He had a premonition, and gin
has always been a sovereign against premonitions. Finne-
gan had his sea jacket.
Anastasia had a blanket and shawl from her grandmoth-
er's, and a magic lantem from somewhere. The magic
lantem was not a projector. It was an assembly of reflect-
ing mirrors and a lantem. It was in a sort of binnacle
case from some old boat.
They found a flat clean rock and sat down for the vigil
that was still puzzling to Finnegan. Anastasia seemed
anxious and worried.
"Your boat, it isn't coming from the mainland?” Finne-
gan asked.
“Who said something about a boat?”
"You said something about a boat. Papa Devil said
quite a bit about a boat. Why else are we here? What else
is it then, a sea gull, or a sea plane? Where will the Hawk
come from?"
"The hawk just appears suddenly. The hawks have their
102
a
nests in the sky, just out of sight. Everybody knows that.
Then they swoop down.”
"I could watch one sector if you would tell me what to
watch for. Is it coming from Rhodes, or Crete, or Anatol-
ia, or Egypt, or Lebanon?""
“No. I have to watch for myself, Finn. I don't want you
to get involved. Of course, we will probably get you
killed, but we don't want to get you involved. Or this
might not be the night. But this has to be the night."
There were quite a lot of cow bells and sheep bells.
There were bells around the landings and on some of the
little boats. Some of the buoys out on the shipways had
bells that clanged as they rolled with the rollers. And there
were dinner bells in many of the farm yards with a rope
pull from the kitchen window.
"The bells are the only things left here from the bronze
age,” Finnegan said, "the only things that cannot be made
better than out of bronze. Here it is perfect, for the whole
island is a rock and it vibrates with them."
The moon was already high in the sky when the sun
went down. It was March and it would get chilly. Now the
moon suddenly lit up, like a light controlled by an astro-
nomical switch to come on at a certain time of dusk.
"You have to see it here to understand how the old
Greeks were so mistaken about the sun and the moon
when they were mistaken about very little else,” Finnegan
said. “They estimated their size, some as big as a wash
basin, some as big as a wagon wheel, some as big as a
bam or a ship, but none of them believed them really
huge. They appear so close, the moon particularly, here.
"Galen estimated the moon's size from a Goat-Sucker
that he saw fly behind it and emerge from the other side.
This took the time of twelve wing beats, and indicated a
large moon, as big as a large ship. He thought that it
would take a very high tower to reach it, since catapults
had never been able to do so. There is the further difficul-
ty that the moon may be nearer at night, for it is only at
night that birds have actually been seen to fly behind it."
"If any bird is able to fly behind it, it is this same
Goat-Sucker,” Anastasia said, "I saw one do it just then.
If he didn't go behind it, where did he go? And there he
appears again! He was behind it after all."
There was a chorus of cicadas about them and below.
103
And Papapaleologus the donkey was chomping grass in
the narrow glen beneath their feet. The moon lacked a
week of being full, but the night was very bright. Here on
top was nothing but rocks and gnarled old branches and
stump trees. That is the way the top of the world always
looks. But by Greek moon it was even stranger. Moonlight
is different in Greece. As you know, it was the Greeks who
invented the moon.
Anastasia sat on the blanket and could see the sea on
all sides of the island. Finnegan lay with his head on her
lap. Her legs were the color of moonlight and her head
was like that of Diana.
Not the Diana of Nemi or Ephesus over whom the
silversmith Demetrios and St. Paul quarreled. St. Paul
was right to oppose Demetrios in this. Demetrios always
made the heads of his Dianas too large and pasty, and the
silver color did not become them.
But that other Diana, Diana Artemis the bringer of
light; she whose little statue Pausanius saw at Messene in
the sanctuary of Asclepius, she who was painted marble
of a natural expression. Or the little Diana Artemis of
cypress wood that stood on the stoa of the temple at
Delos so many years ago. That is what Anastasia's head
was like.
Finnegan's head was that of a gargoyle, but no matter.
They also are noble, or at least they are fitting on a night
like this.
Finnegan strung verses together as he lay with his head
in her lap. And because he identified fourteen bells, eight
from the land and six from the sea, he made it a sonnet;
which word means a little bell as well as a little song:
I've seen the ending darkly through a glass,
The last I tipped, the last time I was fried,
And that old sacred snake that never died
Has bit the world and left it in its grass.
I rue to see its final agony;
The world was mighty rum and mighty queer,
Now only Anastasia is here
And Papapaleologus and me.
We three have flown the world and left it there,
And mourn its end, and us, and what shall be;
104
And may God help us when the moon shall drop!
And now there come night thoughts to raise our hair,
And now there is a Hawk upon the Sea,
And Oreads upon the mountain top.
a
“Have you a piece of paper and a pencil in your
pocket?” Finnegan asked Anastasia.
"I have. And why do you want them?”
“I made a sonnet. I want to write it down before I
forget it.”
“It's too dark. Go to sleep."
"But I always make them at night, and I never get to
write them down. In the morning I forget them. What if
Laura hadn't given Petrarch a piece of paper and a pencil
when he wanted them?"
"You go to sleep."
"It's real good and you're in it.”
"I'm sure it is. Go to sleep."
2.
Six men in a little boat were coming out of Anatolia.
They were coming towards the blind side of Naxos, the
side opposite the harbor. The boat looked as though it had
been cobbled together by drunken Irish carpenters out of
Hogan's alley; and parts of it had been. Its sail was too
big for it, and its donkey engine too small. Yet it could
take the wind and move. The name on it was the Seabach,
but it was to be found in no registry. It hadn't a proper
log, or a business-like listing of the crewmen.
The log consisted of random notations, cryptic jottings
in some kind of number code, and private notes of
amounts of winnings and losings at cards. The roster did
not give the crewmen by name, but it did give an incisive
description of each, though in an unusual form that is
sometimes called doggerel:
Was one a Bloke, and one a Black,
And one a Buck, and one a Smasher,
And one a Clerk, and one a Hack,
And one a bleeding Haberdasher,
105
0
Seven men that would indicate; but there were only six
men on the craft. The seventh man, the leading man of
them all, the Smasher, had been on distant leave from
them. Now he awaited them very near.
The buck of a man was only a boy. He would stay on
the craft till the end and use it as a ram. The black man
wore a little pearl-gray derby hat that was too small for
him; he was a clown in his moments. The bloke wore a
digger hat, filthy with old grease. The clerk and the hack
were the navigator and the engineer, and the haberdasher
was acting captain and pilot. But they were all men of
some talent or they would not have been there; and they
would gamble on the short end of the stick.
It did not seem a disciplined group, but it had a solid
unity. They all wore olive shirts that were a sort of
uniform. They had Enfield rifles of old British issue, but
they had nothing else in common.
The Seabach coasted into the blind side of Naxos after
dark, signaled but once with its light, and thereafter gave
no signal at all. Later, there might or might not be a
signal to them from a narrow glen in the mountain, and
they might or might not heed it. Likely they would go
ahead with what they intended to do regardless of any
signal.
They were, in fact, doing it shortly after midnight. Five
of the men came ashore around the shoulder of the island,
and the sixth man took the boat off again. The five men
followed a path, and a road, and another path, the in-
formation of them having come to them partly from maps
too small and undetailed, and partly from the childhood
memories of a girl. Nevertheless, they followed these ways
in the dark.
The one man on the boat, the young buck of a man,
would take the thing around by himself, and at the proper
moment he himself alone would launch an attack from the
sea, coming in with gun and spotlight to take attention
away from the men raiding from the shore side. It was a
loose plan that had been worked out by a loose sort of
man who hadn't much to work with.
Meanwhile, on the Brunhilde, an old Retiarius waited,
his nets ready. He had his own love for a fight and his
own tactics. He could smell a trap half-way around a
world, and his nets were adaptable. With the old netman
106
were his two cronies, Gerecke and Wirt. They may have
been set down as nonentities, but they weren't; they were
cockeyed old foxes who had been in battles before. There
were some who had wondered what they were good for.
Now they were like to find out.
And sometime in the middle of the night, a big man
slipped off the Brunbilde to try his hand once more at
being a tiger, to regrow his lost stripes.
3.
Finnegan dreamed a while on the mountain, and the
Oreads came. They were three girls who emerged from
the bushes and signaled to him. And he went and talked to
them.
"We are three Oreads," they said, "and our names, as
you may have guessed, are Anemotrephes and Akroreia
and Oreibates. Anastasia is our sister. She will be with us
after tonight. But you will never be able to see her again
unless you are on the right mountain at the right time. Or
rather, you will not see her until long after, when the
world is remade and we will all be resolved together. But
that is not for us now."
"It will never be for you,"
be for you," Finnegan told them.
“Oreibates has the mark of the polypus on her wrist, and I
believe the other two also have it dimly. I didn't know
that Oreads were of that kindred, but I should have
guessed."
“Oh, we have no such marks," they told him. “We are
Oreads and no other thing, and we try to explain the
,
night's business to you. Anastasia has taken you for her
brother, so you are our brother also. But after it has
happened to her, do you not stay here. Go as far and as
fast as you can. This isn't the time for you yet.”
"You're talking in your sleep,” Anastasia said. “Who
are you talking to?”
"Anemotrephes and Akroreia and Oreibates,” Finnegan
told her, half awakening.
"I didn't know that you knew them.”
“They said they were your sisters."
"
107
“I've often suspected that they are. Why should we let
millennia separate sisters? But regular people can't talk to
them. You must belong to the other people, Finnegan. I
was pretty sure that you did.”
Finnegan saw that, though it was several miles down
the mountain by the road, yet one could go down rapidly
if he went down sheer. It was hardly four hundred feet
down the face of the cliff, and was bushed and brambled
all the way. A careful man might pick his way down there
in the daytime, or a foolhardy man at night. Finnegan
liked to know all the doors that led out of a place,
whether it was a room or a mountain.
But he dreamed again almost immediately while the sea
boomed around the island. The Oreads were still there but
he could not come up to them. He had thought that they
were already on the top of the mountain, but this was not
so. They were only on the top of a little mountain; there
was a bridge that he had not noticed before and it led to
the bottom of a brand new mountain.
This was different from most mountains in that it had a
light inside it and was translucent like ice. And yet it was
a mountain in its essence.
There was a sparkle on everything. Finnegan climbed
very high after the Oreads. He liked to watch their beauti-
ful ankles and knees as they climbed. The rocks were like
fox-fire, and the trees like jewels. They climbed so high
that the first mountain shrank to a very small rock with
moss on it down under the moon. But he couldn't catch
the Oreads.
"You can't come with us," they told him. “You don't
belong up here yet. Even people can't come up here.
Certainly a teras or a drakon cannot come here."
"I'm a person, I'm not a teras or drakon," Finnegan
insisted. “I want to climb to the top of the mountain."
“Even we haven't done that, and we live here. We
climb forever, but we never reach the top. And if we
cannot, then a teras cannot."
He followed them yet, and their heels sparkled like
gems above him.
"You be as much teras as I," he called up to them.
"No, we are not," Anemotrephes insisted. “How did you
know that we are?” Akroreia asked sadly. “It is our
108
>
destitution and destruction," Oreibates keened, “but we try
to climb up to the light. You have to go. You know too
much."
Then they pushed Finnegan off the mountain. He fell a
very long way down: three leagues, a parasang, a stadia
and a half. He tumed over and over as he fell through the
air. But he was unhurt in the landing, and came to rest
with his head on the knees of Anastasia which were very
like those of her sisters the Oreads. This he hadn't noticed
before.
"Who were you dreaming about that time?” Anastasia
asked him.
“The same three girls. They pushed me off the moun-
tain."
“I knew they would. You didn't have any business up
there. How do you know my sisters so well?”
“I never met the girls before tonight. They said I
was a teras, a drakon."
"You are, Finnegan. So am I. So are they a little. But
we try to make amends. Whatever would happen to peo-
ple if some of us didn't help them?"
The moon went down, and there was nothing but star
light and a few lantems by the landing.
"How will you see the boat, or the hawk, when it
comes?” Finnegan said. “Will it show a light?"
"No. I think it has already come. No, it won't show a
light till it begins."
.
Finnegan didn't doze off. He entered a sleep vigorously
as though shouldering his way through a door. There was
an old teras sitting on the ground in a cave, or at the foot
of a cliff. The teras had a face made out of gloomy
granite.
“If we were first, how did they get ahead of us?”
Finnegan asked the teras.
"I don't know, boy, I don't know," the old teras mut-
tered dumbly.
"And which are the aliens, ourselves, or them?” Finne-
gan also was sitting on the ground.
"It is always the others who are the aliens, boy."
"I feel other. Why do we destroy them?"
“I don't know, boy, I don't know."
109
“And why do some of us revolt against the revolt?”
“Treachery, treachery, or perhaps it has another name if
you say it in another tone."
"Which one of us was sitting here on the sidewalk first?”
"I don't know what is sidewalk, boy, I sit here a long
time, and you as long as you wish.”
The next time that Finnegan awakened he was alone on
the blanket. He had a steep feeling of bereavement, of
everlasting loss, unquenchable gloom. Anastasia was gone.
The false dawn had started to glow in the East but it
would be an hour and a half before the sun was up.
As he started down the mountain, the sheer way down
the brambled face, he heard the first of the distant shots.
a
110
Chapter Ten
DOWN WITH THE DEAD MEN
)
The children were playing 'Other Rind of People', and I
asked them what it meant. "We play we're the Other
Kind of People, and nobody can tell we're not regular
people," they said. "They can't even guess it." "I don't
understand it," I told them. “Oh, did you never play
'Other Kind of People' when you were small?” Helena
asked, "Children everywhere have always played it."
-CLEMENT GOLDBEATER, Enniscorthy Chronicle
1.
Even the headlong way was a long way down the
mountain in the dark. There was shooting of rifles and
BARs, of fifty caliber machine guns; and a rich ripe note
heavy enough to be a forty-five millimeter at devastatingly
close range. The rifle shots kept it up a while, then died
one by one under fire of automatics and machine guns.
It was maddening to listen to such a conversation of
ordinance and not know what was really going on. Fin-
negan was still high on the hill after the shooting had been
stopped and been followed by shrill whistling. Gunshot
almost anywhere in the world will be followed by whistles
of police and officials.
There were brambles and trees and fences, but Finne-
gan burst through them in an angry rush, tumbling down-
ward. The whole world would be killed before he got
there.
“You make more noise than a cow. Stop it!" It was a
young boy talking to Finnegan, and then following him as
he talked, a boy like someone Finnegan knew.
“What's noise? I'm in a hurry,” Finnegan gasped. "Show
me a faster way down."
111
“Don't hurry. If they're waiting to hang you, let them
wait a little longer."
“Let them hang me. Show me the path down."
"No. I came to cut you off. She left word: If it goes
wrong, go cut him off. If I were you I would lie flat inside
that clutter of rocks for an hour at least. And if nothing
happened then, I would crawl as quietly as I could to the
deepest thicket I could find. I would lie there for three
days and nights without breathing.”
"Boy, there is trouble at the landing. They will need
me.”
3
“They don't need you for anything, brother. The trouble
is all over with them at the landing. They are hunting for
you now to kill you.
“Me? Not me. Nobody wants to kill me.'
“Yes, they hunt for you and for two others. Your
friends from the ship hunt for you to kill you. Yes, you,
the comical Italian with the Irish name.”
"Well, I have to find out what happened."
“I told you. It is all over with them.”
"I have to go down."
“Go quieter then. Go much quieter."
They came within about two hundred yards of the
Brunhilde as she lay at the little dock. She seemed quiet
and asleep, with only one pale gang light, and one cabin
light burning, as was usual at night. But an old retiarius
still waited there in the dark for whatever else his net
could take,
Was the shooting over with? Finnegan seemed to hear a
whistling of shots again, but the boy heard them not.
Finnegan seemed to be shot in the wrist; it started like
cracked glass, it bled under the skin, it turned into the
mark.
"It's on me openly now," Finnegan said, "but I won't
accept it. Be damned with it. This marked man will tear it
out of him."
“What, brother?" asked the boy. “You are wounded?
No, I see it is an old wound or mark you have there. The
ship isn't asleep, brother. You go nearer to her and
you're finished. They have BARs. They can blow your
head off with a BAR. Or maybe they'd let you come
aboard first and then give it to you."
“Who was shooting at who? What happened?"
112
“Everybody was shooting at everybody, but there
weren't many shots wasted. The dead are in the little
street to the right, and the officials are with them. But you
will get no help there. You yourself are being hunted as
one of the murderers. You, and the big man who also
disappeared, and the South American. You can't help the
dead people now."
"I come too late. I come too late. There is one I must
find out about. If she is dead, I might as well be.”
"She is dead, brother, and I also feel strongly about it.
She is my cousin, and I didn't even see her alive after she
came. But you might try to stay alive if you can."
They went on down and around to the street, not taking
the direct way.
"Another man is dead on the smaller boat, the one with
the lights," the boy said. "They haven't taken him off yet,
and she is sinking. That smaller boat came in shooting
with only the one man on it. And they blasted it. Did you
know they had a gun like that on your ship?"
“Yes. I guess I knew where it was, though it was always
covered."
They went around through a lane and approached the
street where the dead people were. Finnegan met Manuel
there. He was crying.
"I cannot find Papadiabolous anywhere," Manuel said.
"Now this has gone wrong and everybody is dead, and
they hunt us to kill us also, Papadiabolous is the only one
who could have pulled it off, and where is he?"
"Papa is here present," Finnegan said. For, when Fin-
negan saw one of the dead men spread out there, he knew
that Papa Devil was dead this time for certain and would
no more come back to life. This was the same face that
Finnegan had reconstructed in his mind as the face of
Papa Devil, the face he had painted on one of the dead men
in the barroom painting on the Brunhilde.
Papa was very dead. He had been shot many times and
had been bludgeoned. His pockets had all been turned
inside out or cut out completely. His olive shirt, such as he
had never wom before, was shredded, and even his shoes
were removed. He was a tremendous man. The tiger had
regrown his lost stripes, if only for a little while before he
died.
113
There were six other dead men in the street, of whom five
were strangers to Finnegan, and the sixth was the seaman
Joe Cross. The five strangers wore olive-colored shirts that
were almost a uniform. They were spread out on the wet
cobbles, and lanterns were set to form a square about
them.
There was a Negro man who had wom a little gray
derby hat into battle and who had died laughing. There
was the haberdasher still dapper in death. There was the
bloke stretched out and his digger hat beside him dis-
graced with blood. The clerk had his hom rims, one lens
catching the light of the lanterns, the other started and
with a shot-hole in the center. The hack was dead with a
badly mauled cigar still in his mouth. They were still a
mighty casual bunch and it seemed as if they had minded
dying less than most would.
The officials told Finnegan and Manuel and the crowd
to be off.
A lady took Finnegan to a near house. There he saw
Anastasia his dead sister. She still had the smile of a
happy pixie and her eyes were only half closed. They had
put her on a sofa there. She had been shot once only. She
had been wet.
“She fell off the breakwater when she was shot,” some-
one said. “She was dead when we pulled her out."
An orthodox priest was there. "I gave her the last
rites," he said. “Then I wondered if she had become a
Roman. She had a Roman rosary. Do you know?”
.
”
"No. She was not a Roman. I gave her the rosary,"
Finnegan said.
This was all too matter-of-fact.
"You had better go and hide," the priest told him.
“They plan to find you and kill you also. You and the big
man they are looking for. It is dangerous for you to be
down here."
The priest told Finnegan several other things that he did
not quite understand with his insufficient Greek.
Finnegan slipped away with Manuel up the hill. Finn
had all this time carried a gin bottle in his hand, the same
that he had taken up on the mountain as a sovereign
against premonitions. He had carried it through the rough
climb down the mountain, through the alley off the street
114
1)
of the dead men, into the house where his sister was dead,
and up onto the mountain again.
"I must be depraved," he said.
But he didn't throw it away.
>)
2.
Finnegan and Manuel slipped up onto the mountain a
little before sun-up. They lay up in a thicket all day.
Sometimes they saw their own shipmates searching for
them, or more likely for Papadiabolous.
"They are all very evil,” said Manuel. "What had re-
strained them, as much as they were restrained, was Papa
Devil. He frightened them because he had retumed from
the dead. But he had formerly been one of them also, and
only myself and the beautiful Anastasia knew that he had
changed, that he planned to trap them.
"They were all in it, Finnegan, though Joe Cross tried
to play two sides as Don Lewis had done. He didn't want
Anastasia killed, and he was murdered when he tried to
prevent it. He wasn't killed in the street like the rest of
them. He was killed on the ship and was dragged out
there.
"And Marie Courtois, who I thought was not all bad, she
insisted that Anastasia be killed, she was the one. Myself
and you are also under sentence of death for having been
too friendly with Anastasia and Papa Devil.”
But Finnegan did not say anything. He thought how
odd it is that people will not recognize a man just because
he is wearing a different face. The men on the Brunhilde
still didn't know that they had killed Papadiabolous.
"Have you no tears?" Manuel asked. “I thought you
would be very sorry that Anastasia was dead."
“I am very sorry. I have cried about this many times in
the past," Finnegan said. "Several months ago, it was
given to me to know that this would happen. And today
(that is, yesterday and the night) I spent with her the
most beautiful and peaceful day of my life. She had
become my sister and she is dead. She also told me, as did
another once, that we would be together again. It is good
to be sure of this."
115
"Yes. It is a good thing we are sure," Manuel said. "So
much else had gone wrong.'
"And now I am not sure of it," Finnegan said. "I'm of a
people who have not that promise."
They lay up on the mountain till evening and watched
the men hunting for them.
“Do you know what it was all about?” Finnegan asked.
"The details?”
"Some of them. The men from the little launch and the
big stranger were also of a group. This is what Papadiabo-
lous was in contact with. They are an international bunch,
impatient with their govemments' ways of handling these
things. They try to trap the gangs and to smash them.
They are also illegal, of course, very illegal. I do not know
if theirs is the right way or not.
"Anastasia also had three fingers in the soup. This is the
island where she was bom. I think that she talked Sea-
worthy into coming here; it isn't one of their regular
stops. But it was a double trap, as it happened. You have
heard the expression 'smarter than the Devil'; Seaworthy
has proved to be so here.
“Now we are lost in a strange land. We cannot go back
to the ship or they will kill us. And worse, they are
tracking down Papadiabolous who is worth more than
both of us together. If only there were a way of getting
him away safely I would gladly sacrifice my life for it, and
yours also."
"You are generous with both of us, but it is too late for
that, Manuel. Everything is too late."
"They have found him already?”
"They do not know it; they will probably look for him
for years. But the original Papa Devil really did die last
year, and his surrogate died this moming. They-he-will
not be back, either in himself or in anybody else."
"You know this? Can you tell me about it?”
"He is dead now and finally. So what do we do?”
“Finnegan, there are very evil creatures in the world
and it should be made known. I believe they are of another
species, and they are evil beyond recall."
“I hope not, Manuel, I hope not.”
“What I will do, I will go to Rome and tell the Pope
that there are evil men about in the world. Can you swim,
Finnegan?"
116
“Yes."
"I know you can swim as anyone swims, and better. I
have seen you swim around the ship. But can you swim to
Paros?"
“I think so. How far is it?"
"Seven miles I guess. It is only a guess."
“It looks nearer from here on top of the mountain, but
everything looks nearer from the top of the mountain.
Seven miles, and the sea is not too choppy. Yes, I can
swim it.”
After dark they went down to a rocky stretch of shore.
There were floats from an old fish net there. They put
their clothes and shoes in leather sacks and roped them to
floats to trail behind them. Finnegan still had a rather
heavy bag of stones that he could not have taken without
using a float.
They swam over to Paros.
They lay on the shore there for several hours as they
were very tired. Later they dressed and hid themselves
until dawn. They would have to be sure that the Brunhilde
had not crossed over.
After they had reconnoitered, they walked into the town
of Paros for breakfast.
They both of them emptied their pockets and put all
their money on the table. Between them they had seven
hundred and twenty dollars. This was more than they were
supposed to have. Finnegan had an unaccountable roll.
Though he was careless of money, he did not remember
this at all. It was possible that Anastasia had put it into his
jacket pocket before she left him sleeping on the moun-
tain,
They split the money evenly, They said goodbye. Manu-
el went to Rome to tell the Pope that there were evil men
loose in the world.
And Finnegan, for three days, sat at the little table in
the ing like a man in a dream.
а
3.
On the evening of the third day, Mr. X came in and sat
down across from Finnegan. If you have a wide
117
a
acquaintanceship, you may already know X. Otherwise,
latch onto him tightly. He is elusive. He was an acquaint-
ance of Finnegan in both his lives.
"I thought you were dead," Finnegan said accusingly.
"No, I am not dead. I have never been dead.”
"X, I have had knowledge during the last several
months of one man who was dead and buried, and who
didn't stay dead.”
“That case has puzzled me also, Finnegan. I have fol-
lowed it closely. Closely at a distance, that is. That is a
paradox."
“I tell you, X, that I become a little impatient with
people who are supposed to be dead and who keep reap-
pearing. It loses its humor after a while.”
“My own case I can explain. The other I cannot," said
X. “Let us pool our knowledge and clear up these myster-
ies. Why did you think me dead, Finnegan?"
“One of the kids in New Orleans forwarded a clipping
to me that seemed to say so. This had been sent to me,
and it seemed to describe you dead. Yet I have received
letters from you since that time. I thought it a little odd
when I got them. Something that only you could do."
"That was all in the nature of a tall story, Finnegan. I
sent the clipping to the kids. I also printed it. It was a
contemptible trick, something that only I would do. I have
a flair for the dramatic and I cannot always control
myself. It was a well-written little notice, however, and I
spent a lot of time on it. It told of the unidentified
mysterious dead man, and it gave little details known only
to my close friends that would identify me indubitably.
Nothing but an impractical joke.
“Now, Finnegan, how can you explain the other? I have
it on good authority that your recent patron believed that
Papadiabolous had been killed. He was sure of it. Yet
Papa came back to life and sailed with you. Was Mr.
Seaworthy in his cups and only think that the man was
killed? He does not usually make mistakes.”
“No. Papadiabolous was dead all right. I helped bury
him."
"You interest me. I did not know that part."
"That is where I met Seaworthy. We buried Papa Devil
without a coffin, on top of another man, in an old grave.
For further effect we will say that it was at midnight, for
118
it must have been close to that hour. It's a scene that
would have delighted you, X; I'm sorry that you missed it.'
.
“It may be that I will not always have missed it. When
I tell this in years to come I will, of course, make myself
an eye-witness. I must have been very near the scene. I
was in town and hot on the case, but I followed a wrong
trail. I did not think that Seaworthy would do the job
himself. I followed the hired killer, who looked remark-
ably like you; at first I thought he was you. He waited for
Seaworthy, and Seaworthy failed the meeting. Old Saxon
is devious."
"It was an accident that time, I believe. He took me for
the killer. We found Papadiabolous. There is some confu-
sion in my mind then, as though a blind had been pulled
down over it. But Papadiabolous was dead; there is no
question about that. And we buried him."
“Deaths are easy to explain, Finnegan. Resurrections
are not. I can only hazard the guess that another took the
place of Papadiabolous, and so perfectly that he fooled
even the old associates. And yet this is impossible. Doubles
do not grow on trees, not even on graveyard yew trees.
Seaworthy was the only one who knew that he was going
to kill Papadiabolous; the hired killer didn't know who the
prey was. And Papa Devil surely didn't know he was
going to be killed. Do you know who took the place of
Papa Devil and how he did it so perfectly and so timely?”
"No. But he did it. He still has them fooled. They killed
him and didn't know it was he they had killed. He scored
a point there, but not the main point.”
“ "And you do not know who he is ... was?"
"I don't know his name, X. But this is he—"
Finnegan sketched him. It took a few minutes. It was
that face that had hid so long behind another face.
“This is the same big man who was killed the other
night or morning on the landing at Naxos?” X asked.
“The same man. I haven't done his face well. I didn't
know his face well."
"It's well enough for me to know it. Do the Devils on
the Brunhilde know that he was the one masquerading
all these months?”
"No. It is incredible, but Manuel says that they didn't
recognize him. They are still looking for Papa Devil now.
They believe that the big man came on the little launch
119
'
and they don't tie him in at all. I think this has them
worried, and it will keep them worried."
"Yes, I know him, Finnegan. He is an Irish cop. I wish
he were still alive. His name is either Noonan or Flaherty.
It has been both. We have lost a valuable ally. He was not
hampered by legal methods.
"He was a fantastic man, an amazing mimic. He could
walk behind any man down a street, and manage at that
moment to appear just like that man. But even that isn't
enough to explain it. There is a lot here I don't know and
will have to find out.'
“X, I had come to like the Papadiabolous that I knew.
Irish cop nothing! He will always be the Devil to me.'
“The first death of Papadiabolous must have delighted
him, Finnegan. They were enemies to the grave; and, as it
now appears, beyond. Noonan had a hatred for the gang
and had followed them before. Our Irish cop used many
other names; he got around the world, and he had entree
to most of the police stations of the globe. It's a shame
that he got it.
“But he had been shot at so much that he had to be bit
sometime. They don't know it, but they've killed a fish as
big as Papa Devil.”
“What was the original Papa Devil? Wasn't be the main
one of them?"
“Yes. He was one of the alien conspirators; the biggest
one, you might say. It was just a little intemecine warfare.
The whole clique is a catastrophe looking for a world to
happen to. They have funds for whatever they may decide;
they are given a remarkably free hand. They are almost
the only free-roving group of their kind having complete
sanction from the center, Seaworthy is the executive
officer. You might have learned a little more while you
traveled with them, if you hadn't been like a puppy bom
with his eyes closed. Now, with the Papadiabolous, True
and False, dead, it becomes the rule of four men: Saxon
X. Seaworthy, William Gerecke, Peter Wirt, and Orestes
Gonof."
"I thought that Captain Gonof was a nonentity."
"No. He is one of the shrewdest and most evil of them
all, Finnegan. Like Orestes of old, he would slay his own
mother, which is Hellas, which is the world. And Gonof-
do you know what Gonof means?”
120
"A thief. And it isn't Greek."
"You surprise me. Do you know what grave Papadiabo-
lous is buried in, the name on it?”
“No. I don't know the name on the stone, but Saxon
said that the men had met before. Another day, when I
have the leisure, I will go back. I can locate it."
“The chances are, whenever you go there, in whatever
year it is, you will find me standing by. There is a puzzle
here that must have an answer. Even now I am suddenly
taken by a theory and many facts are tumbling from the
labyrinth of my memory."
“X, I was completely taken with Anastasia and I do not
know it till she's dead. There's nothing left for me now. I'm
dead too. Did you think I would die that easy?”
"I died like that too. We go on with it, and lead another
life on a lesser level. I have a room in town here, Finne-
gan. Would you like to go to it and clean up and sleep?
You have had no sleep for three days and nights, they tell
me, except for little catnaps at this table. I worry about
you."
"No. I think that I will just sit here for a while.”
“You're filthy, you know. But when did you get the sign
of the octopus on your wrist?":
“At the time of the shooting. I thought I was shot or
scotched. But now the mark takes this shape. Am I also of
that flesh, and how will I fight against it?”
“Is there an alien flesh, Finnegan? I myself haven't
decided yet. There is, at any rate, a race that cuts across
the races. Come, Finnegan. You've not even rinsed the
salt out of your hair. It will make sores. And you smell
too. You must come and clean up."
"No. I will just sit here for a few days. Then I will get a
ship and go to another country. And someday my feel-
ings will be less immediate."
“There is something else, Finnegan, and I say it with a
little shame. I am not able to pay for my room. I took it
really to be here to protect you if they ever came here to
kill you in your present state of lassitude."
"All right. We will go to your room.”
Finnegan sat in a chair by the window in the room of
Mr. X and drank all night. From time to time X spoke to
him from the bed.
121
“Anastasia Demetriades was buried this afternoon, Fin-
negan. Did you know that?”
“Yes. I knew that. I naturally know such things when
they happen. And she had a rich funeral, but how did that
come about? Did one of the Devils arrange it?”
“I think so, Finnegan. Seaworthy had a real affection
for her. Not enough affection to save her life when it was
apparent that she was part of a trap, but enough to bury
her lavishly.”
“I also know that Marie Courtois is dying on the
Brunhilde,” said Finnegan, "and she finds a certain plea-
sure in it. She was shot by Joe Cross, after she had shot
Anastasia with an accurate hit at a distance, and Joe
Cross was in tum shot. They were like dominoes knocking
each other off. She's enjoyed dying these last days, but
she'd rather have gone quickly and caught Anastasia on
the narrow way just after she killed her.
"Even so, Marie is glad to die. She believes she will
have a favored place. She also believes that the bridge
itself has only one shore, X. Her eyes are distant now, and
a slaver runs down her chin like a snail's trail. Persephone
has been in Hell before. She often goes there. I see it all,
but I don't know the reason for it. Whatever I do now, it
is what I do after I am dead.
"X, I will clip that old granite-faced fox yet, and all of
them. He has taken the thing I love best. He loves a
meaner thing, but I'll take it, nevertheless. I will kill him
then, after I have deprived him. Or he will kill me. I will
devote my shadow life that is left to this hunt."
In the morning Finnegan paid for the room and gave X
a hundred dollars to travel on. Then he went back to the
inn and sat there for some days. Afterwards, he went to
another country where his feelings became less immediate.
This was the first death of Finnegan.
He was later to die another death on another sort of
island, a physical death that was final, in its way. But this
first death had its own finality, even though it was fol-
lowed by a sort of shadow life.
122
Chapter Eleven
36,000 PIECES OF PAPER
Some believe that the Tityroi are not of our world, that
they are of an other world beyond the moon. Yet I
believe that they are born of women of this world.
Daemons, who may be of worlds beyond the moon,
beget Tityroi or Satyroi on world women. Their chil-
dren are hardly to be told from mankind, though they
have ravening passions for the destruction of mankind,
and have always a seeming of ape or goat or wolf or
panther or other animal. They are the Satyrs. Those of
the first generation, those begotten by the Daemons
directly, are fertile and generate offspring. But those of
the second generation, the offspring of Tityroi on Earth
women, are not fertile, do not generate of spring, though
they are in appearance and passion similar to the first
generation. For this reason, the race must be renewed,
and in every century the Daemons must come back to
women of the world. In our own time, a Daemon begot
children on thirteen women in Calchedon in Bithyni in
a single night.
GALEN, Techne latrike
1.
And remember, passerby, that Galen himself studied
,
medicine under a man named Satyrus. Whence had the
teacher his name? Whence had Galen his information?
This was after Finnegan had died that first time; but
there are compensations to having already died. There is a
relaxation of the restrictions and a certain gained free-
dom. There is a feeling that one is no longer bound by the
conventions.
The mainstream of life is bound by conventions, but
they are neither those of God nor of the gods. They are
123
a
the accidental conventions of two meddlesome men, and
they control by an abiding accident. They are the Unities
of Aristotle, and the Heroics of Plutarch. But in the
shadow life one is not bound by the unities nor obliged to
abide by the heroic.
Several years had gone by since Finnegan had been on
the Brunbilde, and we cannot say how many. Certain
persons had gotten older. And others, apparently, had not.
If there be another recension, it is said that the members
of it do not age as rapidly as do people. They do not age,
but they deepen.
Finnegan had been up and down in his fortunes. He had
been back in his own country, and out of it, and into it
again. Then one day he picked up the spoor of that old
fox Seaworthy, and remembered his promise to rob him
and then to kill him.
Finnegan had first met Seaworthy and the Devil in an
island city. Now he was in another island city: bigger city,
smaller island. It was nighttime, and Finnegan had gone
feral.
He did not, as Papa Devil had done briefly, regrow his
lost stripes and become a tiger. Finnegan was a smaller
and other breed of cat; or ape, perhaps; or climbing
grotesquerie.
There was in that city a small hotel of curious gothic
style. It ran up to parapets and to those stone knobs that
are called merlons. At this moment there was a living
gargoyle sitting on one of those merlons and it seemed
perfectly natural there. Such places are their dens, their
nests,
The gargoyle was carved of dark brown stone that
seemed blue in the dark and the ambient half-light. It had
climbed up the outside of the building for six stories to
come to roost there. Those things can climb; and the little
hotel of gothic style was covered with ornamentation that
made the climbing easier. The name of the living gargoyle
was John Solli and his monicker was Finnegan.
You did not know that Finnegan had once been a
steeplejack? Many do not know that. You did not know
that lately he had been involved in several upper-story
burglaries and that he was good at it? These had not been
for profit, but to obtain evidence of several sorts,
For two or three days and nights now, there had been a
124
legend in that city (they love legends there) of an ape or
monstrous man that climbed up the outsides of buildings
at night and roosted on the pinnacles. It was even said
that this was one of the stone gargoyles from an omamen-
tal building come to life. It wasn't, though. It was Finne-
gan.
On an omamentation of stone six stories up, he perched
above the dark street. Through a blade-thin slit between
drapes of a sixth floor window, Finnegan looked inside at
a coven or meeting of gargoyles. 'You have to admit that
we are funny looking,' Finnegan said to himself.
There were the four senior gargoyles from the
Brunhilde: Saxon X. Seaworthy who now showed the
pherea or protuberances on the neck (one sign of ageing
in the species); William Gerecke who was wiry as a
spider; Peter Wirt with the mind of a wolverine; Orestes
Gonof, the largest and most menacing of them, now that
Papadiabolous was gone. With these four were seven Dev-
ils more evil than themselves. Eleven of them, all of them
men or whatever of some age and authority.
Finnegan was pleased that there were no young men
with them, though he knew that there would be some
outside the doors of the meeting room. The old monsters
would not be expecting an attack from a sixth floor
window, not from an opponent they had not heard from
in several years and who was not likely to be in that part
of the world. Or would they?
One old fox could hardly have been expected to guess
an attack from the landward side on the Brunhilde, not at
the very moment when the impossible seaward attack had
been launched, not on Naxos, the most peaceful island in
the world. It is all right to underrate the Devil, but do not
underrate the man who is smarter than the Devil.
Finnegan had located the thesaurus, the treasure, the
chrysus, and he knew it was not in a classical case. It was
in an unnoticed comer of the room, trying to look dingy
and unimportant. It was one focus for the attack of
Finnegan. The pherea-grown throat of Saxon X. Sea-
worthy was the other. He would have to achieve them
both.
It was quite cold; and the mist was beginning to ice on
the stones, making them dangerous, even for an ape-cat of
a man. Finnegan had two things with him, and he meant
125
to leave them both behind him in that glimpsed room. He
had a lead weight marked with certain cabalistic mark-
ings, meaningless, and of his own invention. And he had a
short hand knife.
Finnegan had opened one window noiselessly and easi-
ly. He was a cat that could climb, he was an ape that
could open anything. He left the opened window and
moved dangerously and swiftly to the window the length
of the room away. Both of these windows were sheer
above the street,
There was, however, in the side of the building (in the
back of the room) a third window. Finnegan would not
enter this, but he hoped to come out of it. Below this third
window, and some nine feet out, was the roof of a
four-story building.
An animal on the surge does not consider. It strikes.
Finnegan smashed the window in front of him with the
lead weight, letting it fall heavily inside.
“Stand and wait!" he called powerfully in the strong
voice of Papadiabolous. “It is myself returned again.
That voice of Papadiabolous had always scared Finnegan,
and it scared him a little now, even though he did it
himself.
Those in the room stood and waited, apparently, star-
tled dumb by the voice. Then one of them turned out the
lights, and not with the wall switch. Look out! Someone
was well-aware inside.
Finnegan was around to the previously opened window
while the Papadiabolous voice he had launched still
echoed in the air. He came noiselessly into the room
whose darkness was modified only by a slight neon ambi-
ent from outside.
Two foci, neither of them to be seen in the dark, both
of them to be remembered from observations of seconds
before. Finnegan grappled the man where the man should
have been, found him, and drove the knife into his throat,
leaving it there. There was a death groan and a fall. And
yet there was something the matter with that death groan.
Then Finnegan had his hand on the handle of the
thesaurus, the chrysus. He leapt to the sill with it and
surged. He shattered that third window, crashing spread-
eagled through it, leaping twenty feet down and nine feet
126
outward. It would have killed a man to hit the way he hit
on the edge of that roof.
And there had been a wrong laugh in the dark room
behind him just as he leaped.
The man Finnegan was on a fourth floor roof, and
there was gunshot behind him. So Finnegan was a man
again; but a swift and sudden man who went quickly down
the iron fire-ladders into an alley, and thought as swiftly
as he could with his man's brain. But what he had just
done he could not have done as a man. Only as the
ape-cat that he had become when he climbed and invaded
could he have done it.
Finnegan moved quickly, angling from alley into street
and into another alley, abruptly into a cluttered space
between buildings, through another alley, into another
street. He was elated about one thing, disconsolate about
another.
"Got it!" he exulted to himself. “But I killed the wrong
man. Ah, well, I'll kill him yet. I'm a trick ahead of him
now, even though it's his pursuit."
The dying moan in the room had been that of William
Gerecke. The wrong laugh in the room had been that of
Saxon X. Seaworthy. That granite-faced old fox was still
smarter than the Devil.
"He's a steady one,” Finnegan told himself. "If he
believed that Papadiabolous was indeed alive for the third
time, that he had come into the room after him, he
welcomed the encounter, Finnegan, you must track this
smart old killer fox till one of you dies.”
Finnegan walked rapidly, but not in outward panic,
with the chrysus in his hand. The chrysus was a heavy and
shabby suitcase, and Finnegan guessed that it was proba-
bly the most valuable
valuable suitcase in the world. He
knew what he had.
He had a suitcase full of paper. There were thirty-six
thousand pieces of paper in it, each of them two and one
half inches wide and six and one eighth inches long. They
were in bundles of one hundreds, tightly wrapped with
rubber bands. They were laid in flat, three bundles length-
wise to take up the bottom length of the suitcase, and six
bundles wide. They were stacked twenty bundles high.
The suitcase was broad and heavy. It weighed eighty
pounds.
127
To improvise now, to improvise. The man who was
smarter than the Devil would be after him with consider-
able resources. This man had killers who could follow a
trail.
Finnegan had little cuts about his face and hands. It
was odd that one could go through a sheet of glass and
receive only small cuts like that. The freezing rain had
turned to a noisy sleet. Finnegan had only small change in
his pocket and it was necessary that he get off the street at
once. A siren sounded, and it shook him, though he knew
it could not be for him yet. A dog pursued him, noisily
and relentlessly, and that could be more serious. A bum
fastened onto him, and Finnegan gave him all his pocket
change to be rid of him. A policeman bore down dourly
on him, and Finnegan just as dourly continued on past.
He tried a car and found the door unlocked. He threw
the suitcase in the back seat and sat in the front, waiting
for a girl to walk past before he jumped the ignition. But
she didn't walk past. Instead, she stopped at the car
window.
“I'm not hustling, mister,” she said. “I'm freezing. I'm
locked out and you can die on a night like this. Just a
dollar. I can get a place to sleep for a dollar.”
Finnegan saw a whole new picture. "Get in the car," he
said, “and you drive the car."
"You misunderstand me. I said I wasn't hustling. I'm
freezing and starving."
“I've done both, girl. It isn't a time to be timid. I told
· you to get in the car. No. In the driver's seat."
She got in.
“Don't you have any friends?” Finnegan asked her.
“None. None in this town. None anywhere any more."
"Do you have anything to keep you in New York
then?"
“I don't even have anything to keep me alive. I've given
up."
“I'm starting south right now. You have to go along
with me. I need you for disguise. Wait here till I get the
motor started. I wonder if all those sirens are necessary."
"Somebody said that somebody just killed a man in the
next street.”
“Oh yes. I'd forgotten about him."
Finnegan lifted the hood and jumped the ignition.
128
»
"Now you drive right on and through the tunnel,” he
told her. "I'm going to sit in the back seat. I have a few
things to do.”
"I'm scared. I'm scared of you."
"That's the way to be. I'm dangerous, and you have to
drive for me. And if I slip down on the floor whenever we
come under the lights, think nothing of it. It's an oddity of
mine. I'll let you loose and give you a tip when we get to
New Jersey if you want to leave the show there."
She drove, and Finnegan was in back. She seemed more
puzzled than scared now. She was a girl who would recover
fast. While she drove he opened the suitcase and abstract-
ed one of the three hundred and sixty bundles. He put the
bundle in his pocket.
"Hand me everything in the glove compartment,” he
told the girl.
"This too?"
"Yes. That especially.” She passed the things back to
him.
“Did you have a gun before I passed you that?" she
asked him.
"No, but I have now. You drive along like a good girl.”
He went through the papers and gave her an address in
Newark to drive to,
“If anyone asks who you are, you are Mrs. George
Brubaker,” he told her. “And you are driving home. For
the rest, just look innocent.”
“I am innocent. Are you George Brubaker?"
"I may have to be old George momentarily. But do not,
if we are stopped for any reason, burden people with the
knowledge that your husband is lying on the floor between
the seats of the car. It's a habit that I may outgrow
someday. Wake me up when we get to that address." He
pulled one piece of paper from the bundle, gave it to the
girl, and put the other ninety-nine back in his pocket.
"It's for you. I'll give you another when we get there if
you're good."
"A fifty! You must be a crook. I don't think this is even
your car either."
"It is mine for a while under an obscure bit of Common
Law known as the Lien of Extreme Need.”
Finnegan slept lightly and with great determination not
to waken. He lay on the floor between the seats curled up
129
with the great suitcase. He believed that they were stopped
once and the girl was questioned. Somewhere in his sleep
was her voice telling a flashlight that she was Mrs. George
Brubaker and that she was driving home to Newark. She
was a good girl.
And after some time, the car pulled up in front of
George Brubaker's house in Newark. Finnegan wrote a
note to George Brubaker cautioning him about leaving his
car unlocked with the many people of an unsettled type
about in the country, and he signed it Roving Magistrate
Number Sixteen. He also wrote that George was to report
at nine o'clock the next morning (that morning actually)
to room 101 of the Epimetheos Building. Finnegan did
not write the address of the building, for he did not know
it. If there were such a building, then the address should
be in some directory. If there were not, then George
would not have been able to find it anyhow.
Finnegan and the girl left the car in front of the
Brubaker house, and quickly walked away carrying the
suitcase.
“Won't George be surprised when he gets home and
finds his car already here!” said Finnegan. “I worry
about people like George."
"What if Mrs. George is waiting up for him?" the girl
asked, "When she finds his car came home without him
she'll be worried. She'll think it threw him and ran off
from him."
"Did you see a bus station?” Finnegan asked.
"About five blocks back the way we came.”
"Take this suitcase and put it in a big locker there. Do
that before you do anything else. Then see when the next
bus goes to Baltimore and get two tickets. Walk back here
then and wake me up. I'll be sleeping behind this hedge.
Oh, and after you've got the tickets to Baltimore, go to
the jane a while, and then go to a different window and
get two tickets for Pittsburgh.'
“Which tickets will we use? What if I keep the fifty
dollars and don't come back?”
“That's yours. Wait, this is for the tickets. And do come
- back. I need you.
9
130
2.
The girl came back.
“Is there an all-night eating place there?” he asked. “Is
anyone around the station that seems to be looking for
anybody?”
“Yes, the restaurant is open. I can't tell when people
are looking for someone. People around bus stations al-
ways look funny anyhow. Where did you get the glasses?
You didn't wear glasses before."
"I guess they belong to George Brubaker. The world
looks funny through them. Ah well, it always did look
funny."
They went to the restaurant at the station and had
coffee and cakes. Finnegan sketched while they ate.
"Was this man around?” he asked the girl and showed
her what he had drawn.
"You really can draw. No. There wasn't anybody who
looked like that. No. Not like that either. The Baltimore
bus is at five forty-five, the Pittsburgh bus is at six ten.
Which one are we going on?”
“Do both busses go through Philadelphia?”
“No. The Pittsburgh bus goes through Allentown and
Reading."
"Give me one of each of the tickets."
“Yes. All right. You sure do draw good and fast. No, I
never saw any guys that looked like any of those.”
“There is one more I haven't seen. I know he is left-
footed. I've heard that he shoots left-handed. What is your
name? I have to call you something."
“I'm Doll Delancy. Dolores, that is. Everybody calls me
Doll.”
“Everybody calls me Finnegan, but I had better not go
by that now. It is possible that none of them remember
my real name. I tore it out of the ship's list on impulse the
last day before I left, and the three most likely to remem-
ber it are dead."
Doll got the big suitcase out of the locker at the last
minute, and they took the Baltimore bus. Doll checked the
suitcase through to Baltimore.
131
»
>
9)
They got off the bus in Philadelphia, took a taxi across
town, got out and walked back part way along their trail.
They stopped at a place for another breakfast, this at a
more normal time for them.
“Shall I go buy another suitcase so you can switch some
of the stuff, and so it won't be spotted so easy?” Doll
asked,
"No. I'll steal one,” Finnegan said. "A new suitcase isn't
what I want.”
They got back to the station just in time. Finnegan stole
a suitcase to carry with him, and they lined up to get back
on the bus.
“Oh my God, don't look!” Doll said suddenly. “One of
the men you drew, he's standing ahead. He's where he can
see anyone getting on the busses.”
They faded away from there, out through a side door,
and down the street. They took a taxi to the railway
station. Finnegan kept the stolen suitcase in one hand,
held a time table up to his face with the other, and kept
his eyes on Doll's heels as he followed her around. She got
tickets for the Baltimore train, and they were aboard and
>
under way.
They exchanged wildly false accounts of themselves
during the trip. They became friends. They got off the
train at Baltimore, registered at a middling hotel; but they
did not yet pick up the original heavy suitcase at the bus
station.
Ah well, they would see what was in the stolen suitcase,
Though large and tacky, it was a lady's suitcase from the
irrational neatness within. Everything was separated into
small packages with shipping tags attached, each covered
completely with small writing.
On the first tag, attached by a cord to the handle and
just inside the suitcase, was written: “This suitcase belongs
to Phoebe Anne Ankerson. If I lose my suitcase, send it to
my sister Minnie MacMasters of Walnut Bottom, Pennsyl-
vania where I will be till a week from next Friday. If it is
after a week from next Friday that you find it, then send
it home to me in Hammonton, New Jersey. Thank you."
There was a little sack of marbles with a tag: "Marbles
to give to Harold Michael, these marbles used to belong to
Aaron and are all of them good ones and some of them
are agates, but he is too old for them now.” And another
132
3
one: "Seeds for Minnie, it is almost time to plant them in
a little over a month, only some of them may not grow,
they are too old." There were quite a few other things in
it, but nothing of use to them.
"We'd better send it to her today,” Finnegan said. “We
can always steal another suitcase.”
They did various things. Finnegan slept all afternoon,
and Doll went shopping. She got some things for Finnegan
also. She was new costumed when she retumed, so they
went out on the town.
Finnegan was delighted with himself. He had always
liked to draw a little fire. When he was a boxer he had
always carried his left low just to draw right hands. He
had Doll, though he hadn't asked himself the never-to-be-
answered question, who was Doll? She had a broad face.
She had bright gray eyes that had grown amused as the
surprise and immediacy of the situation had lessened. She
was nice looking, though a little large. And placid, like a
slumbering volcano.
They went to a supper club and had seafood of the
town; and danced. They went to another place and danced
quite a while and boozed it up. "They will believe me
hidden," Finnegan told himself, "if they have followed me
to this town. They will not look for me out on the town. I
lie. It is that, after my tension, I have to be out on the
town."
a
They livened up as they went along, they had several
small skirmishes, and then Doll had come to the talky
stage.
"I walked out on one life after it got where I couldn't
live it any more,” she said. "You say that this is what you
do after you are dead. I thought it would be like that with
me, but for two dead people we sure do have a lot of fun.
I wish that little string of torpedos would come around
again, Finn. I bet we could take them all. That one was
right, though. You do look like a hooked-nosed ape. And I
just hope these people here caution us just one more time
about making so much noise. I just thought of something
to come back on them with. We weren't either dancing
rowdy. We were just having fun."
"A while ago you told me it wasn't prudent to draw so
much attention, Doll. Who is not being prudent now? But
133
you sure are pretty when you get fired up. I'd like to do
you in oil.”
»
“I'd like to boil you in oil, Finn, thinking about painting
when we're having so much fun. Where do these people
get off, telling us that we can't carry on like that?”
“Ah, let them throw us out, and it'll be the noisest exit
they ever had here. Let's order another meal first, though,
Doll. We don't want to be caught short on crockery to
throw when it comes to the crisis."
Finnegan and Doll Delancy were no longer alone.
There was a comical little drunk with them. It seemed as
though he'd materialized gradually; he hadn't been there
all at once.
"You are the cutest little man I ever did see,” Doll told
the little drunk. "We are going to adopt you and you will
travel with us, aren't we going to, Finnegan? We are going
to go all over the country and live like unobtrusive princes.
We will keep it gaudy but not let it get out of hand.
We've got a million dollars in a suitcase, and we'll give
you all you want, won't we, Finnegan? Will you go with us,
little man?"
Although Finnegan realized that the little man was not
really drunk, and that he and Doll were, yet he was not
alarmed. Finnegan had an instinct for friendship, and he
always knew a right man from a wrong one.
But it was odd that it took him so long to recognize his
old friend Mr. X.
134
Chapter Twelve
CREST AND SHATTER
There are but two sciences, the Science of God, and the
Science of Man. Perhaps the soundest scientist who ever
studied and produced amongst us was John de Yepes
(St. John of the Cross). He studied the highest subject
(Divinity) by the direct experimental method applica-
ble (mysticism). Yet there are those who say that he was
the very opposite of scientist; even those who say that
mysticism is the opposite of the scientific method. Lat-
terly there are those who thrust back as 'soft sciences'
these two basic sciences, and who bring forward as
'hard science' a distant derivative with no sound claim
to reality—the Science of Things.
-WIMBISH A. MCDEARMOTT, Panegyrica
1.
“This is an old acquaintance of mine, Doll,” Finnegan
said. “He is a little sheep dog who has come to lead us out
of the woods."
Mr. X rose and bowed.
"The car is outside, Mr. Solli," he said. "You had better
be Mr. Solli now. Finnegan is being pursued."
"I guess so, X. What car?"
"I bought it from our common fund today. It has a
D.C. plate on it. Now, if you two are tired dancing and
drinking, we will be off.”
“X, you are either way ahead of me or way behind.
You cannot know the situation.'
“Of course I know the situation, Finnegan. I am, as
always, onto everything. I have decided to join forces with
you for your own protection. Diavolo, Finnegan, you have
had some close calls in the last few hours. They have been
missing you by seconds and feet only. It could only hap-
135
pen in an old comedy, the way they have been missing
you."
"Close, has it been, X? I thought I'd lost them com-
pletely, if they were even onto me this far."
“Oh, very close, Finnegan, ah, Mr. Solli. And they are
about to miss you very close again. A man in this room is
to be kidnapped within seconds. And if he will not tell
things that he cannot possibly know, he will be killed,
What do you notice about that man over there?"
“What would anyone notice about him? He has a nose
even bigger than mine, though with less character to it.”
"You are saved by a nose. You were correctly reported
in this town, and in this place. And now the finger men
have been told that yours is a nose they could not possibly
miss. Out of here with me, you two, easy but swiftly
1)
now.”
And in a very few seconds they were in the car of X
and working their way out of town to the South.
“I hate to leave town without the suitcase," Finnegan
said. "Its time will run out in the locker, and someone will
look into it then."
“Let it be known that I took the liberty of lifting a
certain claim check from Miss Doll's bag while she was
shopping this aftemoon. I have the suitcase now, of
course, and I could have been off with it long ago. You
will see that my mixing in this is not purely selfish. I am
rather proud of the way I did it, though.
“After I picked up your prime suitcase, I left another
bewildered conveyance of the same sort in the locker
there, and I planted a trail that would lead them to it. Mr.
Solli, those two battered suitcases are alike as triplets.
They must have been whelped at the same time.
“And in the other one also there are thirty-six thousand
pieces of paper, but not the same thirty-six thousand,
They will be bewildered when they find it, thirty-six
thousand little pieces cut out of newspapers and banded
together and stacked tightly. They will wonder how we
are so clever.
“Those suitcases are very heavy, Mr. Solli. I don't see
how Miss Doll could have handled it so easily."
X drove rapidly South, Doll Delancy chattered, Finde-
gan slept.
It was beginning to be daylight when Finnegan got the
136
unaccountable feeling that he was traveling on the inside
of a rainbow. The dawn was coming up, but there was a
hint of a color fringe that didn't belong to the dawn. Yet
there was no real riot of color visible to him-nothing
except the conventional black. and green rosettes of the
leopard-skin upholstery; the mauve, pearl, and violet
shades of the dashboard or instrument panel; gold where
you might expect chrome; beige charcoal, purple pastel,
livid lilac, shades like that.
“Signor X, what color is this crate?" Finnegan asked,
"on the outside, I mean."
"Signor Solli, I do not understand the word. A crate?
That would be a cesto, a paniera, a casetta, a scatola?”
“No it would not be, Signor X. It would be this faeton,
this drozhe, this vettura, this carrozza, called by the vulgar
an automobile, this celestial omnibus, this purring panther
in which we are riding.
"Signor Solli, it is a little bit giallo, and a little tur-
chino."
“I am waiting."
"You have heard of two-toned cars. You may even
have seen three-toned. But this is the only eight-toned
vehicle they had in the agency. They had ordered it in the
expectation of selling it to a blind man; but when he
cancelled the order on being persuaded by his family that
he was too nervous to drive, they were glad to sell it to
me for an exorbitant figure."
"What a hurtling rainbowl” Doll breathed,
"Pardon the doubt gnawing at my kidneys, but isn't this
conspicuous?" Finnegan asked.
"There is no other word for it," said X. "The first step
would be for us to take a klunker and go inconspicuous in
that. But we are, and they know we are, too smart for
that; so we take the butterfly. So they will watch for a
butterfly. But we being smart beyond this, go beyond a
butterfly to a klunker again. And they, realizing we are
clever beyond what they guessed, will (after thinking it
over) look for us in a klunker. Then, going beyond every-
thing, we take a butterfly after all."
“The truth is that you fell in love with the butterfly and
had to take it,” Doll said.
"Yes. That is the truth. The rest is rationale. But soon
we will split in three parts. We will have a klunker, and
137
a
>
we will have another thing that is neither hot nor cold,
Meanwhile I have split up the boodle. The old original
suitcase is now derelict and empty, and it will be some
days before they find it. The nondescript travel bag is
mine. The sturdy old cowhide is yours, Signor Solli, and
yours is much the heaviest. The chic little overnight is
yours, Miss Doll. We have shorted you a little, Miss Doll,
but you haven't been in this like we have. And it does
contain more than you could eam honestly in a lifetime.”
2.
Another day. They had talked conspiratorial talk; they
had explored eschatological themes; they had discussed
essence, whether they were man or teras or what (“I'm a
woman,” Doll said, “I'm pretty sure of that"); they had
plotted the murder of Saxon X. Seaworthy and his crew;
and they had told some funny stories.
Now they were in the Florida lake country. The three
of them were richly, installed.
This was a fisherman's paradise, though there was
something artificial about it. Finnegan said that the crux
of the matter was that there was something wrong with
the fish. They weren't the honest fish that he had known in
Louisiana rivers, swamps, and bayous. These were con-
trived fish made especially for the tourist trade.
Oh, they were live enough, and they bled blood and
serum when you cut them open. But they weren't fish as
Finnegan had known them. Dou said that Finnegan was
incurably provincial, that he knew only his own little
backwater. It wasn't true. He knew the fish of the midland
rivers and streams, and of many coasts; he knew the fish
of the great ocean itself. But he didn't know these strange
fish.
We will leave it to any honest man: Are those fish like
the fish you knew anywhere else?
The lake they were on was about eleven miles long and
from three hundred yards to two miles wide. It was one
of those finger lakes that are really links of one of the
underground rivers, and it had river currents in it. It was
138
grassy, like most of the lakes in that country, weed and
reed grown.
“This is my kind of lake," Doll said, "where I can
always get out and walk."
"Push the boat, girl," Finnegan would tell her. “Don't
talk so much.”
The little boat often got stuck in the mud, for land and
water were hopelessly mixed here; and Doll always got
out and pushed. Finnegan would gladly have done it, but
he was too lazy. There were many things he would gladly
have done in those days except for the delicious lassitude
that had devoured him completely.
The weeds were full of fish; and Doll, who practiced the
ancient art of noodling, pitched them into the boat by the
dozens, while Finnegan could take only an occasional one
with the hook. Fish? They were young whales, blowholes
and all. Where else do you say, 'No, not that one, he's too
big. He'd swamp us.'
They wore rubber boots and swimsuits. They went out
where it was clear of grass and swam in the four foot
deep water. They thought of putting up a sigu 'Deepest
Water in the State of Florida, Four Feet.' Some of the fish
were nearly that thick, and had calluses on their bellies
from dragging on the bottom.
Often they would empty the boat after they had it full.
The noodled fish would come back to life and swim off no
worse for the experience. And after such pleasures, Finne-
gan and Doll would go back to the shady bait house to
drink beer.
“What are you always kind of afraid of?” Doll asked
him once when they were loafing there, “that people don't
like you?”
"What is who afraid of, Doll?”
"Why, the things like you, Finnegan; and X, I think;
and I knew another one once; whatever you are. Are you
afraid people won't like you? I like you."
“No, Doll, I'm afraid that I won't like people. It is very
bad when we don't like them, Doll; we set them on fire."
The three little outlaws, Finnegan (Solli), Doll, and X,
drew no attention here. All the fishermen were compla-
cently rich. All of them went around like brightly-colored
tramps, with fish and bait blood soaked into twenty dollar
139
sport shirts, and with casting equipment whose cost would
feed a family for years. And there were menages as
unorthodox as that of Finnegan and Doll and X.
The bait house was a pleasant shady building, long and
low, with whitewashed rafters, and water slosbing under
the planks of the floor and sometimes squishing through.
The walls were covered with the pictures of notables who
had caught fish here. There was a caste system: the
grander the notables, the bigger the fish they had taken,
and the pictures proved it. A lot of them sat in the bait
house and drank beer on the warm afternoons.
“There was a man asking for you this morning," said a
man from Minneapolis. “Not by name, of course, and not
by very good description, but I know he was looking for
you. I didn't think you'd want to see him, I flubbed him
off, I think."
“A left-footed man?” Finnegan asked.
"As a matter of fact he was. I thought I was the only
one who noticed things like that about a fellow. What
does he want with you?"
"He wants to kill me,” said Finnegan. “I hope he
doesn't."
“But which is he, Finn?” Doll asked. “He doesn't sound
like
any
of them that X talks about."
"No. He isn't. He isn't from this last ruckus. He's on an
earlier assignment."
ก
9
Later, when it had come on evening, after they had
showered and cleaned up, and after X had made a few
long-distance telephone calls, they would drive around
through the citrus and scrub to Orlando and Kissimee and
Pine Castle and Apopka. And sometimes to Daytona.
“Doll, you have never told me your story," Finnegan
said one day. "You haven't told me who you are, or how
you happened to be clear down. You haven't told me why
you once said that we were the most peaceful company
you had known for a long time, us a couple of refugee
killers."
"Well, I will tell you then,” Doll said. “I'll tell you right
now. I never had the chance before really. I will begin a
ways back....
But Finnegan wasn't there; he had wandered off some-
where.
140
Another day he also asked her to tell it, and again he
disappeared before she could get into it. And she did want
to tell her story.
Even X showed a momentary curiosity once:
“Miss Doll, I believe I know the basic facts about
nearly everyone in the world except yourself. Kindly give
me a précis of your life and leave out nothing. It may be
that the details which you would be inclined to leave out
would be the most interesting ones to me."
“I'd be glad to, X. I've wanted to tell my story to
someone for a long time, and nobody will listen. I will
begin a ways back. ..."
But X was telephoning. He telephoned a lot in the
evenings and night.
“Xochilmileo,” he said. “Listen carefully. Vinschoten,
Vlissinger, Spink, Tineo, Abo, Imazu, Ligueria, She-
boygan-hell, I don't know how to spell it. How do you
spell Sheboygan, Doll? Absecon, Xania. No, with an X.
Oquawka, Neffs. Well, what did you do with your code
book? Y has one. Y, Y, i grec yet. I'll call you tomor-
row.”
Doll never did get to tell her story to either of them,
and she wanted to.
“The next move is up to them," X said. "We could stay
here as long as a month. My operatives have nothing new
to report. In fact, I am not sure that I have any operatives
left to report anything. The last one had lately been fired
from his job and cannot now be located.”
“What was his job?" Doll asked.
“Dishwasher,” said X. So they drifted on.
X now made fewer than a dozen long-distance calls a
day. He had let down his guard. He no longer insisted that
all three of them wear sunglasses day and night so as to be
inconspicuous. To be sure, they had obtained a second and
much older car, with a Georgia license plate, in case they
need ride off in two directions at once. X also insisted that
each of them carry a police whistle and never be out of
blast distance from each other. And naturally they had a
code of whistle signals, but this was all routine for him.
He wasn't concerned, and Finnegan wasn't concerned.
Only Doll was a little.
"It isn't any of my business, outside of me being in it up
to my neck," she said, "but why aren't you guys worried?”
141
)
“Miss Doll,” said X patiently, “it is a truism in my
business that a worried man is a conspicuous man. There-
fore, as we do not wish to be conspicuous, we do not
worry."
“I see. Now isn't it a fact that, from whatever motives,
personal and high-minded though they be, you have stolen
quite a sum of money?"
“I wouldn't call it stealing, Miss Doll,” said X. “Besides,
it was Finnegan who stole it.”
"But the law would consider it stealing, X dear. From
what I can gather, Finnegan is guilty of stealing something
over a million dollars, and of killing a man while he did it.
And you are guilty of abetting him. I abet him a little
myself.”
"Well, yes, if you put it that way."
“Then why isn't it in the papers?"
"Who'd want it in the papers? We wouldn't. And they
wouldn't."
"Finnegan wants to buy that passionate little road
crawler he's been looking at. Then we will have a stable of
three. We could take our chances from a hat, the Celestial
Omnibus, the Little Road Crawler, and the Georgia
Klunker. Then at a signal we could disappear in three
directions. We could also draw for the weapons, the rifle,
the derringer, and the pop pistol, or we could procure
anything we wanted. We might have a stash for a certain
sum, and each take enough travel money to keep up our
newly acquired standards of luxury."
“Non licet omnibus adire Corinthum, Miss Doll,” said
X, "and yet we will travel."
"X dear, what did you say?" Doll asked him.
“I will not repeat. For a long time I have suspected that
your hearing is not of the best, but I would not have it
changed. I once knew a woman who built a reputation of
being quizzical, fascinating, unfathomable, all from a cer-
tain exciting way she had of peering at a person. Yet she
was none of those things. She was only hard of hearing."
" "Thank you," said Doll.
“But your ideas are good ones. We will set up our
signals and our channels of communication. Then we will
scatter. We will rendezvous in a year and a day and some
odd weeks at a certain point. I will do the staff work and
set up the spring."
142
1
"And where will we rendezvous, staff?”
“If we three are in accord, and I believe we are, we
will all know intuitively the time and the place. It will
develop in us. But to give you a little help, I believe it will
be in another southern city, and beside the grave of one
Ifreann Noonan Gregorovitch, though that may not be the
name that appears on the headstone."
"You are immeasurable, X. I condign you."
I
"Is it not a rich name he has, Miss Doll, and I am sure
there is much more to it. And by the time we meet there,
I should have a little story to tell you and Finn. I have a
way of telling these stories, Miss Doll. I put a lot of
thought and research into them. The truth in them is
always interesting, but there is a wide selection of truths.
Sometimes the characters do not come out the way they
should, due to the perversity of people. Neither you nor
the Finn satisfy me too well; I will fictionize you a little,
as I will other things. There are capable people who will
pass up opportunity after opportunity to have interesting
incidents happen to them. Then I have to, not tamper with
facts, but arrange and select a little. There are so many
damned inartistic characters who creep in. It will all be
worked out by the appointed time, however. I promise
you that.”
“Finnegan is fixing to go on another bender, I think,"
said Doll.
“Yes. The little benders aren't his difficulty. It is the big
benders superimposed on the little benders that hurt him.
We must be patient with him, but not too patient. Were I
of your size, Miss Doll, I'd turn him over my knee and
belabor him. I worry about his soul when he does these
things. Yet the drink is more effort than cause. He first
suffers a change. Then he drinks to soften it."
"We will adjust our time to his, I think,” said Doll. "I
think we should take it when he crests the next time. Then
we will scatter."
3.
Finnegan was shaving one morning. There was nothing
strange about that; he often shaved. But the funny thing
143
1)
was that he was shaving the face of Dopey the seaman. It
wasn't illusion. It was the face of Doppio di Pinne, the
seaman known as Dopey. Nor did it act like a mirror
image. Finnegan was wide awake, and Dopey was plainly
in a daze. He showed, for a moment, some fear of the
razor (Finnegan used a straight razor), and was then
reassured. It wasn't Finnegan's face. The follicles were
different, slightly coarser; the complexion was made up
differently, though coming out about the same color.
"Dopey, how did you die?" Finnegan asked the face in
the mirror.
“Ga—I am not dead," Dopey said as if drugged.
"Dopey, where are you?” Finnegan asked him.
“Ga—I don't know. I guess I am right here."
Finnegan finished shaving. He felt his own face and it
seemed to be coming along all right. He scanned Dopey
carefully, and got small places he had missed.
“I am not a stable person," Finnegan said, “and I don't
mean that I'm a looney. It is just that I have indefinite
boundaries. I don't know where I begin, and I sure don't
know where I will end."
He finished. He washed. He put his shaving things
away. Then he shattered the mirror with a jar of Doll's
ointment. He was still curious. He picked up one of the
broken pieces and looked into it. It will still the face of
Dopey the seaman, with eyes closed now in torturous
sleep.
"Enough of that,” Finnegan said. He had cut himself.
He went out and left it.
X sometimes tried to get a little more information from
Finnegan, and he found it incredible that Finnegan had no
more to give.
"When you went through the appurtenances and desks
of Saxon Seaworthy and his cronies on the Brunhilde, you
surely must have picked up bits of information that we
should now be able to evaluate. Dredge into your memory
and recite, and I will take it all down. It will not matter if
some of the papers were in code. Recall them to me. I can
break any code.”
.
"I went through no desks.”
“Incredible! Why did you not? Always go through desks
wherever you are, Finnegan, always. The information may
144
be valuable to you years later if you have a retentive
memory. But their very lockers must have been full of
clues. You have the gift of recall. Let us put it to work,
and now."
"I rifled no lockers."
“Astounding. But tell me at least what valuable in-
formation you obtained by cleverly questioning the evil
giantess Marie. What tracings did you make in the chart
room? What excerpts from the log? What interception on
the wireless?"
“None at all, X. I was not then enough interested. I
haven't that turn of mind."
“Everybody has that tum of mind, if only he will dig
deeply enough in himself. What did Don Lewis tell you
before he was murdered? What did Joe Cross confide in
you? And Manuel? And the Pseudopapadiabolous? How
much did the beautiful Anastasia really know, and how
much of it did she tell you?"
"Nothing, X, nothing at all. You are far ahead of me on
all the information. I have told you all that I know."
“Bizarro," said X.
It was a little before the middle of March that Finne-
gan had a tailor make him a tuxedo with green lapels for
St. Patrick's Day. Then he began to celebrate.
"I am Finnegan the Irish crock," he said when the
logorrhea was upon him. "One Finnegan is worth a dozen
of those pirates. I am the salt of the earth. You do not
toss the salt under a bushel. You put it in a saltcaster and
set it on the table for the whole world to see. I am the only
perfectly spherical saltcaster in the world; I am the grand-
father of all the saltshakers; I am the cerulean saltcellar.
Did you
know that saltcellar is an anachronism?"
“An anachronism, dear?" Doll asked.
"That other thing, whatever it is, when you say the
same thing twice. Cellar is saliere, from sal, salt. The word
already has salt in it, so the salt in saltcellar is in excess,
too damned much salt. 'If it be not salted with salt, it will
be salted with sulphur,' as the prophet says. You didn't
know I was educated, did you, Dou?"
Doll
"It is a shock."
“Ask me what you call a conic section when e is less
145
1
than one. Ask me what is an Exterior Proletariat. Ask me
about Elective Affinities and the Categorical Imperative.
Go ahead, ask me.'
"With you it is two fingers of the stuff in the bottom of
a glass. That is the imperative. The ice and the soda are
the categorical."
“Right, Doll, right. Ask me how many legs has an
arachnid? What you call the cosine of the angle of lag
between voltage and current in an AC circuit? What is the
equator of a parabola? Ask me how you say 'I ordered
cucumbers, I sure did not order that stuff in Russian. A
lot of people think I'm dumb just because I don't have any
brains.”
“They aren't necessary, Finn dear. On you brains would
be grotesque. How much better to have that little trap
door into your brain pan where you can lay the hidden
quart and always have it handy. People with brains would
never think of a thing like that; and even if they did they
wouldn't have room for the bottle there."
They were in the Marine Room in Orlando when they
talked that talk, Doll would park Finnegan in a bar early
every moming so he could get a good start, and would
leave him there with a bunch of little Florida crackers.
She would come back about eleven at night and start
checking the bars. She might locate him by midnight and
would usually go around with him for several hours to
private parties. When he was too far gone she'd load him
on her shoulder and carry him to the car.
But he had amazing resilience in the early days of his
bouts. He would bounce up in a couple of hours and be
booming in the shower. Then she would take him to town
again and leave him, and come back to bed.
"Do you know his time table?" she asked X. "How long
will he go on.
"Another week, I guess. Then he will crest and shatter.
By then the staff work will be finished. We will have a
briefing. Then we will part.
“Will it be safe to let him go in his bad shape?”
"Yes. He won't be in bad shape. He has been tortured.
It concems his morphosis. He drinks when he comes up
from the shock of it. He will drive by instinct, and then he
146
will hole up in some distant place. But he will remember
all the instructions. They will work in him like a barrel of
barm, and next year we will meet him again."
4.
It was about nine days before Finnegan crested and
shattered. He went on a fighting binge. He started it in
one of the little towns. He was pretty good.
“I whipped Harry Greb, and I can whip you too,” he
would tell the big little-town boys. He was a devastating
little chopper, and he could wbip most of them.
"I went ninety rounds with Joe Gans," he'd tell them.
“Who'll go a fast twenty with me?”
He got whipped by some of them, but he always kept
getting up
"I fought Tom Sharky nine times," he'd tell them,
" .
"There's a lot of you here that never even fought him
once, and you think I'm punchy!"
He would fight the local boys in series, but there were
too many of them who kept coming up to try him. He was
in bad shape when Doll found him that last day. He was
still wearing his tuxedo coat with the green lapels, but it
was shredded vow.
“How in the world did it happen, Finnegan?" she asked
him. “Your nice coat!"
“That's from dragging it on the ground, Doll. That's the
way we start fights in Ireland."
"You never were in Ireland."
"It's a lie. I was in Bantry a day and a half. We
unloaded a cargo there once. There's a song you sing
when you drag it:
His name it was Christy O'Malley,
And his ears were the ears of a goat,
But I weathered him with my shillelagh
When he trod on the tail of my coat.
;
I sure can sing good, can't I, Doll?”
"You sure can, boy.”
147
“There's a chorus but I don't know how it goes. I make
up the verses because I only know two lines of it.”
“Is your nose broken, Finnegan?"
“Yes. But the man who did it said that it would be an
improvement. He was a real smart man; he wasn't one of
the kids; he said he was a railroad man. 'I can take two to
give one all day,' I told him. 'Not with me, you can't, he
said. He was right. With him I couldn't. I like a man who
knows what he's talking about. He whipped me worse
than a lot of them did,
"But you know, that first day I won thirteen straight
fights before I lost one. I fight kind of like Harry Wills. I
fight kind of like Battling Siki too. You want to go a
couple of rounds, Doll? We'll just slug a while and quit
after the first few knockdowns. We won't try for a knock-
out.”
"When I fight, I always try for a knockout. Why do you
do it all, Finnegan?”
“I have this character defect. I'm a slob."
Finnegan was washed and patched. They poured wine
and oil, or some goop, in his wounds and taped his swollen
hands. Then, for his sins, he had to listen to X who talked
and talked. Finnegan lay on the sofa while X went
through the briefing, for now the time of action was at
hand,
"Do you follow me, Signor Solli?" X would ask. “Do
you understand the details?”
“Yes. Can you have an ingrown nose like an ingrown
nail? That left-footed killer was asking for me in Winter
Garden yesterday. I may have an ingrown nose. Can you
still see it from the side?”
“We can still see it from this side, Signor. Pay attention
to the briefing.” It was interminable, and much of it
merely cautionary. X went through the rite of burning
some old papers, though they hadn't any papers of impor-
tance to burn. Doll cried a little bit. She was a rich doll
now, but she would miss them for the year and somewhat.
X made his last half dozen long-distance phone calls, and
they were ready to scatter.
Finnegan got dazedly into the Georgia Klunker and
chugged off in the pre-dawn. Half an hour later, from a
148
point about twelve miles distant, a left-footed killer and
companion followed after him.
About mid-moming, Doll went away in the little Road
Runner.
Mr. X disappeared that afternoon in the Celestial Om-
nibus.
And another bunch of sporty fishermen came down to
take their places, and things went on there much as
before.
149
Chapter Thirteen
BILOXI BRANNAGAN
From the gall of infants strangled and the moans of the
guiltless slain
I turn and seek for a greenery beyond the smouldering
plain.
I dream in the great avoidance, I opt for a life that will
scan,
I harry the bulking horror and hide in the hide of a man.
To sleep in the guise of waking, to make an innocuous
me,
To live in a shadowy brightness, and die on an isle in
the sea.
Forgetting, the blessed forgetting, of bones on a caverni
shelf,
Veiling the hopeless haunting that the nameless thing is
myself.
I pray that the cup may pass me, I pray that I fight me
free
From the surge of abysmal terror: that I should awake
unto mel
-MELCHISEDECH DUFFY, The Alien Awakens
When a man shoots at you once it can be an accident.
When he shoots at you a second time he is still entitled to
the doubt. But when he keeps it up the doubt gradually
fades, and a certainty develops.
Some people are patient with this type of treatment,
and Finnegan was a patient man. He was still without
150
animosity when he suddenly ditched the Klunker, rolled
out into the ditch himself, and brought the pursuing car to
a careening halt with a sudden sharp volley of his own.
He shot out both the front lights, broke the windshield,
let down the two front tires, and painfully winged each of
the flustered men fleeing from it. Finnegan had always
been a good rifle shot.
Then he drove away in the Klunker again, but the
Klunker was crippled and sad now, and the bloom was off
the night for Finnegan. He was very nervous when he was
in the clear, and he sniffled and sobbed.
Violence had always made Finnegan nervous after it
was over with. He was not an unperturbable man, though
often he acted the part. Now, moreover, he was in a very
low mood and was gripped by a moral revulsion from his
last orgy.
Physically he was mended and was like a lean cat ready
to start out on a new night's foray. He had traveled for
three days, casually, and with a feeling of safety. Then,
driving after dark the evening before, he had felt the
sharp menace the moment they were clearly onto him.
They'd spent the night at it then, over bad roads and
good, and they had been crowding him intolerably when
he turned on them.
Entering the town now, Finnegan parked the Klunker in
front of the police station. This was an old trick that X
had told him. The pursuers will always fall back and
regroup when they see it there. It is a manoeuvre that
worries them. They will spend half a day waiting around
and devising contacts to the inside to find if the squealer
has squealed and how the land lies.
So Finnegan left it there and went to see the town. He
had to find cover, and rapidly.
It was very early in the morning and the bars were not
yet open. But there was a small beer garden, providential-
ly before him, and it seemed to be open for business.
Finnegan vaulted over the little fence with his suitcase and
sat down opposite a man who seemed famjliar, or at least
friendly.
“I believe I will just have the same thing," Finnegan
said. “Where's the barmaid?"
"Gertrude, bring the pitcher!" the man called. And soon
she brought out a tremendous pitcher full of beer.
151
9
>
9
"Oh, we have company,” said Gertrude. “Such a nice
looking young manl Do we know him?”
“My name is Finnegan," said Finnegan.
“My name is Fogazzaro," said the man with a touch of
a
truculence, and Finnegan knew that it couldn't be.
“Why, it is not, Biloxi,” said Gertrude. “Why do you
want to tell the young man a thing like that? That isn't his
name at all."
“My real name is Solli,” said Finnegan.
“My real name is Brannagan,” said Brandagan. Bran-
nagan had sandy hair with quite a bit of gray mixed in it.
He had the tremendous forearms and clear eyes of an old
seaman. He was weighing Finnegan with his eyes, but he
didn't cast him away as too light. Finnegan was half
accepted already. And he did need a haven.
"You seldom see beer served in a pitcher like this,"
Finnegan said. “I've known it only as an Australian cus-
too."
“My husband is another Australian custom," said Ger-
trude, “and we won't have it any other way. Now let us
get things straight. Not that you aren't welcome, young
man, but are you under the impression that this is a beer
garden?"
"I thought it was an oasis, and you will tell me that it is
only a mirage? And yet it tastes real enough."
“This is our kitchen garden," she said, “and my husband
is drinking his breakfast."
“Oh. I am sorry that I presumed,” Finnegan said, “but I
do not offer to leave. That I have a place to stay is a
matter of life and death-mine."
“I wouldn't let you leave now," Gertrude said. “I have
adopted you on sight."
“There was a little shooting down the road a few miles
a little earlier," Brannagan said. “Did you hear any talk
about it?"
“No. I didn't hear any talk. You're the first ones in
town I've talked to. There were some men shooting at me
a while ago, and then I was shooting at them. It was
,
possibly the same incident."
"Likely. Are they still after you?"
"I think so. Forever."
“What do they want with you, Finnegan?”
"They want to kill me."
152
9)
9
»
“But why? You don't appear to be worth much alive.
How would you be any more valuable dead?”
“They want my suitcase."
"I like a man who gives straight answers, even if they
don't tell anything, Finnegan. But I do understand. Go
inside the house and we can talk and drink together
through this window. I will keep the predators off.”
"Ah-they are not the kind to fool with," said Finne-
gan.
"Neither am I,” said Brannagan.
Inside with Gertrude, Finnegan felt safe. She was her-
self a fortress. She was a gulf-state lady of forty-five, give
or take fifteen years either way. It was hard to tell how
old Gertrude was. She was full-built and pretty, dark and
a little frenchy, curly of hair and smile, voluted and
parapetted. Finnegan knew a little about architecture
from his studies of art and related subjects, and he had
always been partial to the Living Gothic.
“We should know you, Finnegan," said Gertrude. "How
could we have missed such an interesting young man? We
haven't many visitors, but we do have interesting ones. My
husband will abide no other kind."
"And I ought to know you people," Finnegan said. He
didn't say it just to be saying it. He half remembered them
as friends of friends in his other life. He'd have it in a
minute. “Gertrude," he asked, “what town is this any.
how?"
"Biloxi, of course. You didn't know that? You lost little
shoat!”
“Is the goat in the garden Biloxi Brannagan?"
“He is indeed, dear, though more properly John Joseph.
Is there some connection?"
“Yes. But I've always believed that when you surprise a
coincidence uncovered the only decent thing is to turn
away and leave it. You'll never have it, Aunt Gertrude. I
came to you by blessed fate. It was imperative that I have
a place. I claim this place as a right, and I will not even
tell you why."
"Oh, I'll have it, Finnegan? Who do you know? Who
knows us?”
Marie, in St. Louis, had often told tall stories of her
Aunt Gertrude and of Biloxi Brannagan. And also she had
often told tall stories of Finnegan, a catch-all for curious
153
1
episodes in their group. Finnegan never spoke of any
connection again, nor did Aunt Gertrude or Biloxi; but
Biloxi did several times refer to these mutual acquaint-
ances as though he would know they were mutual.
This was a breezy house, full of gulf winds and two
breezy people, with just enough mystery about them to
sauce it up. They were people who told Finnegan every-
thing about themselves except the cold details. It was
never clear to Finnegan how Brannagan had managed to
retire from the sea and sit for a third of a century
drinking beer and watching ships from his garden table.
But he had done exactly that, Gertrude said. It isn't
known why he never went back to sea, though he would
not leave the sight of it.
But somewhere along the line he had acquired a rich
windfall. Also, he gave the impression that he was a fugitive
with much of the world barred to him. Brannagan would
not, in fact, leave his private beer garden, though he
seemed safe there. And 'they' would not cross the line
after him.
"How did you happen to think of the nose, Finnegan?”
he asked. “It's good. Most of them wear a goatee, or go
to great lengths to emphasize some facial aspect. But the
nose is really good."
“Dammit, Biloxi, what's it good for?”
"With a nose like yours, who notices the other thing?"
“What other thing?"
"That you're chinless."
Finnegan sat at the table just inside the kitchen window,
and Brannagan sat at the table just outside; and there they
talked for the most part of four days and four nights. But
with so many things to talk about, they never did get
down to asking the particular secret of the other. Or did
Brannagan guess that of Finnegan?
“Do you know what the world most suffers with. Finne-
gan?” Brannagan asked. “Brain damage. It's a selective
idiocy. Aye, it's from an epidemic, a recurring infection.
Do you know the germ that carries the infection, Finne-
gan?”
"On one level I do, but we're not thinking of the same
thing."
“Yes we are, Finnegan, This germ, in size, is at the
154
9
opposite end of the scale from the virus. In fact, it's a
man-sized germ, and it repeatedly infects. It is endemic at
all times; but it was several times epidemic: in ancient
times, in the low Middle Ages, about six hundred and fifty
years ago, and from a hundred and fifty years ago to the
present. It is the attacking parasite, the alien within. And
it is no less completely alien because it is within. I don't
see anything that will keep it from destroying its host and
itself this time."
Brannagan had been to more places than Finnegan had,
including the same places. He had not only skirted the
d'Entre-Casteau Islands, he had walked all over them. He
had not only sailed through the China Straits, he had
dived in them for old wrecks. He had not only climbed the
Cloudy Mountains, but had panned gold in their streams
and dips.
"I've lived in the interior of Java, Finnegan. I've lived in
any number of wonderful places. Then I came to Biloxi,
the most romantic spot on Earth, and I stayed here,
though it is not even an island. Ah, but there's small
islands I could swim to if it ever gets dangerous. But now
that I mention it, there are no bad islands, and there are
no unromantic places. Biloxi is on a continent, but I
overlook that for the love I bear it. I've always felt that
the continents were unsafe and impermanent. When the
cosmic catastrophe comes, and I expect it any day, I
believe that all the continents will sink and only the islands
will stand fast.
"A cosmic student to whom I confided my theory does
not share my fear of the impermanence of the continents.
Or rather he thinks that when the continents sink the
islands will not be far behind.
“But here I fell in love with Biloxi, a port just warm
enough for gracious living, in a wild fresh country that is
cousin of my own. And here I met a French girl, Ger-
trude, and I wondered how I would go about the thing. I
had much against me. I was an unhandsome and awkward
seaman, and moreover I was Australian.
“I had never proposed to a girl before except in fun. I
didn't know how to do it, and nobody could tell me.
Consequently it was never done. The first definite knowl-
edge I had of it was when Gertrude's mother told me they
had picked out the date. I married her, but I'm damned if
155
I ever proposed to her. Other men I've talked to say that
they don't remember proposing either."
"You are an old goat and luckier than you deserve to
be," Finnegan said.
“Ah, you love her. All the young men love her and she
loves them. As I say, I settled down here and have been
sitting in this chair for twenty-five years. There was an old
chair that I used before that for ten years, but it wasn't
comfortable and I disposed of it. I sometimes get up to go
to the bathroom, but that's about all. I don't have to go as
often as I used to.
“I'm content to sit and look at the sea. You can see four
little islands from here. They are Deer Island, Hom Is-
land, Ship Island, and Cat Island. I could swim to all of
them, but I've never been to any of them. High tide comes
to just about seven feet from my chair, but in thirty-five
years the only salt water to touch me has been the actual
spray when it reaches out. It's just that when I'm sitting
down I don't like to get up."
"How do you manage it, financially, I mean?” Finnegan
asked.
"When I first came here, thirty-five years ago, I brought
along a sea bag of about the importance of your own
suitcase. I have always liked to carry everything I need in
a sea bag; this one was packed to carry everything I
would ever need. I hope I don't make myself too clear. I
like to pose as a man with a secret.
"I doubt that I would have gotten Gertrude without
such a valuable baggage. She was better looking than I
was in those days; I tell her now that the situation has
reversed. But while I was trying to work up my courage
to propose, the contents of my sea bag made themselves
known to her by a sort of osmosis, and soon we were
married.
"I might add that my wife has a sense of things like
that, and even now she has divined the great value of your
own luggage, even though it is securely locked and she
hasn't been into it. Not that she is honorable, but she
cannot fathom locks,
“This makes for a tricky situation. For, while she would
rather be tom by wild horses (I think she'd like that, she
uses the phrase often) than breathe a word of your secret
(she does not breathe such things, she tells them breath-
156
а
lessly), yet the odds are that by tomorrow, if I do not
throttle her or exgloss her, the neighborhood will know
that the young man staying with us has a suitcase with
over half a million dollars in it."
"You've a deeper reason for settling in Biloxi than
looking at the sea," Finnegan said.
"Sometimes I look at the neighborhood also. When I
first came here there was a most attractive lady living in
that white house. She was such a pretty lady, with a
husband and a young daughter. I used to sit here just to
catch five or six glimpses of her every day. This went on
for several very pleasant years.
"Then she disappeared. She had run off with a fast-
talking man, and she should not have. Now my days were
empty as I sat here, and I really believe that I would have
packed and left town had I not finally noticed something
very interesting. Her daughter of about fourteen was stay-
ing with papa and had not gone off with my lady and the
fast-talking man. And her daughter was her very image.
“ 'I am set here for a long time,' I said. They had the
same sweep of the hips, the same dip of the shoulders, a
certain wonderful sameness about the knees. So I pleas-
antly enjoyed the view of the daughter for twenty years
while she married and in tum had a daughter. And then
what would you guess happened?"
"She also ran off with a fast-talking man."
“She did that. She left her good husband and fifteen-
year-old daughter bebind. Now, with her to look at no
longer, there was surely nothing to keep me in Biloxi.”
"Unless it was that her fifteen-year-old daughter in tum
had a wonderful likeness to her."
"And that is the truth of the matter, Finnegan. For you
saw her not half an hour ago, Finnegan (she is now a few
years beyond fifteen), and you noticed her closely though
you said nothing. Her own daughter is now about six years
old. If the trend holds, she should be of sufficient age
when the next fast-talking man comes along and the
mother leaves. I believe that I will have this beautiful
scenery here forever."
Finnegan was at a disadvantage in judging the stories of
Brandagan. He could not tell when Brannagan lied. He
was not able to appraise just how tall the stories were. It
would seem chronologically impossible for one man to
157
a
)
have done all that Brannagan said he had done, and still
have time left over to sit for thirty-five years on a chair on
the shore in Biloxi. But there was no trapping the man.
Finnegan knew history of the usual sort. He did not
know the details of history of Brannagan's sort. He did
not know what skirmishes the Australian irregulars had
been in, for Brannagan was Australian. He did not know
how many times a man can move in and out of the
various branches of the Empire armament; and he did not
know the names of the main actions on the Afghan bora
der.
There was a strange familiarity to the sound of some of
the adventures, almost as if they had once been told by
other men; and Finnegan was often on the verge of
remembering where and when.
He was willing to admit that a man could get rich by
trading in Circassian slave-girl futures on the Aden mar-
ket, a canny man who watched the trends. He would
allow that the brown stone statues of Sjabrir were men
petrified standing by the Seti darts and the quick-acting
juices in which they were dipped. He could accept that
Prester John still lived in the interior of Madagascar, a
rather foppish little man in the center of a static culture.
But he took it with a low degree of credit that among the
Simuka the men bear the children, even though Bran-
nagan himself had witnessed such parturitions. And he
would not believe that Brandagan had himself handled
raw diamonds the size of ducks' eggs.
"They must be small ducks in that country," he said, "I
wonder what species they are."
"No, they're not particularly small ducks, Finnegan.
Why? Anas Paludosa is their species, and they're rather
large for paludosae. I said duck egg only for comparison.
A little larger, really. I've heard of much larger ones, but
I credit only those I've held in my hand.”
"Then this would seem rather small to you,” Finnegan
said. It was a foolish thing to do but he couldn't resist it.
From a little sack around his neck he slipped out the
largest stone he had, one that would have bugged the eyes
of a real expert.
"Yes, a little small, Finnegan, though I'm surprised that
you would have such. From Sierra Leone, is it not? One
158
)
can tell, of course, by the vestigial clay still in the faults of
it."
Well dammit how did he know that! Oh well, you
couldn't catch that man, and you sure couldn't top him,
but it was an experience trying.
Finnegan himself had lived some pretty good stories,
and he now borrowed shamelessly from high experts he had
known. They passed the days and nights pleasantly. Both
of them liked to talk.
"Were you ever to Naxos?” Finnegan asked Brannagan
on the third day.
"Sure. They mine emery there. It's their best known
export. And their least known is mermaids' hair. They
don't sell it on Naxos itself, out of some ancient reluc-
tance, but you can get it from Naxos in little shops on
Siros and Tinos and Kea. It is not, as is popularly sup-
posed, fine of texture and light of color. It is rather—"
"I have seen it and handled it,” Finnegan said. “Blue
sparks would jump two inches whenever she combed it.
It's black, but there are lavender lights in it. I cry inside
when I remember how I handled it, the short-cropped
electric stuff."
But there was more to the days and nights than just
high talk. Aunt Gertrude cooked with as much extrava-
gance as Brandagan talked. There were things about her
cooking that you might not believe, but you couldn't
afford not to eat. When she made rice ribby, the whole
world gaped amazed. She had to be French and something
a little darker also to cook it like that. She had huckleber-
ry wine and greenberry wine and perry. She put pecans in
everything, even pancakes. She roasted pork so opulent that
it was a scandal.
Turtle chowder! Brannagan said that he had the turtles
flown in special from Galapagos, but it was a lie. They
were turtles from the local fishermen, but when Aunt
Gertrude had finished with them they were turtles from
Heaven. This was a southern home untouched by the
curse of southern fried chicken and com bread, and Fin-
negan offered thanksgiving at finding a citadel of sanity.
He gained in weight and wisdom when he was with
them, and added the place to his index of nostalgias
forever.
Finnegan got a long-distance phone call early one
159
moming, after he had been there three days and three
nights.
"Are you Signor Solli y Gordonasco?" Gertrude called
out to him.
“I probably am. I'm almost sure that I am." He took it,
It sounded like a man speaking from a badly ventilated
grave.
“The goats are staked out and bleat near the delta,"
said the sepulchral voice. “But the hunters are in cover
and waiting for the tiger.
"Oh hell, X, what are you trying to tell me?"
"How did you know it was I? I was disguising my
voice. Or rather, what makes you think this is X, whoever
or whatever that may be? Stay away from your old haunts
in New Orleans if it was your idea of returning there. Stay
away from your old haunts everywhere; they watch for
you everywhere. And you can stay no longer where you
are. It is time to flee. I see your luck running out on you
like sand. Be steadfast. There may be a role for you to
play in the affair but I can't imagine what it is. I'd better
ring off. This call may be monitored.”
"Oh, come off that, XI” Finnegan exclaimed, but X had
already hung up.
“Who was that?" Brannagan was curious through the
window.
“My antipodal ghost. We're just alike only a world
apart."
"I just think I know that fellow,” Brannagan said, "even
though I am some feet from the phone, even though the
voice was disguised. I bet I know him."
"I bet he knows you," Finnegan said. “I have to go, he
says. They'll be onto me here, and everywhere."
"Do you want to take Gertrude's car?"
“Yes.”
"She'll fix up the title. And she can go around and get
yours from the police pond. They're both about equally
worthless. Gertrude, go take care of things! What I like
about my wife is that she takes care of things.” And
Gertrude did.
" “Brannagan, have you the double blood in you?” Finne-
'
gan asked suddenly.
“I won't pretend that I don't know what you mean,
Finnegan. I will only say that you don't know what you
160
9
99
3
mean. I have it a little, and you have it a little. There are
several recensions of it. It saves time to have it. We have
the entire conflict within ourselves."
It was all over with and Finnegan had to go. Gertrude
had taken over, and the coast was clear-except for two
little girls playing on it about a hundred yards down.
Finnegan shook hands with Brannagan, kissed Gertrude,
did it four or five more times when he found it was fun,
threw his suitcase in and got in the car.
"It's been all too short," said Brandagan in parting.
“Brandagan and Finnegan make a nice novelty act. If
you're not killed, and if you ever get back to Biloxi, stay
again and we can talk some more. Hear Brannagan's
outré theory, the Procession of the Epics. The part about
the Kalevala will absolutely make the hairs on your head
rise up."
161
Chapter Fourteen
COMPANY OF FIFTY
There were giants on the earth in those days, and also
afterward, when the sons of God had relations with the
daughters of men, who bore children to them. These
were the mighty men of old, the men of renown.
GENESIS, 6-4
1.
“These are the mighty men of right now," Finnegan
said truculently, and he felt mighty. “But its seeming has
been inverted. Who was it who went into whose daugh-
ters?”
Something came over Finnegan then. And this was the
Transport of Finnegan upon certain shadowy history.
“Ah, we were a short stubby folk, bandy-legged and
a little stooped. How is it then that even God remembers
us as giants?
“We were the people of the earth itself. We were here
at the making of the hills. And how can we be called
aliens?
"We adored in caves, and buried our dead with boughs
of yew and elder. And how can they say that we are
devils?
"We were a Childhood in the deep fimbul-winter, and
we invented all childhood inventions. How then have we
become the boogeren?
“We were the brothers of animals, of the giant stag, of
the nobler bison, of the cave bear and the wooly rhinocer-
os. And how has animality become a dirty thing?
“We were a Valley; and our name is Valley of the New
Men, not of the old. But how have they denied us every
valley?
“We were the people before the people, and how is it
said that we are not people at all?
162
"We labored the million years to raise ourselves. And
who were these ganglers who arrived full-blown and full-
brained to supercede us? Are not they the aliens?
"Was Cain of ourselves? Which of us bears the mark,
plain on the face, that lower protuberance like another
nose?
"Who made the blood, out of salinity and iron and all
elementals? Who remembers the deep cisterns of the
?
earth? Who remembers the blue ice of our childhood? It is
not those summer sojourners upon the earth.
“What if ghostliness and prodigies and dual manifesta-
tions are a part of us? Must we cut out that part of
ourselves?
"What if the parasite is older than the host? How then
is it parasite?
"What of the deep rivers and streams in the earth?
What of the deep rivers and streams in the people? Shall
the deepest river of them be cursed?
"What if we be the sword inside, the sword of God? Is
it right that we should stay this sword?
“ 'Show mercy to the victors,' said our own prophet. But
how has our mercy been answered?
"Which is the treason for us of the double blood?
"Is it then some of ourselves who must protect the
people from ourselves? And what have the people done
for us?"
A Transport cannot last long. Then it goes into vague
rhapsody
“The thing is biologically and genetically impossible.
Was Mendel wrong? Were Morgan and Galton and Paint-
er? Was even the great Asimov wrong? How is it possible
to throw an angry primordial after a thousand gener-
a
ations? How is it possible to do it again and again?
"Where did we primordial aliens vanish when we were
defeated and harried from the face of the earth? Into
deep caves or swamps, into forests or inaccessible moun-
tains, to distant sea islands like Tasmania? Some of us did,
for a few thousand years. But many hid cannily in the
bloodstream of the victors. They became the Aliens With-
in, and they had vowed a vengeance. And now and again,
at intervals of centuries, they erupt in numbers, establish
centers, and carry on the war to near death. This time,
163
1)
this time, they swear it will be to final overthrow and
extermination.”
The rhapsody had left Finnegan, but it left him weak.
He came back to the world. Le Marin was with him
there, reading a magazine with a gaudy cover. It was full
of stories of monstrous aliens from the stars, written by
Van Vogt and Leinster and such.
"Le Marin, you read about aliens from the stars who
invade," Finnegan said. “Did you not know that there are
nearer monsters and aliens?”
“I know it, Monster, and you know it,” said Le Marin,
"but we do not want everyone to know it."
They were in the Old Wooden Ship, a rambling building
of four stories.
"Three," said Le Marin. Frenchmen do not count the
same as do other people. You can count the stories of
every building in town, and a Frenchman will always
come up with one story less. Nevertheless, the Old Wood-
en Ship had four stories. It was unpainted and pungent, the
last building in a garlic block, with raked shells for a
sidewalk. It had dozens of doors; inside and outside stair-
ways climbing all over it; loose slat shutters; and an
uncanny swaying creaking motion like that of an old ship
indeed.
Finnegan and Le Marin had been hanging around the
Ship. It was in the town where Finnegan had first met
Seaworthy and the Devil and Anastasia and the other
ghosts. It was the first time since then that Finnegan had
been back to the town. He had set a death trap there. He
was waiting for reappearances.
Le Marin, however, was not entranced with the Old
Wooden Ship.
“The people here are decadent,” he said. “They are
fragmented; they are episodical. There is no overall pat-
tem to their lives, no clean strong lines to them.”
"I knew a bunch with clean strong lines to them, and an
overall pattern," Finnegan said, “and I love them less than
my blood requires me to. I've about decided to opt for the
humans. They're full of humanity, I tell you, and I've got
a hunger for it. I have a need to immerse myself in these
people, fragmented and decadent though they be."
The first story of the Old Wooden Ship (which Le
Marin said was not a story at all, how can it be a story if
164
it's on the ground) was the bar. And these were the people
who might be found in the bar, besides Le Marin and
those you will meet again; those are the regulars:
Tippio (George Tibeau), Freddy Tin-Horn Forca, Sul-
phur-Bottom Sullivan, Swede Aansen, Swede Kristjanses,
Swede Bjork, Swede Bergen, Big Swede Swanson, John
(Little Alcohol) Indelecio, John (Big Alcohol) Jereboam,
Russ, Smokehouse, Bill (Buffalo Chips) Dugan, Bob,
Charley (-horse) Heckel, Harold (Shrimp Boat) Gordon,
Tom, Bamey, Dotty Danvers, Dotty Peisson, Dotty
Hulme, Little Dotty Nesbitt, Nelly Leakley, Violet, Little
Eva Vickers, Mary, Avril Aaron, Frieda, Jeannie, Mae,
Dutch Duquesne, Little Dutch Eckel, Art (One Shot)
Yoder, Art (Two Shot) Welch, John Sourwine (Sour
John), Tommy (Cow Town) Borger, Jake (-Leg) Lewis,
Sebastian (Shot Gun) Schaeffer, George (Basin Street)
Becaud, Catherine Cadensus, Giuseppe (Raviola Joe) Ga-
brielangelo, Vivian Gilligan, Sammy (Saddle Sore) Sand-
ers, Soft-Talk Susie Kutz, Benny (Bay Rum) Boerum,
Ouida (Cotton Picker) Garrard, Harold A. (Honeybuck-
et) Kincaid, Mercedes Morrero, Aloysius (Basket
Weaver) McGivem.
One is forgoti One is forgot! There should be fifty in
that brave company.
Others like Finnegan and Le Marin and the boys from
the beach might come in three or four times a day. Some,
like Dry Gulch Cavaldos, came in twenty times a day. But
they were not like these regulars who, living there, were
always there.
Each of the fifty regulars had an interesting story. Had
we but the time we would tell them all, but we cannot.
Not even tell the story of the proprietor Lazarus Reilly
who had taken to heart the story about entertaining angels
unaware. So he never tumed down anyone, lest he be an
angel in disguise, and Lazarus be guilty of slighting him.
“A man of my sort can't be too careful,” Lazarus would
say. "I have so much to make up for."
"
So to anyone who came along Lazarus would give a
room and a bed, and beer credit, and a loan of money.
These were the only credentials that any of the fifty had
on their first coming to the Old Wooden Ship, that they
might be an angel unaware. But many of them made good
165
)
guests, and enough of them now paid part of the time that
it wasn't necessary that all of them pay all the time.
In reality the only one of them who was an angel
unaware was Soft-Talk Susie Kutz the barmaid of the
Ship. She made irregular reports to the Lord, and made
them a little better than they should have been; for which
reason those at the Old Wooden Ship prospered more than
they deserved. And if, the next time the world is de-
stroyed, you should find that the Old Wooden Ship is one
of the places spared, do not be surprised. This will be the
reason,
We cannot stop to tell the story of the five Swedes who
were one of them Norse, one Danish, one an Icelander,
one German, one from the Orkney Islands, and none of
them Swedes at all. But they were all very like Swedes,
they were all valiant Viking seamen, except Swede Bergen.
Bergen had sailed once, and he never would again.
He had been sick all the way over on the ship. When he
got to land he swore that he would never leave it. He
wrote his wife to come across and join him, for he could
not walk back, and to go by sea again would kill him. But
his wife as a little girl had also been on a ship and had
been sick. She would not come. They have been writing
letters for twenty years, each begging the other to cross,
but they will be separated forever unless someone builds a
bridge across the Atlantic.
Nor can we tell the story about Sulphur-Bottom Sul-
livan and how he got his name. He had been baptized
Clarence, and his parents had never called him anything
else. And yet it's a remarkable story how he came by his
name of Sulphur-Bottom.
We cannot tell the story of Tippio, though Tippio told a
lot of stories about Tippio, like this one:
Tippio got on a scales in the bus station and put a penny
in and got a card: 'Your name is Tippio, you weigh 168
pounds, you're going to Port Arthur, and you forgot to
shave this moming.'
"I didn't forget, I just didn't do it," he said. He knew
that the scales was fallible then, and he thought he'd get
ahead of it. He tore up his ticket to Port Arthur and
bought one to the Valley. He tumped up his collar and put
his hat on backwards and got on the scales again. This time
the card said, 'Your name is still Tippio and you weigh 168
166
pounds. You tore up your first ticket like a fool and now
you're going to the Valley.'
Tippio tore up his second ticket and went and got a
crew cut and a pair of sun glasses. He went and traded
clothes with a bum in the men's room, and came back to
fool the scales. This time the card said, 'Your name is still
Tippio and you aren't going anywhere. You left your
money in your pants when you traded with the bum, and
you can't buy another ticket. And you look like hell in a
crew cut.' So Tippio never did leave town; he hadn't the
money to go on, so he's still there.
We cannot tell the story of Freddy Tin-Hom Forca
who was called that because that is the kind of sport he
was. And we haven't the nerve to chronicle the doings of
John (Little Alcohol) Indelecio and John (Big Alcohol)
Jereboam. These were a raw pair. They were burglars.
Little Alcohol did the climbing and the high window
work. Big Alcohol was the drill, saw, chisel, and pry-bar
man. But they didn't work very hard at their trade. Only
when they were very far in debt to Lazarus Reilly would
they do a job.
Nor can we tell you here about the multi-billion dollar
idea of Harry A. (Honeybucket) Kincaid. Honeybucket
was in trouble with the Corporation Commission following
his application to incorporate and sell seventy-five billion
dollars worth of stock. “Haven't you a few too many zeros
there?” a commissioner asked him.
“I don't see where I can shave a nickel off the thing,"
Honeybucket said resolutely.
“Just what is the billion dollar idea?” the commissioner
asked.
"I will take plankton from the ocean and feed it to
livestock," said Honeybucket. “Doesn't that astonish you?
It astonished me when I first thought of it. At once all the
habits of the globe are changed. Famine is demolished.
All industry is realigned. We have a limitless source, and
we can harvest our plankton, by any system of costs, at a
tenth of the expense of com or any fodder. We dip
screens, charged at certain voltages and frequencies, into
the ocean. The plankton settle on the screens inches thick
in seconds. We haul it in, cut the charge, dump it. It's like
loading scrap iron with a magnet.”
"How does it taste?" the commissioner asked him.
167
а
9)
"It tastes terrible. At first even the hogs wouldn't eat it,
nor the cattle. They took some working on. Camels are
the only animals to eat it willingly at first. We have twenty
good milk camels now. The present name of our company
is the Ancient Syrian Cheese Company. Nobody would
guess that a firm with a name like that was about to
change the world. We will feed the stuff to everything,
now that we've got everything liking it. We will raise,
slaughter, pack, and market the meat from hogs, cattle,
sheep, goats, camels, alpacas, llamas, rabbits, chickens,
turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, ostriches. Naturally we will
be the biggest butter and egg people in the world also.”
“Why do you want to make so much money?" the
commissioner asked him.
"I'll tell you why," said Honeybucket. "Someday I'll be
in a barroom popping off, and there will be a little man
down at the end of the bar who won't like me. And when
I'm finally putting it on good, what do you think the little
man will say? He'll say, 'If you're so damned smart why
aren't you rich.' Yes, that's just what he'll say. That'll be
the moment I've lived for. I'll say 'I am rich.' And the
way I say it, he'll know that I am. But you can't fake a
thing like that. I've got to get rich first."
And yet the commissioner turned down the request, and
he shouldn't have. It wasn't that Honeybucket had actually
tried the idea; he didn't even know what plankton looked
like. But his story wasn't entirely a lie. He did own a
camel. He had once operated a camel ride at the amuse-
ment park, but riding a camel makes people seasick, and
the concession was a failure. He still has the camel. It
lives on weeds in the weed patch behind the Old Wooden
Ship. The Ship is the only barroom in town with a camel
in the weed patch behind it.
We cannot tell you about Russ unless we also tell you
about Smokehouse and Buffalo Chips Dugan, and Bob,
and Charleyhorse Heckel, for these five were all cut from
the same side of the animal. Smokehouse and Bill worked
in the same garage. Originally they had worked there at
the same time, but the proprietor had always got them
mixed up though they were no more than passing similar
in appearance. They had a great idea:
One of them quit his job, no matter which one. After
that, they worked on alternate days, and the manager
168
never did catch on. At the end of the week they split the
pay. This gave them only half as much money as they had
before, but it gave them twice as much time off.
Russ and Bob and Charley horse were steerers. They
would scour the town looking for a live one, and they
would steer him to the Old Wooden Ship. A man thirty
blocks away could arrive at that state where he wanted to
buy drinks for everybody, and instantly one of them was
at his side to guide him to the Ship. They had an instinct
for it.
They also were rollers, but that did not concem the
Ship. They always did it in the camel-lot out back, if a
man had spent all he was going to spend and was still
loaded. Nobody loves a hoarder.
Shrimp Boat Gordon, Tom, and Barney were commer-
cial fishermen, but they didn't fish very often. Every
morning they would look at the sea and sky, and smell the
air. “What do you think?" Shrimp Boat would ask.
“What do you think?” Tom would ask.
"What do you think?" Barney would ask. And oftener
than not they would decide that it was a poor day for
fishing, and would stay in the Old Ship to drink.
A lot of people got Dotty Danvers, Dotty Peisson,
Dotty Hulme, and Little Dotty Nesbitt mixed up. For one
thing, they had married a lot of the same people. Dotty
Danvers and Dotty Hulme had both been married to
Buffalo Chips Dugan. Dotty Danvers and Little Dotty
Nesbitt had also been married to two brothers in Sugar-
land, Texas, to one of whom Dotty Hulme had previously
been married. And Dotty Danvers had also been married to
a man of the same name as the first husband of Little
Dotty Nesbitt. Dotty Peisson didn't get married very of-
ten, and only by association was she classed with the other
Dottys in this. Dotty Peisson, as you may already know,
was the best Galveston-style piano player in the world.
Most of the girls who lived at the Ship were married to
seamen. They were called salt water widows: Nelly Leak-
ley, Violet, Little Eva Vickers, Mary, Avril Aaron,
Frieda, Jeannie, Mae.
Dutch Duquesne looked like a snapping turtle. He was
a waiter at the Balinese Room, or else one of those other
places at the end of the pier, anyway the swankiest place
in town. He said he made a hundred dollars a night in
169
tips, but nobody ever saw any of that money. He always
went to the clubs as soon as he was off work and lost it
on the games. 'Easy come, easy go,' he would say.
But Mary who worked at the clubs said that Dutch
never lost more than five dollars at the game, that he
never had more than five dollars, that mostly be just stood
around and watched the games. He wasn't a waiter, and
nobody ever tipped him. He was a kitchen boy who
cleaned fish and shucked oysters.
Little Dutch Eckel was an engineer who worked at one
of the refineries in Texas City. But he still lived at the Old
Ship because they had let him live there when he was
poor. He was the prince of the place and he spent more
money there than anyone else did, .
Art (One Shot) Yodel and Art (Two Shot) Welch were
card sharps and tricksters, but they weren't very good ones.
It took a very sharp pair to keep ahead of the marks now,
and the field was so crowded that they were always being
taken by sharpies better than themselves.
We cannot tell you the story of John Sourwine here.
But how that Sour John could tell stories!
Tommy Cow-Town Borger and Jake-Leg Lewis were
salt water cowboys. The only things they ever rode were
cattle boats. But live cattle shipments were getting very
rare and they had very long times between voyages. They
always wore boots and spurs and chaps and gauntlets,
although they did not use horses in their business.
2.
If only it weren't so near to evening we could have the
story of Sebastian (Shot Gun) Schaeffer. It goes like this:
A beautiful lady approached him once. “Aren't you
Shot Gun?" she asked him.
“Indeed I am," he said, for he was. But the lady had
him mixed up with some of the other Shot Guns in town.
Schaeffer's name had no connection with the weapon. He
was called Shot Gun because he had invented a drink of
that name.
"Well come along," said the lady to Shot Gun, "and
170
let's see what kind of job you've done. I'll have to be
satisfied with it before I pay you.
They got in a car; she drove him out to a lovely estate;
they entered a mansion. Upstairs in the mansion they
found a distinguished looking gentleman with his head
pretty well blown off.
"That's a real nice job,” said the lady. “It must take a
special talent to do a job like that.”
"Indeed it does, ma'am,” said Shot Gun, for he could
think of nothing else to say.
"And if I ever need another job like this I will call
you."
“Thank you, ma'am. And I also do yard work."
"Well a bargain is a bargain," said the lady. “I believe
you said five on the phone.” And she gave him five
thousand dollars.
“Thank you, ma'am,” said Shot Gun, and he touched
bis cap and left. He was too embarrassed to refuse the tip,
even though he knew that the lady had made a mistake,
That's the story we would have told of Shot Gun
Schaeffer, had we but the time. But, as he often told it
himself, you may already have heard it. One at least who
bad heard it was George (Basin Street) Becaud. Basin
Street played a bull fiddle in an orchestra, and he carried
it in a large case.
"What is that thing anyhow?" Shot Gun Schaeffer asked
him once.
“How come your name's Shot Gun, and you don't know
a shot gun when you see it in its proper case?" Basin
Street asked him. “This is an 800-gauge shot gun. I can
decapitate a bull elephant with this.
"By the way, Shot Gun, somebody got us mixed up a
couple of years ago and you collected for one of my jobs.
I'm sure you didn't mean to, but there's one way you can
square it if you do it at once. I'm short on cash tonight, so
run up and get the five thousand dollars. I'm kind of in a
hurry."
“Yes sir, right away sir," Shot Gun Schaeffer would
always say. And he would scuttle up to his room and
lock the door and put a chair against it. And every night
Basin Street would dog him again.
"I had to leave on another job last night, Shot Gun, so I
couldn't wait for you to bring me the money,” Basin Street
171
would say. “Ah, it was a messy job, but it's a life. Run up
and get the five right now. I'm a little short and pretty
edgy."
"Yes sir, right away sir," Schaeffer would say. Then he
would go tearing up one of the old outside stairways to his
pidgeon-roost at the top, and lock himself in.
Basin Street looked very sinister, as do all bull fiddle
players; and Shot Gun Schaeffer spent many terrified
hours. If it were not for the consuming of the shot guns
themselves, life would have been intolerable for him.
Catherine Cadensus was the prettiest girl who stayed at
the Old Ship, and it was to look at her that many a
stranger lingered in the bar. It was on account of her also
that Finnegan came in more and more often. She ran
around with Vivian Gilligan and Ouida (Cotton Picker)
Garrard and Mercedes Morero. Nowhere in the world
had there ever been four such pretty girls together at
once. They were class.
Vivian was a stunner with so much hair that she
couldn't keep it all on top of her head. There was always
a lot of it down around her lovely neck and wonderful
shoulders. Cotton Picker was a Cajun girl who liked to be
taken dancing and riding by strangers. Hey, she did make
them feel welcome around that town! Mercedes Montero
was very dark and she had gold jangles hung all over her,
around her neck, and from ears, fingers, wrists, and an-
kles. She was habit-forming. She was like salted peanuts;
she made one stay and drink more and more. And if
Finnegan came into the bar to look at Catherine Caden-
sus, he stayed to look at Mercedes.
But she worried about herself.
"Everyone thinks I'm kind of dumb just because I never
say anything," she complained. "Hell, Finnegan, if I say
something they'll know for sure how dumb I am. Wottle I
do?"
“Keep them guessing, darling. Three or four words are
enough for a woman to speak in any one day.”
>
Raviola, Saddle Sore, and Bay Rum were unkempt and
uncouth, and not at all up to the high standards main-
tained by the other folks at the Ship. It takes all kinds
though.
172
Aloysius (Basket Weaver) McGivern was paid a stipend
by his family to stay out of their way. There is the story
that they were ashamed of him. They were red-dog rich
and could afford it, and it was mutually advantageous.
Basket Weaver agreed to remain peacefully at the Old
Ship and to embarrass them not at all, if they would pay
him for it, and would promise not to send him to the
sanitorium again.
“It's the damned baskets," he would say. “I could stand
it in any of them if it weren't for the basket weaving. 'The
Devil finds work for idle hands to do,' they say. 'Let's
learn to weave the nice baskets. It will keep you happy
and busy.' Why the devil don't they put the Devil to
basket weaving if he's so worried about idle hands? Why
can't they let an honest man go to pieces in peace?"
After Catherine Cadensus, the prettiest girl at the Old
Ship was Soft-Talk Susie Kutz the barmaid and angel
unaware. An angel should be prettier than any human; but
we have heard this discussed by really competent judges,
and they all agreed that Catherine had it on Soft-Talk
by just a little.
A lot of this material here is copied from Soft-Talk
Susie's own reports, which is why these people appear so
much better than they really were. If someone had tried
to tell you what they are actually like, it would take a
long time, and you would be disgusted with them and
would turn away. And then you couldn't be sure that you
were any nearer the truth than was Soft-Talk Susie Kutz.
But if you really want the tote on them, come down to
the Ship tonight. Only you will have to buy.
Finnegan immersed himself in the Company of Fifty
for some time. He felt a crying need for assurance in the
reality of humanity. And, guys, humanity was what those
folks had!
The reason we haven't told you more about Le Marin,
or about Don Bamaby, is that they went with Finnegan
when he left town, and you will see them again.
But these noble fifty you may never see any more.
173
Chapter Fifteen
BASSE-TERRE
"You probably don't know that we had a hard time of
it after you died,” Finnegan told him. "You almost
didn't get buried. And mama changed a lot. When you
have a hard time of it, it makes you lose patience."
The old peasant Giulio Solli began to cry, deeply and
silently. Then he went away. That was the first that
Finnegan knew that his father had loved them all very
much. And they had all derided him, and perhaps they
had killed him.
-Archipelago, Chapter Ten
1.
Well, maybe Finnegan's father had loved them very
much, but there was something he didn't love. Finnegan
now realized that Giulio had been a part of a monstrous
apparatus, and he had died The Monster Forgotten. 'I
wonder how I would have tumed out if I had had a father
of the human sort? Finnegan wondered ironically.
We forgot Hildegarde Katt! How could we have forgot-
ten her? We love Hildegarde.
One day, in the Ship, Finnegan asked her who her
husband was.
“But you know him, dear,” she said. "He's the cop with
"
the little moustache named Tommy."
"It's an odd name for a moustache,” said Finnegan.
"It is unusual," said Le Marin who was there also. "I
knew an Englishman who had a moustache named Tank-
ersley. I knew a Nigerian who called his Cecil. Myself, in
my salad days, had one christened Pierre. But Tommy I
had not beard."
174
“No, I mean Tommy's name is Tonimy, not the
moustache's," said Hildegarde.
"Well, what is the moustache's name?" Finnegan per-
sisted.
"It doesn't have any name. "
“How old is it that it doesn't have any name?"
“About two years old. Oh, you guys are kidding.
One day Finnegan looked up, and the very person who
caught his eye was the cop with the little moustache
named Tommy.
Finnegan had seen Art Emery standing on a street
comer and picking his nose, and in sudden hatred had
knocked him flat. Finnegan had been overcome with fear
(not of Art, of course) and defeat and confusion. Then he
looked up, and that cop was eyeing him icily, and Tommy
seemed to have an unfamiliar twitch.
For the record, Tommy Katt was the toughest cop in
that town. Not mean, just tough.
"I wouldn't have done that, Finnegan, unless I had a
good reason," he said.
They were not particular friends. The cop did not
necessarily love everyone who loved his wife. To many of
them he was cool. Some people said that he shouldn't have
married a playgirl in the first place.
“I had a good reason,” Finnegan said. "I hate him. If
he is in town, maybe the Brunhilde is in port.”
"She is in port, Finnegan," said the cop with the
moustache, "and the boys are betting that you will not be
alive to answer the rooster in the moming."
Ah, that was wrong. Finnegan bad been in that town to
trap them coming in. He had a web spun out to take
them, and more delicate spider silks strung to signal him
when they should touch. But Finnegan would never be a
good retiarius, a net man.
He had, in fact, been about to leave town, Certain
conflagrations, insurrections, and slaughters in the Carib-
bean region had convinced him that he could better inter-
cept their course there.
They could not be here! And he could not be the last to
know it. He had lost every advantage. An old net man
named Saxon X. Seaworthy had already thrown a net over
him and intended to entangle him in it this night.
175
It wasn't for fear that Finnegan left town, however. He
had said that he was tired of running, that he would not
run any more. He was going to leave town anyhow. That
is the truth. In a little while it will be seen that it is the
truth.
For oddly he and Le Marin and a fellow Damed Don
Barnaby already had their passage. And now, after
scouting the town a little, Le Marin said that he believed
they might just as well leave the way and time they had
decided. So they left that night.
But before they left, Finnegan went fox hunting. He
planned in a hurry. He told Le Marin and Don Bamaby
to go ahead. "Hurry it,” Bamaby said, "we can just make
it now.” “Go ahead,” Finnegan said, “I'll be at the dock as
soon as you are.” They thought he was going to say
goodbye to some girl. They said "Hurry it, Finn.”
And Finnegan made a savage detour that delayed him
less than three minutes. He went feral. As a surging
animal he performed incredible feats in seconds. He had
his own intelligence, once over the surprise of being
slipped up on. He knew where they were.
He struck. Right on the sidewalk he killed two of their
guards. This was right downtown, on Church Street, in the
early evening. No longer man, but werecat, he went up
the outside of the building; he struck at an upper level
into the prepared fortress, the Pirate Hotel; he sent a
shock of terror through them, as a tiger sends through a
grass-hut village.
He struck death there. He got, he believed, his primary
prey. He left in a splatter of gunfire; and he was hit. He
came out shatteringly through a second story window,
over a false balcony, dropping many feet to the street.
And he heard a sour laugh as he left!
The laugh of the man who was smarter than the Devil,
who (it seemed to Finnegan) skipped from body to body
at the moment of striking and let another inherit his
death. Whomever Finnegan had killed in his animal
wrath, it was not yet Saxon Seaworthy.
The bleeding Finnegan ran into the tough cop Tommy
Katt in the side street across from the Church. Less than
three minutes for it all!
Tommy Katt always came to gunfire like iron filings to
a magnet. He enjoyed wading into the middle of it. But he
176
had just watched something that scared him: an erupting
creature too strong and swift and sure to be human, a
werecat. He watched in stunned amazement when it
struck death and then fled; when it was shot and only
snarled at the shot.
Then, when he grappled it (for he was cop, scared or
not) the werecat tumed into the winged and bleeding kid
with the big nose named Finnegan, the very one he had
been following and had lost.
“Get in the buggy fast, fast," he ordered. “I'm not
taking you in, I'm getting you out of here fast, Dammit,
Finnegan, you can't go around killing people. If I did not
know what people they were, I would take you in. I'm
putting my neck on the block for you now. Do you expect
people to hold an umbrella over you forever?”
Tommy Katt got Finnegan to the dock just in time.
Winged or not, he made it by jumping. He had jumped for
boats before. The seamen gave him a little cheer there,
not knowing what had happened.
2.
Finnegan had been beginning to write a letter. It had
been several years since he had answered a letter from
Theresa and Vincent in St. Louis, and he was going to do
it now. He had even started it. He wrote a salutation:
'Mon tres bon hote et ma tres douce hotesse
"Is that right?” he asked Le Marin who was French. “I
read it somewhere. Is it all spelled right?"
“Right enough, Finn boy. They aren't either of them
French, though, are they? Now go ahead and write the
letter to your friends."
“I'd better wait for tomorrow. The heading is enough
for one day, a real good day's work. I sure do like that
heading."
So Finnegan put the letter aside to finish writing it
another day. He never did finish it, but he often meant to.
1
Finnegan was in high clover, or in high oyster shells.
The shells were deeper and cleaner and more beautiful
and better raked than had been those at the Old Ship. The
177
sea was like a blue dream. Finnegan had money. He did
not know how much, but he had got nowhere near the
bottom of it. And when that was gone, be knew where
there was more, and still more, and still more, seven
stashes of it in all.
Finnegan was in Paradise, he and Charles Le Marin and
Don Barnaby and Johnny Duckwalk. And the way he
happened to go to Paradise was this:
He had been sitting one afternoon in the Old Wooden
Ship with Le Marin, reading a book. He had been reading
about Paradise in St. Francis de Sales. And it said:
'Oh how lovely, how desirable is this place! Oh how
precious is this City! And again it said: “let us go, my
dead soul, let us go toward this blessed land which is
promised us! What are we doing in Egypt?'
“I would go,” said Finnegan, “if I knew where it was.”
"I know where it is," said Le Marin who had been
reading the passages over Finnegan's nose, “and I will go
with
you. I am a little tired of lingering in Egypt myself.”
So they checked the boats and counted their immediate
money, and converted their vendible furniture, and took
passage.
“You are sure it is the place all right?” Finnegan asked.
“Nobody else has offered such a location for Paradise.
From what I had read, I did not even suspect that Para-
dise was on an island.”
”
“Yes it is,” Le Marin insisted. “You gotta read writ
right. Scripture tells of it being in the middle of four
rivers. This is a riddle for its being surrounded by water,
an island. If you were giving the theory to me, instead of
me to you, I know you could find a dozen old bishops and
old Jews to support it.”
"Why yes, I wouldn't have to go much further than St.
John Chrysostom, and if not he, then Jerome. But none of
them placed it in your part of the world. They looked for
it all over the Near East."
“That's why they didn't find it," said Le Marin.
)
Paradise is actually in the Antilles. That is why they
haven't found it in Persia or Mesopotamia or such unlike-
ly places. The great ones have read the old sources with
curiosity, but without real devotion, and they have missed
it.
178
Pay attention now. Here is exact information! Write it
down, the location of this Heaven on Earth. And then
settle your affairs and go there. Go tonight.
Nobody else has ever given the exact location of Para-
dise.
Paradise has a longitude of sixty-one degrees, forty-four
minutes, and forty-two seconds West. And a latitude of
exactly sixteen degrees North. This is the Terrestrial Para-
dise.
The other has a more difficult reckoning and is reached
by a longer and more dangerous voyage.
It was the Terrestrial one they went to, but St. Francis
had meant the Heavenly.
There is a beatitude about the Earthly one also. But in
it there are yet a few small snakes. In the end, it was the
snakes, of one sort or another, that drove them out of it.
Finnegan lived cheaply here, from habit, not from
need. Fifty cents would always get a bottle. He went bare-
foot like a boy. It wasn't that he didn't have shoes: he did
have a pair of shoes. One of his friends was keeping them
for him so they wouldn't get lost. Finnegan could have
them any time he wanted them.
They were at Basse-Terre. Now this is tricky. There is a
Basseterre and a Basse-Terre, and they are about a hun-
dred and fifty miles apart as the sea tem flies. One is
British and one is French, or they were so then.
Finnegan himself did not know which one he was at,
and he later said that he didn't even know there were two
of them. This was not the one he had long wanted to go
to. He had always meant to go to the Basseterte that is
on St. Kitts. Reaching the other one, he arrived at Para-
dise by accident, the only way it is ever arrived at.
Whatever place it was, it was in the Antilles and below
the Tropic. You have the bearings; do not be confused by
the names.
Here was a place that Finnegan and his friends—he had
three of them--called Sloppy Joe's. In point of fact it was
named either the Imperial Bar, or the Royal. It was called
Sloppy Joe's only in fun, for it was a clean, even fastidious
place.
It was joy to be there. There was greenery in front of it
to cut down the glare, and a light blue breeze ruffled the
golden air when it came in. The air itself smelled like
179
good rum with a touch of lime, and there was always that
almost inaudible tinkle coming from just above and be-
yond. The music of the spheres, when analyzed, has
proved to be the same sound as the tinkle of ice in a glass,
heard faintly and hardly recognized.
Quite near to Sloppy Joe's the four friends had four
hammocks strung up, these in a slightly secluded spot
where they spent endless long hours and days and weeks.
They drank the rum of the islands, and they had beer
and gin. They even had good Danish beer, though that
cost more than the island rum. They had no care for cost
of that or of anything. The four friends all had money.
Money is one of the requirements of a Paradise, especially
for the undeserving.
You would naturally think that four adventurers set
down in a haven like this would do a lot of drinking and
talking and lying around and chasing. They did what was
expected of them.
Two of them, the Duke of Moule (who was duke only
by nickname, and was named Don Barnaby) and Johnny
Duckwalk (it was spelled on his ships' papers Doekvalk),
chased the girls, the chocolate, high mabogany, almond,
and chestnut-colored girls. Chased them and caught them
too. Finnegan and Charles Le Marin did not, or not to
quite the same extent. In all other ways the Four lived the
same life.
(About that Don Barnaby, now, there was a peculiari-
ty. He reminded of another man. We will come back to
this and come back to it, but we will never get around it.)
If Finnegan was the most addicted to the drinking, yet
his gauged consumption was not greater than that of any
of the rest of them, and certainly was not up to that of
Johnny Duckwalk.
Johnny Duckwalk was a classic drinker, an old champi-
on. There was nobody on Basse-Terre who could outdrink
him. There were not a dozen men in all the Antilles who
could; there were fewer than a hundred men in the
whole world who could do it.
Finnegan had never been a heavyweight drinker like
that, but he was one of the most durable welterweights
around. They all of them stayed with it without faltering,
night and morning.
And they didn't entirely vegetate there. Besides chasing
180
the girls, they swam and fished, walked the island, went
out on the boats, played poker, told lies (mostly seafaring
and other-land lies), and brewed and blended a saltwater
philosophy.
If paradises were easy to come by, they would have
them everywhere, and they don't. There are requirements.
It must be below the frost line, and have a breeze and a
bloom. Thre must be at least one ship a week to break
the monotony. The Negroes must speak French, and the
Frenchmen must speak English. There must be a history
several centuries deep, a legend of the Lost Dauphin, and
a volcano named Soufriere. And the place must have been
discovered by Columbus himself. Also required are three
friends, to be, Charles Le Marin, Johnny Duckwalk, and
Don Barnaby the Duke of Moule (and there is something
amiss about that duke, we tell you, though there was
never a finer fellow).
With these, and a little money, paradise can be
achieved. And it can last for months on end if nothing
untoward comes to wreck it.
0
Finnegan now examined his own situation. 'There is a
certain entertainment in this life after death,' he said. 'I
need not keep to a pattem. The patter I have lived by, I
believe, was a people pattem, and it should not have
applied to one like myself. Why should I have Words-
wortbian Intimations of a Beginning, Baconian Turgidity
in the Middle, and Bierceian Irony at the End? I am not
thus. I know I have not come to the end here, but I have
come to something.
‘Did we ourselves ever find it in the old days? We must
have. We left the legends of it. Have people ever been
able to find it? No, no, not ever. But might a mixed
company, of myself and choice people, find it for a little
while? Yes. We seem to have. We have. We are all four of
us, I know it now, people of the double blood.'
“I wonder if you know,” he said loudly to Johony
Duckwalk who was sleeping in the hammock beside him,
“that we have found it. Wake up! The waves are leaping
like wallobies and the shores have all tumed into assay
gold. Wake up, Johnny, you're in Heaven! You can do
anything you want to now."
“Maybe we can, but you had better not. You had better
181
not wake me up again or I'll trample you from one end of
your nose to the other. Stuff it, Finnegan."
“This life can be a ramble, Johnny. We can have
perfect freedom.”
“You will find, Finn boy, that our freedom becomes a
little abridged.”
That Johnny Duckwalk fell asleep again. Let him, let
him. He was a prince of a fellow and he deserved his
sleep; he was so active at night.
And Don Bamaby the Duke of Moule was asleep in the
hammock on the other side, breathing vigorously and
regularly. And Finnegan himself, for a while, fell into the
sleep of the blessed.
"Finnegan," came a low voice from Don Barnaby's
hammock, “I owed Anastasia fifty dollars when I died.
Pay her back for me, will you?"
Electrified, Finnegan sat up and gaped. Don Bamaby
the Duke of Moule was solidly asleep, and Finnegan knew
that the vigorous and regular breathing had not been
broken.
And it hadn't been Don Bamaby's voice, but it had
come from him.
182
Chapter Sixteen
LIAR'S PARADISE
THE RETURN OF THE NEANDERTHAL, subtitled
THE ALIEN WITHIN. Royce Rollins. 211 pp. $5.95
Carlson-Shipman Press.
Not since the palmy days of the Shaver Mystery and
the exudations of Immanuel Velikovsky have we had
such a taradiddle as this. The unacademic author,
widely known as a crank, has put together an insane
creed more indicative of his own pathological state than
of the objective world,
The thesis, if it may be called such, is that the Neander-
thals (the other human race) have not forgotten their
defeat and replacement by Homo Sapiens fifty thousand
years ago; that they were not entirely obliterated; that
they still exist as pure elites in isolated regions of the
earth; that another recension of them hide in the human
blood stream as in caves or underground rivers, and
that these periodically (possibly by prodigious siring of
an elite run amok, though this is not clear) produce
authentic Neanderthal primordials; and that these orga-
nize and devote themselves to the destruction of the
human race. The author believes that we are now on
the verge of a teeming return of the Neanderthals, and
that the human race is in actual danger. All the well-
known animosity of the author toward progressive ele.
ments and movements is brought into play here. He sees
valid revolutionary movements and liquidations of ob-
structive populations as incendiarism and massacre, and
he ascribes many of them to these interior aliens. But
this is not his greatest departure from sanity. He
ascribes poltergeistic manifestations, apparitions, dou-
bles or fetches, second sight, and 'poetic immediacy as
life dynamic' to his aliens, stating that such phenomena
are normal aspects of the species.
183
In his closing words, at which one hardly knows wheth-
er to laugh or cry, he appeals to Neanderthals of good
will to block the evil inclinations of their savage breth-
ren and to live in accord with the human species. In
an appendix he proposes that these returnees might not
be Neanderthal at all, but Grimaldi or some other
species of early man.
Be careful of this! Things nearly as silly have been the
beginning of cults.
CHARLES O.A. HARRINGTON, Review in Science for Today
1,
Charles Le Marin was telling this story during one of
their hammock sessions:
“Castleman was the last of the grand pirates. He is still
alive and still working at his trade. I have heard people
say that piracy is no more. That is like saying that bur-
glary and shop-lifting are no more. Men do not become
honest at sea when they are not so on land. A thing like
that isn't going to die out completely, not when the cargoes
are richer than ever before.
“Castleman broke in during the twenties as a rum-
runner. Then he decided to feast on the rum-runners. An
illegal cargo is always the easiest to take. He still works
this side. But enough of that.
“You have all heard the story of the derelict ship. It's
been reported in a lot of places and under a lot of names.
But it is always a ship in clear water and calm weather,
with tables set in the galley, and the coffee still warm, and
all the seamen's things in order or in standard disorder,
with a cigar still smoking in the tray in the wardroom, and
with nobody at all on board. Well, sometimes the ship's
cat, sometimes not.
"Once at least this thing really did happen, and only
about three hundred miles from here. The ship was the
Sarcophagus, and I was one of the seamen who disap-
peared and was never seen again."
“I knew another man who disappeared and was never
seen again,” said Finnegan from his own hammock, “but
184
he was around for a while to tell me about it. Whoof! I
have the strongest feeling that he's still around right now.
But go on, Le Marin."
“I will not go on. You have a bottle, and it's time to
crack. Mine was the last."
Finnegan cracked a bottle and they started it around.
"Here's to Hildegarde,” he said.
They named their daily bottles, like the hurricanes,
after the ladies. This day the four had drunk more than
usual. It was late at night and they had got down to
Hildegarde. They seldom got so far.
They had enjoyed Agatha, Batbildes, Clotilda, Del-
phina, Etheldreda, Faustina, Georgina, beautiful names all,
liquid music, liquid ladies.
"Now tell us how you disappeared and were never seen
again,” said Don Barnaby, and to Finnegan Don's words
had a mocking quality as though there was a double
meaning.
“The Sarcophagus was a little tub and shaped like a
coffin," said Le Marin, “which is how it got its name. We
came up from Paramaribo and we had several stops. We
had a standard cargo which the authorities said was intact
and undisturbed when the ship was found derelict. This
was not strictly true; the records had been falsified, and
much of it had been taken.
“We had another cargo not on the manifest. It was well
worth stealing, so it was stolen. But now I hear you asking
in amazed voices how this could happen in charted
waters, and no radio waming given, no nothing."
“I did not hear anybody ask anything,” said Johnny
Duckwalk.
"And the answer is that it didn't really happen there,”
Le Marin continued. “It happened earlier. Castleman, for it
was he, had our ship infiltrated before we left Paramaribo.
Then, at every port, Buxton, Morrow Hanna, Port of
Spain, one of our men apparently jumped ship, and a dock
rat was signed on in his place. But here is the peculiar
part. In every case, the dock rat signed on looked just like
the seaman who had disappeared. Nobody could tell the
difference.”
“How about yourself?” asked Don Barnaby the Duke of
Moule.
“I apparently jumped ship at Fort-de-France," said Le
185
Marin, "and a dock rat who looked exactly like me was
signed on in my place. But to continue"
“Then you aren't you?” Finnegan asked.
“No. I never did know what happened to me. To
continue, the dock rats raised hell and got us all in a
turmoil. Then we took it over, and of course the radio
shack was taken over first of all."
"I knew a world that was taken over that way,” Finne-
gan said. “This one. And the communications shack was
taken over first of all, One of the things took over each
person of the world, and I never did know what became
of myself either. And quite soon the world will be found
derelict."
"Shut up, Finnegan,” said Le Marin. “You interrupt
once more and I'll kill you, I did that to a fellow once,
but that's the story for tomorrow. After we had taken
over the strategic spots, lo and behold, the Tercel Hawk
appeared on the seascape and ran us down. And Castle-
man came on board like a king. We herded our captain and
the faithful crewmen onto the Tercel Hawk; there they
were all bound and shackled and weighted and dropped
overboard.
“Now here it was that I got the sudden feeling that
everything was not exactly right. There was a sick wind
blowing and I got a whiff of it. “Do we have them all?"
Castleman howled. 'Drowned, all drowned,' I answered
in another voice, and hid myself. 'Did we get Le Marin?
he asked. I never did trust him, I never was sure we
made the switch on him.' 'Got him, got him first of all,' I
answered in the other voice from my hiding.
“I concealed myself for three days. Then I swam ashore
as we hove to, and I was in Florida. Castleman, that is not
the name he goes by, made his report. It was a classic.
The Sarcophagus had been found derelict, he reported,
with everything in perfect shape, coffee still warm in the
cups and cigarette butts yet smouldering, and not a soul to
be found on board. Fellows, were a cat to report that he
had come on a canary's cage, open and empty, with the
perch still swaying, and the half-eaten birdseed still warm,
with tiny feathers drifting in the air, but with the canary
not to be found in Heaven or on Earth, it would be a
great mystery. Yet, a very canny man might catch a glint
of the answer.
186
“Castleman bad lifted a great cargo, and I a small one.
I myself had taken a portion wisely, and when I swam
ashore I had fifteen pounds of the raw stuff that is worth
more than gold."
“And of course you met Castleman again some years
later," Don Bamaby suggested.
“I did. And it was in a respectable stateside bar and he
couldn't touch me. 'Castleman,' I cried out with a ring in
my voice, for I was pretty well filled with the Courage,
'You're a bugger and a Turk. (That is not the words I
used).
‘Ah little Le Marin,' he said. 'I always thought that we
had miscounted. I preach care and I preach it, but a man
has to attend to everything himself. I never did trust you.
I never was sure that we made the switch on you.'
"He was a large and dangerous man, and I let him
alone then. I never let my courage carry me to extremes."
“Why, it's only the story of the Marie Celeste," said
Johnny Duckwalk. “You miss a drink. You pass us a
counterfeit story.'
"I do not miss a drink," Le Marin insisted. “The story is
nothing like. And please, I'm a purist, the name of your
ship was the Mary Celeste.”
1
2.
19
"The same thing happened to me," said Johnny Duck-
walk, “exactly the same thing."
Johnny always started his stories like that, though what
happened to him was never anything like what happened
to the fellow in the previous story. Hildegarde had now
declined by one quarter.
“This was in Lisbon, or possibly it was in Stockholm,
said Johony Duckwalk. “There was this girl. Her name
was Marie. No it wasn't. It was Kristine. Marie was a
different girl. 'I need a strong smart man,' she said, and I
jumped when she said it. I thought she must have heard of
my reputation to spot me so perfectly. I know I don't look
it, but I'm strong as a bull and smart as a sheep and horny
as a toad. 'I have a proposition,' she told me. 'We can
both collect a lot of money, and you can win a beautiful
187
wife-me.' 'But why do you ask me, a stranger,' I in-
quired.
'Right away I saw what a wonderful man you were,'
she said, and I had to admit she was right. She was not
very pretty, but if she thought she was I didn't want to
tell her different. 'I have insured my husband for for-
tune,' she said. 'I hocked everything I could put my hands
on and bet it all on him. Now if something were to
happen to him, we could collect it all.' 'What do you have
in mind? I asked. I was feeling my way here, being the
cautious type. I'm a pretty good man with either a gun or
a knife,' I said, 'or do you have some other suggestion?' 'I
thought it would be nice if an axe fell on his head,'
Kristine told me. 'We could tell the insurance people it
was an accident, and then collect the insurance money and
get married.'
“She outlined the details of time and space, which was
to be right then and right there. Being a sport, I naturally
said all right. I downed a fast one to appear cool. Then I
took the axe and went upstairs to the little darkened room
to tempt fate. 'Fling open the door and do it fast,' she
said. 'It's always better to do it fast.'
“I bumped open the door and raised the axe. It was dim
in there, and for a minute I thought I was looking into a
mirror. There was my shipmate, Mike Merganser, with an
axe raised opposite to me. He is left-handed and I am
right-handed, and we are of the same great size, and at
that time we were bearded the same. We looked at each
other and started to laugh. We were good friends; but for
a minute there I thought I'd let him have it anyhow just
for the hell of it. I saw that he was considering doing the
same thing to me, and he saw that I saw it. Finally we
lowered our axes and fell into each others' arms, but it
had been close, I tell you.
“We went back down to the bar and cornered Kristine,
'I knew you each had a roll,' she said, 'and I thought that
if I got you both in a dark room swinging axes, somebody
would get it. I ought to be able to get one roll out of it,
and probably two. But I had to go pick two damned smart
alecs who knew each other and knew that neither of you
was my husband. You two sure messed it up. What I want
to know now is: Who's going to pay for this room? '
“ 'I'm not going to pay for it,' I said. “It wasn't my
188
idea.' 'I'm not going to pay for it either,' said Mike
Merganser. 'I didn't rent it, and I didn't use it very long.'
'By God, I'm not going to pay for it either,' said Kristine.
'I didn't get any good out of it. I had to go pick a couple
of smart alecs. But somebody owes three kroner for rent
on this room, and somebody had better pay up.'
“We were around that town for another week but we
didn't have much to do with Kristine. She was too tricky,
and besides she held a grudge against us. But I can't
honestly see where we wronged her.”
3.
n
“Exactly the same thing happened to me,” said Don
Bamaby the Duke of Moule. Johnny Duckwalk winced at
this, but he didn't know why he did it.
"Exactly the same thing," said Don, "only to me it
happened different." And Hildegarde had now declined to
one half. “Now first a question," said Don. "Did any of
you ever take joy pills? Yes, you of course, Johnny; but I
do not mean just any joy pills. There are all kinds.
“There are Haiti hoodoo joy pills. There are High
Harry joy pills that you can get in Jamaica. There are
Deep Romany joy pills, and Dead Frenchman, and Black
Rooster, any number of varieties. All have their devotees
and also their scoffers. I can understand the skepticism of
most intelligent persons to many of them. After all, there
is nothing to even the best of them except sawdust and
honey and the urine of a black cat. I see something worse
coming: the goddess Mageia will be replaced by the false
goddess Narkos. Then all the joy will be gone out of
them.
“The general distrust, however, should not apply to
Madame Le Mourcheor's Old Original Juju Joy Pills.
These do have an amazing effect. It is so. I cannot explain
it. And these are made, not in Black Africa nor in Black
Haiti, not in coffee-colored Jamaica nor on the Gullah
Coast; they are made in the most enlightened quarter of
the most dazzling city of the brightest land in the world, in
the city of the nativity of our beloved brother Count
189
1
Finnegan; they are made in noble New Orleans herself, in
the heart of the quarter that is in all ways
distinctive.
“And the curious thing is that the efficacy of Madame
Le Mourcheor's pills is not due to the strangeness of their
additives, but to the omission and simplification. She does
not use the stone from the stomach of the red-eyed goat;
there is no such thing as a red-eyed goat outside of bock
beer ads. She does not use the gall bladder of a deranged
alligator; the alligator, being reptilian, has no gall bladder.
Nor does she draw blood from the third toe of a swamp
dragon; the swamp dragon, being legendary, has neither
blood nor a third toe.
“Madame threw away all the tainted additives. Her
methods were like a breath of spring bursting into the
musty halls of the Juju Joy fabrique. She returned to
pristine sources. She used sawdust, but only sawdust from
the Arabian Frankincense Tree. She employed honey, but
only the honey of the bees of the meadows around
Megapolis in Arcady. And the black cat that she used had
the glanders. Her pills are like no others."
There is something the matter with this clown,' Finne-
gan mused. 'He is not the other man, he cannot be. He is
larger and rougher. The other man is fearful, and this
man is afraid of nothing. This is a foul-mouthed lecher,
and it is for homicide that he has fled here. But he is also
a genuine poet from the shaggy days, and such men may
have ghostly extensions. And they are both dark and
handsome. He is as the other man would be if he let
himself expand, physically and personally.'
"I was in port only three days,” said Don Barnaby. "On
second morning I had a terrible hangover and I went to
find a joy pill dispenser to cure me. But in the whole town
at that hour of the moming I could find none: all were in
jail, or dead, or deaf, or moved, or not yet awake.
Nobody would answer my knock at that hour of the
moming, except Madame Le Mourcheor. From her I
bought one pill only (I had not the habit), and by this
simple bit of business I discovered a new magnitude of the
world,
“There was a small courtyard or interior garden to her
establishment, and I went there to sit down when I had
taken the pill. It was small, as I said, but beautifully
greened and flowered. But not so small either! One now
190
learns how to look. Quite large, really. Very large. Bound-
less would be the word. In fact, the entire world was
contained in this garden, and not this world only.
"The garden was filled with a multitude of wonderful
people, all of whom I knew intimately if intuitively. I may
have stayed in that garden for many years. It was there
that I met and married a chameleon-like creature who did
not always have the same name nor appearance, and yet I
knew that she was always the same one.
“This beautiful wife bore me a number of children,
These were not like children as you might know them, nor
were they bom at so early an age. They were ambulant
and cognizant from the first, and completely charming.
Like their mother, they had the changeable quality. Though
they always preserved the threads of their identities, they
did not always have the same names or appearances, and
there were not always the same number of them.
“That life was multi-faceted, a cosmic kaleidoscope.
Thus a conversational friend who began a sentence might
be an entirely different person by the time he had ended
it. It made for complexity, but it also made for joy. So an
apple that you started to eat might not be exactly an apple
all the time that you were eating it. It would grow sweeter
or sharper or cooler or more bracing. It would be an
unknown mountain fruit or a valley fruit of matchless
flavor. And yet it would be the same all the time, in its
essence and its soul.
"It was the same with sleep in that garden. You would
be asleep. Then you would be not so much asleep as dead,
but not inextricably dead; only dead for the moment. And
then not dead, but transported, disembodied, detached,
This is the amoral hypnosis.
“Teleportation was possible there also. I would be in
that garden: then, instantly, I could be in Scollay Square,
or Hyde Park, or Ringstrasse, or in the old cow meadow
of my home town. I sailed in many ships while I was in
the garden. I was in Campeche and Paraiso, in Freetown
and on the Grand Canary. I was at Tangier."
"And how did you get out of Tangier?” Finnegan asked
out of an angry daze.
“By the efficacy of the joy pill, Count Finnegan. And
yet that was part of it, as this is part of it. All that, and
all this here present, Basse-Terre and you the company,
191
are but episodes I experienced in the garden. I traveled a
lot there. I went where few men have been before, down
in the caves in the middle of the earth, and up on the
mountains that are brothers of Everest. Then do you know
what spoiled everything?"
"No, three times no," said the three.
"It was my damned goodheartedness, my cursed, con-
temptible, moronic, wretched magnanimity. I was full of
bedamned benignity then and I let it trick me. In my
perfect pleasure, I felt sorry for the most unhappy man in
the world. Naturally the most unhappy man in the world
is John Sourwine whom we call Sour John. In my warm-
heartedness I thought I would go to John and get him to
take one of Madame's Old Original Juju Joy Pills, that he
might be as happy as I.
“No sooner imagined than done. I was at the side of
Sour John. We were in a bar, and it was the same day
that I had taken the joy pill, and not fifteen minutes later.
'Sour John! I cried, folding him in my arms, though
ordinarily I can't abide him, 'Come across the street with
me and have a joy pill and be as happy as I am. I have
lived a hundred lives in fifteen minutes, and the hangover
I had in my previous existence is gone.'
"Sour John would not go with me. He had a look that
would wither weeds and he gave it to me. 'You and me
ain't going nowhere except to the ship,' he said to me. 'I'm
going to take you to the ship and put you in your bunk
and strap you in. Your eyes look like a hoppy, and you're
not fit to be on the street.'
“But I am happy, Sour John,' I told him, ‘and my
hangover is cured.' 'I'd rather have a hangover than be in
your shape, Sour John told me. 'I don't mind having a
hangover. I kind of like to have a hangover.' Sour John
took me to the ship and put me in my bunk and tied me
down. And he stayed with me till the ship sailed. That was
three years ago. I have not been back.
“But I will go back there if I ever leave here. I will get
the secret of the mixture from Madame if she is still alive.
And if she is dead I will still get it from her somehow."
That was the story of Don Barnaby the Duke of
Moule. Hildegarde had now declined to one quarter of her
original state.
192
4.
9
66
>
"Exactly the same thing happened to me," said Finne-
gan, "and this is the way it went: :
"I had been studying with some other young painters
under the great master Van Ghi in Firenze. He had taught
us nearly everything that could be taught.
'You have learned your trade as a plumber learns
his,' he told us. 'You are now able to do a workmanlike
job. You can draw, you can limn, you can color, and
shade, and copy. The worst of you is not too bad, and the
best of you’ (doubtless he meant me) 'should go a long
ways.' Then he went on to tell us about inspiration, and
whether or not we should court it. 'This is not a vague
idea,' he said. 'It is real. It is something that comes. It is,
in fact, a person, a spirit. It may be that for some of you
it would not be a pure spirit. I do not know what it is, but
I will tell you this: Do not court it if you do not want it
to come. There are many uninspired painters in the world.
They make more money and have more peace of mind
than do the inspired; and they do not get burned. But if
you must have it, seek it!
“I had sought it for a long time. And I suspected that
for me it would be an impure spirit when it came. There
is no accounting for certain elements in Art if we except
Diabolism. I dabbled in it, I dabbled. I would sit at night
by my canvas, and it would gradually come to me. You
are all familiar with planchette?"
"No. What is planchette?" asked Don Bamaby.
"To Americans, the ouija board,” Finnegan explained.
"To Americans. What are you, a Hindu?"
"I use the continental term," said Finnegan. "As I say,
the influence was like planchette; my hand was guided. I
painted under the influence, and the results were not too
fortunate.
“I talked it over with my friends and fellow students.
They advised me to try an experiment. I would try to
paint that spirit itself. I would paint that daemon, that
devil. I did it. I painted this devil.”
“I remember one Devil you painted on the Brunbilde,
193
)
Finnegan," Don Barnaby said absentmindedly. "Oh, oh,
that was a slip! That wasn't me. I never heard of the
thing. Go on, Finnegan."
"It took eleven nights," said Finnegan, talking a little
,
a
nervously. Don Barnaby sometimes made him nervous. “I
would just piddle around with the black and red shades a
while. Then a jerky sort of nervousness would seize me
and I would make bewildering marks. Another painted by
my hand. I could not see what was coming from it; I
could not see how it would ever turn into a form or a face
recognizable.
“It was on the eleventh night and all my friends the
former students were there to watch. The picture was still
completely formless. And then it was there! I say that I
could not consciously have done this, for I was the last
one to recognize it: that face staring out of the canvas,
that face that was real and had no connection with the
canvas.
“There he is; he's coming out my friends had cried.
'One more stroke and he'll emerge!' I made the stroke, but
I could not see the pattern yet. 'One more, they cried. I
made it. 'There he is!' they cried. He was there.
"Believe me, he was an odd little devil that I had
painted, or who had painted himself with my hand.
Crawling evil, of course, but not too threatening. Just
unpleasant and mean. He reminded me of a toad, not in
appearance, but in a sort of misguided eamestness. I
understood then that the poltergeist is not a creature with
a macabre sense of humor. He is the only creature in
Heaven, Hell, or Earth with no sense of humor at all. He
is deadly serious. This is his scope and his higher life.
When he buffets and pinches he is serious.
“ 'Is he anybody we know?' my companions exclaimed.
'An ectoplasm with acne!' 'Finnegan, however did you get
that dead fish color? one asked. 'I have seen him before, I
will remember where I saw him,' said another. We all
treated it as a joke, but we were impressed. This was the
picture of a devil. Finally I covered it, and we thought
about breakfast.
"About seven in the morning, as we were ready to leave
to get something to eat, a priest, a Father Le Faye S.J.
arrived and introduced himself.
“ 'First the Devil, and then the Jebbies,' said one of my
194
<3
friends, an anticlerical. Then Father Le Faye explained his
visit. He had just got off the train, he said. He had ridden
all night and had come direct to our rooms.
“'Who called you? we asked him. “There is no point in
waiting to be called,' he said. He talked a while on
diabolism in general. He was an exorcist of some fame. I
had six or seven pictures in the room, all covered. He
went direct to that picture and uncovered it.
“ 'Oh, it is only he,' said the Jesuit. 'Do you know him?
I asked. 'Oh, yes. It's almost a shame to waste ceremony
on him. Well, burn the thing, and sweep out the ashes! I
don't think you'll have any more trouble after that, but in
case you do. ... And he performed the short form of
exorcism,
“ 'Well, bum it and sweep the ashes out,' he said crisply
once more after he had performed the exorcism. I'd like
for the master, Van Ghi, to see it first,' I said. 'He was
interested in the experiment.' 'Is that old mountebank still
in town?' the Jebbie asked. 'Well, send for him and get it
over with.' Van Ghi came, and he said exactly the same
thing and in the same voice: ‘Oh, it's only him.' 'You
kmow him too?' we asked,
“ 'Yes. He's an old repeater,' said Van Ghi. 'He's in the
background of many otherwise fine paintings. “The Night
Watch,” for instance, And Peter Bruegel did him often.
He's in the “Betrayal" of Giotto, and he's in the “Burial"
of Count Ortega. He was in a lot of El Grecos, often
painted over, and nearly as often uncovered again. He has
been painted out of many pictures for their betterment.
He's on Notre Dame in stone. He's on Etruscan vases and
Aztec statuettes. Let's burn him as the Father says. You
had better paint without inspiration from now on, Finne
gan. You have drawn the Joker instead of the Queen.'
“That is the story of how I painted a picturo of a devil
when I was a student under the great Van Ghi in Flor-
ence. And if anyone wants to know what a devil looks like,
let him go to a library and look up reproductions of the
pictures that Van Ghi named. In each of them there is a
minor face in the background, and it is the same face in
all of them. If looked at long enough, it ceases to be
minor and dominates the picture. It does not itself become
significant; it draws everything else down to its level. You
will spot that mean little face and figure that is common
195
a
to them all, and you will know what one of the devils
looks like."
The story wasn't entirely a lie. Finnegan had painted the
picture of the Devil, but not under those circumstances.
Finnegan thought much of the Devil now, since he had
killed several men. He thought about a hundred cities
buming along curious shore-bugging routes, and he won-
dered how long it would be till hellfire should consume all
the earth.
Hildegarde was completely emptied by this time.
They uncorked Idabel, and each took one gulp for good
fellowship, and to show that they all appreciated the high
lies they had told each other. Then, as it was very late,
and as even gentlemen of the beach must keep some
hours, they fell to sleep in their hammocks.
"Finnegan!" sounded a remembered voice from Don
Barnaby's hammock an hour later. "I'm lost and scared.
I'm dead in the sand for three years now. Get me out of
here!”
But the strong and even breathing of Don Barnaby had
not been broken. It was not his voice, but it had come
from him.
196
Chapter Seventeen
ANGELA COSQUIN
There we saw Monsters, Giants, the sons of Enac ...
And the whole multitude crying wept that night ... fear
not the people of this land, for we are able to eat them
up like bread.
-NUMBERS
1.
There is one other requirement of Paradise that hasn't
been mentioned: a beautiful barmaid or factotum.
"Factota," said Don Barnaby the Duke of Moule, “for
if anyone is feminine, she is.”
There is a thing about Don Bamaby that is not easily
explained. Finnegan did not remember when he first met
him. Finnegan and Le Marin would be together, the two
of them, and gradually there came the feeling that the two
of them were three. The third presence had coalesced into
Don Bamaby. This was mere impression, however. The
first time Finnegan actually saw Don Barnaby, he near
jumped out of his frame. Finnegan had taken him for
someone else, someone not really very much like him.
We were about to talk of Angela, however, and not of
Don Barnaby.
Feminine, but she was feminine in an old island fashion,
She was womanly but not weak. She could carry two
hundred pounds on her head as she went swaying along
the rocky roads. She could launch a six-man boat by
herself. She was always in dazzling color, and often she
broke into music,
Angela Cosquin was French, of course, but more than
French. She had in her everything that had ever been on
that island, from the Carib Indian to the English. Some of
her forebears had been noblemen, and some had been
197
)
slaves. It is a little hard to explain just how pretty she
was. She was never silent in any language that she pos-
sessed, and she told quite a few stories herself.
"The only difference in mine," she would say to the four
topers, “is that mine are all true, and yours, I believe, are
sometimes loosely detailed.”
Most of her stories had to do with her father and his
interesting occupation.
“He was a cartographer and antiquarian," she said. "He
made maps by hand. He did this beautifully upon old
leather and vellum and parchment. He was an exquisite
artist and imitator, and he was unsurpassed in the imagi-
nation that he put into his detail work,
"Originally he made these maps for showpieces, for the
clubrooms and dens of rich men, for their libraries and
showcases. It was quite by accident that he learned that
one of his maps had been passed off as an old pirate
treasure map. This amused him, but he immediately saw
possibilities in it.
“On many of them that he had not yet sold, he put the
signatura del tesoro. This is the baul or arca, and above it
the azadon and pala, the treasure chest under the pick-axe
and shovel crossed. And on the baul or chest he would
often put a lettering or brand, as T or K or BP, which the
simple-minded might take to mean, if it were suggested to
them so subtly that they thought they had discovered it
themselves, that of Teach, or of Kidd, or of Bartolomo
Portuguese, or one of the other old pirates.
“He made a lot of these old maps, and he penned a lot
of ancient affidavits on the backs of them. And the con
men would buy all that he could draw. Yet he never let
down on the quality or did sloppy work, however great
the demand. His maps were always authentic in detail,
whether they were intended to represent the sixteenth or
sevententh or eighteenth century hand of Englishman,
Spaniard, Frenchman, or Colonial. A tetteraglot from
childhood, my father was an expert on archaic spelling
and handwriting.
“A second sort of treasure map he now devised at the
demand of the con men, the naufrage signature maps,
those of the shipwrecked treasure as opposed to the land-
buried treasure. In the plotting of these, he also used
unusual imagination. He put himself in the place of the
198
a
ship. He said to himself, If I were a ship, where would I
go to be shipwrecked?
“As you may know, there are seven true passages
through the Antilles, and seven false or shoal passages,
The seven true passages are: Anegada; Guadelupe; Wind-
ward; Mona; Martinique; Ste. Lucia; and St. Vincent. And
the seven false or shoal passages are: Jardines Banks;
Cabo Rojo; Vieques; St. Barthelemy; the pass between
Basseterre and Nevis; the pass between Basse-Terre and
Marie Galante; and the Grenadines. These seven false
passages were where the wrecks piled up, or where they
should have piled up if they were ships of any logic and
had mistaken a false passage for a true one.
“My father made a master map, the most beautiful of
all his maps. It hung on the wall in his study in my old
childhood home. On this great map he represented fifty or
more sunken ships, real or imaginary. The fame of this
map went out, and the con men came to visit him on our
island. They came from all over the world. There were
Spanish-Trunk Swindlers, Custom-House-Gambit Work-
ers, Mexican-Prisoner-Story Dealers. All kinds of them.
For them, he made maps and half-maps.
"You may not appreciate all the tricks that can be done
with a half-map. You cannot just cut a map in two and
have two maps. It must appear to have been tom or cut in
two a hundred or more years ago. This takes art. Of
course, one half-map is useless without the other half. The
cons stake out their two half-maps at a good price to two
victims a thousand miles apart. Then, by devious tricks,
they bring the owners together, collecting again and again
as they came nearer each other. There is a fascination
about two matching half-maps that a complete map can
never have.”
“Do you have any of them left?” asked Johnny Duck-
walk. “I just believe I know a few ways I could work
those map tricks after I leave here."
“Of a certainty I have a few left,” Angela said, "and I
will always let them go at an immodest figure. The buyers
used to gather around the old master map of my father.
There, from a selection of fifty or more, they would
choose a sunken ship that they fancied, choose also a new
location for it if they did not like it where it was; and they
would commission my father to do the detailed treasure
199
map and supporting papers. He would draw, compose, age,
and deliver. There is money enough in treasure, if you can
fine it; and there is very good money in treasure maps.
“Oh the ships on that big map! The Mary Jane, the
Red Fox, the Halcon, the Loutre, the Jabali, the Moon-
raker. There were Spanish ships like the litany of the
Blessed Virgin: Estrella del Mar, Torre del Marfil, Virgen
la mas Benigna, Casa del Oro.
“There were old English venturers: the Golden Mastiff,
the Indiaman, the Hind, the Crane. And the French: the
Blaireau, the Megère, the Renard Volante. All noble ships,
and they all had two things in common: they were loaded
with treasure; and they went down.
“My father's maps still have a wide currency. In fact,
he died of overwork after he had put an ad in Variety and
had so many confidence men come to him for maps that
he could not do them all. And every year the treasure
hunters come down to the Antilles and dive and sound,
Some of them are dashed to pieces and drowned in the
shoal passages, and some of them spend all their money
on the search and then leave.
“They even come to this very island and look for the
twin ships that my father depicted as sunken here, the St.
Marc, and the Sangre del Cristo. These two ships are
supposedly sunken one on top of the other. This account,
of course, is the most complete fabrication, even though
some of the other ships in the other maps may have their
ounce of truth."
In this last sentence only did Angela lie a little. For the
nearby St. Marc and Sangre del Cristo were solid fact,
even though some of the others may have been mostly
legend. Angela said these things to throw even these her
good friends off the track. For the two ships were really
there, not over three hundred yards from where she
spoke. They were sunken, and were so full of gold that it
passes understanding how they could ever have floated.
Angela often dived down to the two ships and luxuri-
ated in their hoard. At one time she had brought up a
great lot of it; but she found that people were suspicious
when she spent gold coins of such ancient mintage. And
they looked at her as if she herself were morally impli-
cated when she wore too many of the diamonds of the
ship.
200
After that, she brought all the treasure she had
gathered back down to the old ships again, as being the
safest place of all to keep it. Later she had a copper box
made, and on it was inscribed: Angela Cosquin sa Caisse.
Into this she put all the money that she had in the world,
and dived with it down to the two old ships to leave it for
safe-keeping.
And after that, once a month, she would go down and
add to it one gold sovereign that she had saved; for she
thought that her money would be safest there with so
many millions of old dead men's money to keep it com-
pany.
There is an interesting sidelight to this. All four of the
beach gentlemen had followed her, and all knew where
the treasure ships were and had explored them. But they
had never taken anything up from their diving except a
few interesting samples, having no need.
Except Johnny Duckwalk, who had a mean streak in
him. Every month, as long as he was on the island, and on
the day after Angela had deposited her gold sovereign, he
would dive down and steal that sovereign from the box of
Angela Cosquin, and touch nothing else of all the millions
there.
3
But Angela had another series of treasure maps that
worried Finnegan. Only he of the four topers had seen this
latter series of maps; Angela had arranged that only he
should see them. There were seven maps in this series, and
they were beautifully drawn by the hand of Angela
Cosquin in imitation of that of her father.
Each of these showed, not a shipwrecked treasure, but
a land-buried treasure. The treasure symbol on these was
not the baul, but the maleta (the suitcase). And on each
of these were the initials S X S, and below these, robado
por C F. It seemed very likely that this might indicate:
Saxon X. Seaworthy's, stolen by Count Finnegan. And the
seven maps were accurate. They showed correctly the
seven cities of the seven treasure stashes, and they seemed
to indicate an even finer detail.
It was possible that Finnegan's enemies might have dis-
covered one or two of the stashes. But they could not
have discovered all seven. And Angela was not bis enemy.
She could have got the information only from the mind of
201
Count Finnegan himself it was she who first called him
that). But when and how had she read him?
"Who will you sell these seven maps to, Angela?" Fin-
negan had asked her.
"Oh my heart, I will not sell them! I will keep them for
memory of one who scattered his treasure too widely and
had none left for me."
1
2.
In the Haggada there are passages about the forbidden
fruit, and there is one thing mentioned there that isn't
generally known. The fruit, whether pomme or drupe, we
will still call the apple, the apple of the first offense, that
apple was wormy anyhow.
St. Augustine also seems to refer to this, and others.
Anyhow, the apple was wormy. This was also the case
with the golden apples of the Hesperides, which were a
cross from the same tree of Eden and a small sweet yellow
apple of the Western Islands.
It was on these golden apples, among other things, that
the four tired topers had been living; and now the worm
began to stir. The taste of it appeared first to one of
them, then to another.
Johnny Duckwalk, who appeared to be a man without a
conscience, now was taken with the sickness of repent-
ance. He announced one day that he had decided to give
up the cheerful life and to enter on another condition of
existence. He would return to a shabby mainland site. He
would confess to the appropriation of a sum of money
which (due to involved reasons) had never been missed.
And for this offense and confession he would spend from
six to ten years in confinement or durance vile. He had
already been in touch with someone, and he had that
estimate of the length of his servitude.
"So that is the end of it with me,” he told them, "the
plain end of the stick. Well, there isn't any other thing I
can do, what with the apprehension that has come over
me. It's the end of me, though."
“But you are still a young man,” said Le Marin, "and
six, or even ten years won't last forever. You might get
202
time off for good behavior, and when you get out you can
still have a long and happy life ahead of you."
"It isn't so," said Johnny. “You all know me well
enough to know that I will never get time off anywhere
for good behavior. So much I will do of what I am
obliged to do, but I will not behave well when they have
me. And I am not as young as I appear, though I'm still a
boy to myself. I'm in my forties. With six years or more, I
will be in my fifties when I come out, and I will be an old
man. A fellow like me, who's followed the rogue roads a
long while, will age all at once. I remember my father.
One day he was old: and he had not been old before."
Johnny Duckwalk went home on the next ship, and he
wrote to them from prison. He told them all to get off
that damned island before it ruined them. There is nothing
like prison to give a man a changed outlook, he said.
And then it was Don Bamaby the Duke of Moule who
became restless in the middle of Eden. (“You ever hear
anything from Manuel?" Don asked Finnegan one day.
“He was the only one out of our bunch, besides you, who
got through it alive, wasn't he? Ah, ah, I forgot. That
wasn't me there." This Don was an odd one. He couldn't
have been the other Don, but he seemed to carry some of
his memories.)
Yes, the next of them was Don Bamaby who decided to
go farther and do worse. He would be back, he would be
back, he said. “Oh, he will not be back,” said Angela
Cosquin to Finnegan, “they are all fools, they never come
back."
“There is something a little bit wrong about this Don
Bamaby,” Finnegan said to her.
"Whhooff! There is something a little bit wrong with the
Count Finnegan, he says," said Angela. "He says you are
mixed in the head, that you mix him up with another
Don. He says he has not been that other Don for several
years."
Well, Don Barnaby had gone now, a man so open that
he left the very lid off himself, and you still couldn't solve
his mystery when you
looked inside.
And in a few days (you could see it coming on him,
you could see it coming) it was Charles Le Marin who
203
took to the sea again. He had developed a trouble with his
stomach, he said, and he was convinced that he would
never be whole again till there was a ship under his feet.
He said he would be back; they all said that. He left it all
there and he didn't know what he was leaving. “He is a
fool, a fool, a nine kinds of fool,” said Angela Cosquin.
"Well, I will stay,” said Finnegan. “I, at least, am not
such a fool as to go wandering off after I have found a
den. I will stay here if I have to drink sea water and eat
sand."
“No, you will not stay,” said Joseph Chastaigne (Sloppy
Joe). “You'll leave within a month. I can see it on you,
too. I thought that you, at least, would measure up to this
place, but I see you have the same weakness as the others.
You'll leave on the next boat."
When the three other topers were gone, Finnegan had
no friends left except this Joseph Chastaigne, and Angela
Cosquin the girl who worked for him at the Imperial Bar
or whatsoever it was called. All the other people on the
island were acquaintances that Finnegan didn't know very
well, or friends that he didn't like much, or beings with
whom he would not associate at all.
Besides, there was the taint of smoke in the air, even
here. Finnegan had tried to insulate himself from the
world, but news kept creeping in. They were still burning
down the world, bit by bit. They were still fomenting riots
and massacres. The people of the world were still being
destroyed, or were being led on to destroy themselves.
Finnegan got the idea that he might go back to the
States for just a little while. One thing had gone seriously
wrong with Basse-Terre. He was no longer safe there, as
he was not safe anywhere. He was being hunted even
here.
A Negro friend had told him that he had been asked
for. The Negro friend had even been paid a certain sum
to find him and to put an end to him.
“It was a left-footed man who asked?” Finnegan in-
quired.
“Aya, sor, it was."
Finnegan, of course, was obliged to pay a larger sum to
the friend not to put an end to him. He did not mind this,
except that it wouldn't stop there. “But I will have to have
204
a
something to show," said the friend, "I will have to have
some of your old clothes."
Finnegan didn't understand, but he gave the friend
some of his old clothes. The next day, he understood it a
little, when a stray seaman, of appearance not too far
from his own, turned up shot dead on the beach in the old
clothes of Finnegan.
They were getting close to him. The left-footed man
would not be fooled by anything so simple as this. The
friend would play it along further, as far as it would go,
and collect something again. But he could not be expected
to warn Finnegan a second time, or even to stay bought if
he did war him. Johnny Duckwalk had once spoken of
friendship with a difference, and this was too different.
Finnegan began to rationalize his reasons for leaving
Paradise.
"There are, I am sure, letters lying for me in a call box
,
that have not been forwarded. There is a man to whom I
owe ten dollars that I had forgotten about. He may need
it, and I cannot reach him from this distance. There is a
bundle of merchandise that I should market and realize
upon; my partner will believe that I have forgotten our
agreement. I will go and take care of these things. And I
will be back in a week or a month."
“If you go away, you will never come back," Angela
told him.
"But of course I will be back. I am not the same kind of
fool as the others.”
“I will give you everything if you stay,” Angela told
him. “I clasp you. I do not want you to go. I give you two
ships full of gold, and other things."
"Oh, them! I would not stay for them, Angela, but I
would stay. I will be gone only a few short weeks. Then I
will be back.”
She clasped him. She lifted him off his feet.
"Count Finnegan, we will not let them get the people.
We will always protect the poor people," Angela said.
"We are the strongest ones and we can protect a little."
"We will not let them get the people, Angela,” Finne-
)
gan said.
He sat on the strong knees of Angela Cosquin in the
shade there and told her goodbye. But he never came
back.
205
Chapter Eighteen
FUN IN THE GRAVEYARD
The brain of the Neanderthals must have been slightly
larger than that of modern men (cranial capacity
1,400–1,600 c.c.) and apparently well developed. It
was not, however, the same brain. The development
and shape is different. Modern man is the high-brow of
the animal kingdom with the fore-brain greatly de-
veloped. Neanderthal was the low-brow, with the fore-
brain less than ours, and with a great back-brain form-
ing a bulge at the base of the skull, We understand
most of the functions of the fore-brain; these are the
functions that make us what we are. We do not well
understand the functions of that back-brain which in
the Neanderthals must have been six times the size of
ours, a difference that is frightening. It is partly the site
of the unconscious, we know; of the subliminal, of
certain psychical phenomena, of parapsychological
manifestations, of what we can only call ghostliness.
Modern humans with heads of the Neanderthal type
(pumpkin heads, with the bulbous nose and the basal
bulge) are often absolute criminals. But they may also
be religious pathfinders, seers, inflamatory leaders, spir-
itualists, humorists, poets, inventors,
Consider Plato who was named for his curious broad
head as well as his broad shoulders. Consider the Ambro-
sian bust of Homer; the fifth century representations of
Attila the Hun. Consider Aquinas the angelic ox: what
things he did spin out of his massive back-brain, tedious
to most, it is true, but it is said that God understood
him. Consider Rabelais, Luther, Christopher Smart,
Rasputin, Toussaint L'Ouverture, Steinmetz, the twelve
children studied by Washita as poltergeist hosts, the
levitators, the stigmatists. Consider Santana's wonder
that the mystics of such singing and beautiful thoughts
206
were all facially ugly. And they were ugly in a certain
type. Their brains difered from ours, their concepts
must have been different, and therefore they lived in a
different world.
Could we understand that world, we would understand
ourselves better; for we also are part of that back-brain
world to some degree. It was the 'other people', the
'Ugly people who gave to us whatever ghostliness
we have, and whatever imagination. We gave only fore-
brain consciousness.
The back-brain type is also found in the Grimaldi, the
Aurignacian, and other related types of early man.
-CARMODY OVERLARK, Studies in the Imagination
1.
There are a few months or seasons missing here. Finne-
gan had been into his other life, what might have been
called his human life. He had been in New Orleans and
St. Louis and Chicago, seeing his friends from that set. He
had had long visits with Casey and Vincent and Hans and
Henry. He had been in a sanitorium for six weeks. It was
not his idea, but that of his friends. He knew that what
was wrong with him did not come from a bottle, however
much he enjoyed that.
He had worked for Hillary Hilton, really exciting work
for which he had a special talent. All that, however, had
pertained to Finnegan's normal life, not to his under-life
here. He had been passing for a human, albeit a strange
one. Then he had the call from inside his head that the time
was nearly at hand.
He had begun now to wander in the direction of the
meeting, but with many stopovers. It was an early morn-
ing with some country-type friends after a night with the
coon dogs.
“I have eleven days," said Finnegan. “Then I must
,
attend a meeting."
"Hereabouts?" asked one of his friends.
"No, not hereabouts. A few hundred miles. I have to
207
meet a middling old gentleman and a tolerably young lady
in a graveyard."
“At midnight?”
“No. No, that came before. This one will be at high
noon. There I will hear a story from an old master,
exchange a few remarks on the destruction of the world,
and then scatter again to see if we can do something
about that destruction."
“Where will you scatter to then?"
"If I don't find a road sign pointing elsewhere, I may go
to St. Kitts."
"You ever been there before?"
"There is only a slight chance that I have been. I once
intended to go there but was confused by names. Some-
times it seems that I have been there very recently, though
there is a dispute about this.
"It is like the night that we have just passed. Some of
you say that we have been in the Chosky Bottoms, and
some of you say that we weren't within fifty miles of those
bottoms. There is something here that transcends geogra-
phy. Old Pop Potter here says that the Chosky Bottoms is
just a sort of general name for a spook place, that they
are always over the ridge and in the valley of the next
river from where you are. The Chosky Bottoms are where
the man-killing panther lives, and where the swamp ghost
is; it's where the old masked riders rode from; and where
the Northern Platoon went down in the quicksand. It's
where the grandfather of all the big coons and big fish
live; it's where the Bloody Mulligans shacked, and where
eighteen-foot-long bull snakes have been seen.
“How come you know so much about the Chosky
Bottoms when you're not from around here?"
"The Chosky Bottoms are everywhere, or just over the
next hill from everywhere. St. Kitts is a little like that to
me."
"They got big coons and snakes there?"
"No. That's not what I mean. But that is where I will
go. The name is loosely applied to several islands, by
myself, at least. If it doesn't turn out to be the end of the
rainbow for me this time, the chances are going to be a
lot slimmer for me ever finding it.”
They had breakfast of flapjacks and roast possum, and
popskull from a distressed stock that the sheriff had confis-
208
cated in an accidental encounter during the night. Finne-
gan himself had shot a boar coon that would have
weighed sixty pounds. He told them that it would be
considered little where he came from.
“Now, now, boy, now, now," they told him. They knew
it wouldn't have been considered little anywhere.
Then the men scattered to their patches and farms and
towns. And Finnegan set off for his rendezvous eleven
days away. He had been immersing himself in humanity
again. Often he had to convince himself of its reality all
over.
2.
Finnegan had hitched a ride on a produce truck, over
the causeway and onto the island and into the city. He
was inside the net now; he could feel it. Likely his old ship
was in port; very certainly his old antagonist was in town.
He could feel the grizzled evil of that fox and hear his
sour laugh. It was a congregation of powers here. The
left-footed tracker was here, as well as his employer. It
was showdown time today.
"Oh my odd unclel" Finnegan cried out. "It is our
confrontation again today, the last time in either of our
lives!”
Finnegan went to the club across from the graveyard.
Yes, they remembered him there; but there was a certain
iciness in their looks as well as a certain compassion; such
a look as they tum on one who is about to die, on one
they are bound to disassociate themselves from.
Oh yes, the old master and the doll had been looking
for him. You could see them from there, across the
boulevard and inside the graveyard. Ah, the secret meet-
ing was well heralded.
Finnegan crossed over to meet his fellow conspirators,
in bright daylight, and with many eyes upon him. He
kissed Doll with great vigor and pleasure when he came
up to them. She had always been an undemanding friend
of his.
"And how many have you kissed since we parted?" she
asked.
209
"I could count them without using any of the fingers of
any of my hands,” Finnegan said, "except when I did it
just for fun. It doesn't count when you do it for fun.”
Finnegan bad brought along a portable radio to follow
the Indianapolis race. They had chosen that day for the
meeting in the graveyard so as not to be conspicuous,
though here in the South the day was not so much
observed as elsewhere. Doll had brought a hamper of
food, drink, and ice, and red roses on the top of it.
X had brought only himself and a little briefcase; and
an otherworldly cloak with as many pockets and con-
cealed drops in it as a magician's cloak, which as a matter
of fact it was. He had used it when he was the great
X-Capo, Magician and Escape Artist. Doll Delancy and X
had both been waiting for Finnegan who would have to
show them the way.
"Finnegan, I have looked for it all over the hallowed
place," X complained, “and I can't find a clue to it. I
surely cannot be wrong, can I? I am so seldom wrong that
often I do not even consider the possibility. I have not
looked over all the graves, but I have looked over more
than two hundred of them.
"The grave register does not seem to be complete for
the earlier years, but I cannot spot the name in any form.
And I know for sure that it's here. It is necessary to my
theory that it be here. Please lead us to it, Finnegan.”
“We are watched," said Finnegan.
"I know we are watched. Here there are traps within
traps. We want them to know that we have found it. We
want them to believe that we intend to open it as soon as
possible. We want them to attempt to open it before we
have done so. Lead us to the grave, Finnegan."
Finnegan led them, after some wandering around, to an
old and neglected grave. They had to pull weeds to see the
carving on the gravestone. And it meant nothing when
they had cleared it, nothing to Finnegan, at least.
The carving on the stone was I.N.C.G.P. Bogovitch.
This was the grave of the Devil himself. And that was
the puzzling name carved on his gravestone.
“What diabolical irony!" X exclaimed. “Finnegan, Doll,
is that not true irony! Why didn't I think of it? I thought
of everything else.”
210
)
"It would be kind if you would explain," Doll mur-
mured,
"Why, Bogovitch is, of course, an euphemism."
“It is?" asked Doll.
“And of what?" inquired Finnegan.
X looked at the two of them with pity. It was a look
that he seldom used. Mostly he was tolerant of the igno-
rance of his fellow citizens of the Earth.
“Why, of Chortovitch, of course. How obvious can it
be? You would hardly call a man Chortovitch in death,
would you? Even the chisel of the monument man might
hesitate to cut such a name. Even if this man did bear
that dread name while living, it would be natural to soften
it at death. We have that cleared up, I hope.”
“Apparently not,” said Finnegan. “If only we knew
"
what the words meant, it would be easier.'
"Oh. I didn't realize that your difficulty was on that
score. Chortovitch means son of the Devil. Bogovitch
means son of God. And now I will just have one of those
devil's food cakes from Miss Doll's bamper, and then I
will ease into my story that is also, aptly, devil's food.”
"They're gingerbread, not devil's food,” Doll said, but
she gave him one.
"Bogovitch, as I say, means son of God," X continued.
“This is the euphemism, for the man to whom it refers
was really named Son of the Devil. My researches, which
are extensive and could have been carried out by no other
man but myself, have tumed up his name to be approx-
imately Ifreann Noonan Columkill Gregorovitch.
"The names of this family are confusing, being a mix-
ture of the patronymic, the conventional eponymic, and a
mystic sort of uionymic. We also have the alternation of
generations in the names.”
"How close do they want to watch us?” Finnegan
asked. “The glint of the sun on the binoculars, of course.
"They try to read mouth,” said X. “I face them clearly,
but I am too tricky for them. I have leamed a disassocia-
tion. My words say what you hear them say, but the
movements of my mouth indicate that I am telling a series
of humorous stories in Yiddish. Not everyone can do this.
“In other words, a family name may run all through the
strand. At the same time, the son may bear as surname
the first name of the father or the grandfather; or the
211
9)
father may be named for the son. Or the father may be
named for the grandson: this is the hard part to under-
:
stand. At any rate, Papadiabolous and Chortovitch run as
common auxiliaries through the generations which con-
cern US.
“Please get the picture now, you two. Sympathy and
personal identification are required. These are the people
and events that we must understand:
“It was in a hay field near Krakow, Poland (possibly a
little nearer to Skawine) that Ifreann Noonan Columkill
Gregorovitch Papadiabolous Chortovitch was born. This
was in the year of Restored Salvation 1830. He had for
mother an Irish girl named Noonan. For father he had the
Devil.
"In the early part of my researches I was of the opinion
that Katie Noonan, in a moment of exasperation, had
merely said (as unfortunate girls with a child and no
husband are likely to say): his father was the Devil,
“But later I came to believe that his father really was
the Devil. The progeny of this devil are numerous. You
may say that it was the old race still throwing angry
primordials after a thousand generations. I say that it was
the Devil himself come to Earth. And the son of Katie
Noonan was only one of very many that he pupped.
“There is a personal note here. This manifestation of
the Devil was, I am convinced, my own grandfather. He
was also your own great-grandfather, Finnegan, and also
that of the beautiful Anastasia. She was right when she
called you adelphos, for adelphos meant cousin as well as
brother in the Old Greek. So these are all of your kin-
dred, and I believe that you have known it.
"In the records of St. Elmo, the parish nearest Krakow,
it is clearly written The Devil' in the blank for the father.
I have seen it myself. Officially, at least, likely in reality,
this was the son of the Devil.
“Katie's son was baptized Columkill and was given the
patronym of Gregorovitch, from a certain Gregory in
whose home Katie was govemess, and who adopted little
Columkill. There is also the chance that Gregory was the
real father, but this I do not believe. He was a kind man,
and Katie was a good girl, and this would not account for
the perversity that broke out in the brood. Katie called
212
the boy Ifreann, which of course is Irish for the Devil, but
she seems to have used the term affectionately.
“There is an old tendency in certain parts of Poland, as
in Brazil and Italy and Spain and other places, to speak
English with an Irish accent. I myself have it, and I have
it from my native Milano. This was sometimes due to the
English tongue being taught by Irish nuns. It was also due,
in families of property, to English being taught by Irish
governesses. These Irish were preferred in the last century
to the English as working more cheaply; and also, for
those landed Catholic families, as being able to give the
true religious instruction and a grounding in manners.
Katie Noonan then was a governess in a landed Polish
family. She left their employ some months before the birth
of Ifreann Columkill, and returned to it several weeks
afterward.
“Ifreann is known from old family letters to have been
a monster from the beginning. He killed cats, and he tried
to kill children-twice in fact. His mother was the most
placid creature in the world, but he broke her heart.
"You may wonder how I know so much of the inner
emotions of obscure persons of a century or more ago.
There are ways by which an off-trail historian like myself
can reconstruct: a few phrases in a badly-written old
letter, a rain-soaked evening in the countryside in ques-
tion, old grandfathers who remember what they were told
as children. One can get the feel of an unhappy old family,
especially if one has a common background of belief and
station and temperament.
"Ifreann was a large and brutal boy. He was possessed
of an exceptional mentality (I almost said intelligence, but
he had no trace of that) and an abundance of energy and
purpose. He was fifteen and large for his age when he
killed a man, probably not the first, but the first for which
he was pursued. He escaped due to the confused state of
the land.
“In that year (and that year only) there existed the
Republic of Krakow, which reverted the next season to
Austria. Poland herself, in that century as in most cen-
turies, was enslaved. It is possible that Ifreann had a
certain loyalty to his own region. He had a rebellion
against all foreign, indeed all, authority, at least. He later
appealed to patriotism for his own purpose and he pro-
213
claimed himself a citizen of Krakow all his life, though he
was below the age of citizenship when he left there.
“After this punishable murder of his sixteenth year, he
abandoned the Krakow region and lived thereafter in
Austria proper, in Russia, in Greece, in Smyrna, in Lon-
don, in Ireland, in Milano, in Sicily, in the United States,
finally in this particular city.
"Ifreann had attended the Paris Commune when he was
forty and had become an ironic disciple of Kropotkin.
Where Kropotkin was a crooked saint, Ifreann was an
honest devil. The point is that Kropotkin affected to
believe in his own teaching, and Ifreann was guilty of no
such dishonesty. I believe that Ifreann had a number of
half-brothers at the Paris Commune. I believe that my
father was one of them.
"Ifreann became one of the old line communists. He
was active in the conspiracy when its sheer evil was still
undiluted by nonsense and not yet weakened by Slavic
imperialism; when the mentally inept had not yet found
shelter on its fringes or in its half-way houses; when it still
used its own name when it went about its business. Ifreann
won a certain respect in the movement due to the fact that
his father was the Devil. Even those who did not believe
in the Devil, believed that his father was the Devil.
“Enough of that. Ifreann lived a full and pungent life.
When he was seventy years old he sired twins.
"The unusual thing about these twins is that, though they
were born at the same instant, they were born in different
centuries, on different continents, and to different moth-
ers."
214
Chapter Nineteen
THE DEVIL IS DEAD
Man, the privileged mutation, rose out of a deadly
conflict, a murderous mingling, an actual cannibalism of
one of the elements by another. This has not happened
to any other species; there is no other case of one
species totally absorbing a close kindred, nor the emerg-
ing of a fertile hybrid of such sudden ability and such
stunning advance. Sharply, in an incredibly narrow in-
stant of time, Cro Magnon man stood tall and screne
and talented and dominant; but recessive in him was a
reservoir as deep as the earth.
We are the taut bow. The iron-wood of the bow must
never break. The twisted bull-sinew of the string cannot
be cut, or we lose everything. We are born of this
terrible tension and balance, and it must be maintained.
But there are premonitions of more than usually savage
conflict between the two misunderstood elements of
ourselves. This time it goes to the conflict, and there can
be no victory. The death of either of us kills all of us.
We become the broken bow. Our limbs, our lives, our
world become unstrung, and we die.
-HIRAM HUNT, The Death of the Species
Doll had wine in a picnic jug and she passed it around.
She had sandwiches and coffee and cakes. They were very
neat about this, and they returned all the remnants and
papers to the hamper.
Finnegan had a pocket harmonica with him and he
played a few bars of 'Arise, ye Saints, Arise, but none of
the dead in that yard arose. "I wanted to give them the
chance," Finnegan said.
215
Doll put the last of the red roses on the grave of
Ifreann Noonan Columkill Papadiabolous Chortovitch,
which was also the grave of Gregory McIfreann.
“Will you go on with your story, X?” she asked.
“No. I will begin my story," said X. “It was with those
fearsome words that Kantara fok El-Nahr began the last
page but nine of his eight-thousand-page novel El-Kamar.
He didn't write in humor; it was just that he was a slow
starter. I will begin the story now. And how should one
begin a story? Il y avait une fois?"
“That's a good way,” said Doll.
"In illo tempore,”
"That is still better," said Finnegan, “but get with it.”
And softly on his harmonica he blew the first eight bars of
Browne's Prelude.
"Very well,” said X. “Once upon a time a septuagenari-
an had twins. Some may say that these were not properly
twins as they were born to different mothers. But they
were of the same father, conceived at the same time (for
he was a lively rake), and born on the night of the turn of
the century. They might not seem so old to some, but
those of the Other Flesh do not age quickly. One was born
in Smyrna, and one in Cork. Ifreann, as we will call the
ancient father for simplicity, had in the meanwhile sepa-
rated his menages.
"The Asiatic son was called Gregory McIfreann, and
the Irish son was named Gregory McColum. Both of them
picked up various cognomens during their lives. We will
call them here, Papadiabolous I (the Asiatic one, the one
you buried, Finnegan), and the Irish one, Papadiabolous II
(the one you knew).
"The first was correctly named Gregory McIfreann
Papadiabolous. Other names he used were Sanditen, Chry-
sostom, Protagoras, Hochstruwelpieter-Goltz.
"The second or Irish one was correctly named Gregory
McColum Papadiabolous. And the variant names he used
were Noonan, Flaherty, Christy, Clarenden, Cobbett,
,
Malory, Ingraham, and Arbuthnot."
(On his harmonica, Finnegan was playing softly ‘Oh
what was your name in the States?')
“The brothers both employed variations of John as a
working first name,” X continued, "Ivan, Sean, Jan, Ian,
Jean, Giovanni, Juan, Johannes, and Giannes, so that
216
either of them was likely to be known at any given
moment as John Gregory. The untangling of these names
proved something of an obstacle to me.
“Papadiabolous I was (horresco referens) much like his
father. He was an evil man, and evil with a purpose. He
was a man of phenomenal physical power. It is doubtful
whether his twin was his equal in this dark strength,
though he also was a very large and powerful man. Papa
II is not known to have performed great physical prodigies;
here he rather traveled on the reputation of his brother as
whom he was masquerading. But Papadiabolous I did
have preternatural powers that cannot now be explained.
He was a devil, and he had that dark power of the Devil.
“Papadiabolous II was his opposite, that is to say, a
comparatively good man. Not that he was entirely free of
encounters with the law before he entered police work. He
was a gentleman burglar, a contrabandist, a swindler, and
a forger. But at all times he was morally sound. Born in
an enslaved nation, he turned in his youth to these means
of self-expression. Later, when he entered police work, he
found this early training valuable.
“The two brothers were identical as to build, coloring,
and skull shape. Skeletally one could not tell them apart.
But fleshed, there was little superficial resemblance. In the
accidentals of face they differed, even though the faces
hung on the same sort of facial bones. You, Finnegan,
who had seen them both, and both dead, may understand
how one brother was able to masquerade as the other, and
why you were the only one who knew it. I myself cannot
understand how he did it.
"For years the twin brothers did not know of each oth-
er's existence. In fact, Papadiabolous I did not know
about it till after he was dead; and then (as I have it from
my contacts) it came as quite a surprise to him.
"Papadiabolous I was a working revolutionary, as his
father was. He grew up in the middle of it. His associates
were a group of men, some of whom you know, several of
them rumored to be his half-brothers under the bar sinis-
ter, Seaworthy, Genof, Wirt, Gerecke, Wedekind, Aska-
drian, Sanditen, Sorensen. While he lived, and you will
notice by his gravestone here that he lived to be a hun-
dred years old, the old man Ifreann was dominant. But
Papadiabolous I was crown prince.
217
1)
1)
"We know that Papadiabolous I was in St. Petersburg
on November 7, 1917. He was about eighteen years old. He
was serving a practical apprenticeship. All the sons and
pseudo-sons did so.
“All except Papadiabolous II (McColum) the forgotten
issue in Ireland. He was not included; we do not know
why this was so. His native talents were allowed to
develop without guidance. When he was twenty-five, under
mysterious auspices, he went into police work. I am not
sure just who his superiors were. I am not even sure for
whom I myself am working now. I knew him vaguely for
several decades as Noonan the undercover Irish cop. He
was simply N, as I was simply X.”
Finnegan was harmonicaing ‘A policeman's life is not a
happy one.
"I forget a lot of the people, and mix the others up
before you get around to them again," said Doll.
“That is because you have a human mind, Miss Doll,”
X explained, "unable to comprehend the thick texture of
details that make up our world. Ah, the convolutions of
this police work, the counter-subversion business, are so
intricate as to be incomprehensible to a layman. So
intricate, in fact, that, like those of modern art, they
sometimes raise the suspicion of being meaningless. It is
the case of watching the wheels of a great evil machine
turn relentlessly, and trying to convince the world that it is
happening
"And the world, as you know, has always insisted, not
only that the wheels of the machine are not turning, but
that there is no machine there at all—this against all the
evidences of the senses, particularly that of smell. This we
in the counter-work have never understood. The only con-
clusion, is that we are not getting our message across. We
have not been able to alert the populace.
(And Finnegan was tootling 'Wake the town and tell
the people' on the harmonica.)
“Go ahead, X,” said Doll, “and when you finish, Finne-
gan is going to take me swimming. What are you giving me
that little gun for, Finn? I already have one."
“Noonan (Papadiabolous II) kept track of his half-
brothers and step-brothers who did not know of his exist-
ence," X continued. "And there is the story that he con-
218
fronted the old man his father shortly before the father's
death.
"The father was buried in the year 1930 in the grave on
which we are sitting. After this, Papadiabolous I became
the uneasy head of a regnancy that lasted for some years.
The other associates revolted perpetually, and there were
often clashes. Saxon X. Seaworthy, one of the half-
brothers, was more or less the chief of the mutineers. He
was selected to effect the murder of Papadiabolous I.
“We do not know quite how Seaworthy did this. He
seems to have convinced Papadiabolous, and I believe that
the thing is true, that very valuable information had been
buried with the father (the father of them both), and
that they should open the grave in each other's presence.
Fearing treachery, Papadiabolous I had taken the precau-
tion of getting Saxon Seaworthy very drunk, which may
not have been difficult in his high-strung and near hysteri-
cal condition. You, Finnegan, may have been an acciden-
tal instrument in this. Papadiabolous I, being the larger
and more vigorous, did most of the digging in opening the
grave. But Saxon Seaworthy was still lucid enough to kill
Papadiabolous the Devil with a small caliber weapon after
the digging had gone down a ways. He is smart, that
Saxon, and he can fake it. Whether they had already
examined what they came to seek I am not sure. I think
not, for Saxon still seems to seek an opportunity to get to
it. I think that Saxon was that night incapable of getting
to the bottom of the event. Something scared him. You
were that something, Finnegan.
“For Saxon was about to dump the body of Papadiabo-
lous I into the grave when our fabulous friend Finnegan
came along and offered to deepen the grave out of the
pure goodness of his heart.
“The feelings of Saxon may have been a little mixed at
that moment. We aren't sure why Finnegan wasn't also
killed. Possibly Saxon had already thrown the small cali-
ber weapon into the grave to be rid of it. Finnegan was
quite close to death when he let go the spade and fumbled
with his hands in the old grave for the bones. He'd have
died surely if he had not looked up when he did.
“The feelings of Saxon Seaworthy may have been even
more mixed the next moming when Noonan (Papadiabo-
lous II) the Irish cop took his quasi-twin's place in the
219
)
organization. There must have been strained relations on
that trip half-way around the world. Seaworthy had al-
ready been proclaimed the new leader of the band, and
Papadiabolous II could not have known all the details. He
felt his way, but he came in as if nothing had happened,
and he carried it off. Did the relations seem strained, Fin-
negan?”
“They were all a cryptic bunch.”
"Saxon never has figured it out. When he killed Noonan
(Papadiabolous II) on Naxos Island, he did not recognize
him dead as the man who had been masquerading as
Papadiabolous I. Saxon is not a believing man. He knew
that he had killed Papadiabolous. He is a total materialist.
He knew that a man could not come back to life. He also
kept Finnegan for confirmation that he was not out of his
mind. But then the ghost had come back and continued to
control the gang on a voyage of many months. Ah, but
the deaths of the two Papa Devils are a parable of the
deaths of us all. I can see nothing but destruction for us.
“They all believe that Papadiabolous is still alive. They
do not know that there were two of them, and that both
are now dead. One of our forgers (why should I lie
about it? it is myself) sends them notes now and then
in Papadiabolous' strange handwriting. It was, in truth, a
taunting note in this devil's hand that brought Saxon
Seaworthy to town this day and into my trap. Ah, he and
Papadiabolous are to meet this night again and complete
their opening of the father's grave.
"And Saxon has nerve. He has come. He isn't afraid of
a man returned from the dead; he isn't afraid of the
Devil. He's a cool one, Finnegan. But his group has
declined, has in fact been relegated to the fringes of the
conspiracy.
“Oh, they can still get funds. The funds that Finnegan
once stole and shared with us were but one season's
working specie for them. People enjoy contributing to
these funds for their own destruction.”
“X, I hear a sour laugh," said Finnegan. “I have heard
it twice before, when I thought I had killed that man, and
had not. He is smarter than the Devil, he is smarter than
I, and he is smarter than you. X, tell me about this. I
know that now we—they—are not a small group, but a
million, mostly quite young. I see our reappearance every
220
>
day in strange youthful faces. Will we, they, really bring
down the world?"
“Likely they will, Finnegan. The feeling of Rome and
such things were only boys' tricks of theirs. Now they well
up in eomnest. And the people, of course, are no help in the
saving of the people.”
"Bet we are," said Doll.
“No, Miss Doll. The people are but sheep. They graze
on catch-words, and they go to their slaughter. If there is
any staying the revenge of the old people, it will be done
by a stubbom minority of themselves, and I haven't much
faith in us.
"One thing ere we part. There is a thing, a key buried
in this grave. It was that which brought Seaworthy and
Papadiabolous I to open the grave in the first place. It is
that which will cause the grave to be opened tonight. There
is something in that document that would give one person
too much power if he were the only one in the world to
know its contents. Saxon may have been restrained in
something by believing that Papadiabolous is still alive and
possessed of the information.
"I have decided to remedy this situation by possessing
this information tonight. I will need no help. I dig well
and silently. This night I will have the visit with those two
old devils in the grave under us. And I believe that Saxon
Seaworthy will come to intercept me."
“Bet he doesn't!" said Finnegan. “Bet he'll have been
intercepted before that. He did say, though, that nobody
drinks at his spring three times, and I've drunk there
twice."
“Bet he does," said X. “Oh, you mean your own little
encounter with him? You are no match for him at all. I
say it in some sorrow, Finnegan, but this is most likely the
last afternoon of your life. It will not matter. You have
led me to certain information, and now you are not really
needed any longer. But it will also be the end of Saxon
Seaworthy tonight. I bait the trap when I dig here, and he
will die in that trap.
“Bet he doesn't," said Finnegan.
“Now we have had a pleasant visit here," X intoned. “It
took me nearly a year-
“Hold it, X,” said Finnegan. “The glint of the sun on
binoculars is one thing. The shine of a compounded rifle
221
9
9
.
>
scope is another. I get behind this rat-leaf palm from
them, you behind that other. Doll may remain in the
open. Nobody wants her.”
“It is their loss," said Doll.
"It took me nearly a year," X continued when he was
sheltered by the rat-leaf palm, "to unravel the relation-
ships of a father and his sons. It has unraveled other
kinships. Now I will be on my own mysterious way tomor-
row. And you two have a swimming date today; it may be
a colorful one, Finnegan; it would be a good place to get
you. The two of you may be found bobbling in the water,
staining it red. In a way, I hope not.'
“You make the water seem a little chilly, X,” said Doll.
But Finnegan, at that moment, was thinking neither of
devils nor of death. He was not even thinking of the man
who is smarter than the Devil, his own disreputable uncle,
as it seemed. He was rather looking at Doll Delancy and
marveling at the strangeness of the human kind. The
poker-faced weirdness of people came over him like a
wave. "The mystery of them,' he mused. 'What goes on in
them anyhow? What do they think? How is one ever to
understand the human kind. The Doll has several times
tried to tell her own story, and we would not listen. But is
it possible that regular people do have valid life stories?
Who would believe it? Oh, the inscrutability of them!'
But Doll was meanwhile speaking sharply:
“Now you listen to me, you two loop-eared, bugger-
nosed bums! Are you saying that people can have no
effect on what happens to people? Are you saying that you
old gargoyles will destroy us, unless a minority of the g's
can prevent it? Why can we ourselves not prevent it? We
whipped you once, I believe."
“The people are hopeless, Miss Doll," X said. "The
people are sheep. All leaders everywhere, on all sides, of
every sort, are either of the older people or of the double
blood. Regular people are incapable.”
“Bet we're not,” said Doll. “I like you two. But why
don't all of you just go away?"
“We were here first," said X. “Tell her, Count Finne-
9
gan.”
“We were here first, Doll,” Finnegan said. “Wait, wait, I
have to listen in the back of my head for the rest of it...
We are the lords of the world, the people who were
222
a
before the people. We arise in our primordial form and
reestablish ourselves. We will cause this late-world people
to destroy themselves. We will roast the people of the
world and eat them up. And I am renegade if I do not
go along with it; I am traitor. So then I am renegade. But
I know there is no help from the people themselves.”
“Bet there is,” said Doll. “This thing must be ended. Do
you two not realize that it must have a climax?”
“It is only regular people who believe in climaxes, Miss
Doll,” X said. “It is not the other people who have fought
from within for thirty thousand years who believe in such
things. It is the constant gnawing down, the undercutting,
the inflaming. But there will not be a climax."
“Bet there will,” said Doll. “Here, I have a high thing
that I've been scribbling myself. I will register it here with
the devils, and you their kindred. And after that, a joyous
death to you all! Tomorrow I'll be about my own way of
salvaging the world. I've been in the business for years. I
tried to tell you both about it, but you never listened. You
didn't think that I met you by accident, did you, Finne-
gan?
“Get this, boys, it's good."
All the people in this history are poets, or they cannot
get into this history. So Doll had written a poem, or at
least some verses, and dropped it down in the great split in
the grave; for the ground was always splitting there since
the second burial. And the evoking paper went all the way
to the bottom.
This is the poem, and the name of it is:
9
DIABOLIQUE
Tell us the story of one who was said
to fall like the Devil and die with the dead.
Salt him with sulphur and level his mound,
Dig him in deep in his grave in the ground.
Hound him with thunder and let him not sleep.
Pitch in another and cover them deep.
Bury the bodies all under one lid,
I never did it, but Finnegan did.
223
Wreathe with black roses, and case him in lead.
This is the day that the Devil is dead.
This is the pit, and the story is X's.
Those are the ashes, and these are the hexes.
Boys, it's been fun, it's a bang-up, a revel.
Finnegan soon will be dead as the Devil.
Roll out the sidewalks and paint the town red.
This is the day that the Devil is dead.
And they also tell the story of-
224
`192 Strange Doings
Then we went out (for the last time, as it happened)
from the Shelni burrow. And, as always, there was the
riming with the five-year-old Ancient who guarded the
place:
“What to crowing?"
“Got to going.”
“Jinx on Jolly,
Golly, Holly!”
“Were it other,
Bug, my brother!”
“Holly crying.
Sing her flying,
Jugging, shouting.”
“Going outing.”
Now this was remarkable. Holly Harkel was crying
when we came out of the burrow for the (as it hap-
pened) last time. She was crying great goblin tears. I
almost expected them to be
green.
Today I keep thinking how amazingly the late Holly
Harkel had finally come to look like the Shelni. She was
a Shelni. “It is all the same with me now,” she said this
morning. “Would it be love if they should go and I
should stay?”
It is a sticky business. I tried to complain, but those
people were still ringing that bell and chanting “All you
little Pig-Shelni-Singers come jump on the cart. Ride a
tin can to Earth! Hey, Ben, look at them jump on the
slaughter wagon!”
“It was inexcusable,” I said. “Surely you could tell a
human from a Shelni."
“Not that one,” said a bell ringer. “I tell you they all
jumped on the wagon willingly, even the funny looking
>
a
Ride a Tin Can
a
193
one who was crying. Sure, you can have her bones, if
you can tell which ones they are.”
I have Holly's bones. That is all. There was never a
creature like her. And now it is over with.
But it is not over!
Singing Pig Breakfast Food Company, beware! There
will be vengeance!
It has been told.
Aloys
He had flared up more brightly than anyone in memory.
And then he was gone. Yet there was ironic laughter
where he had been; and his ghost still walked. That was
the oddest thing: to encounter his ghost.
It was like coming suddenly on Halley's Comet drink-
ing beer at the Plugged Nickle Bar, and having it deny
that it was a celestial phenomenon at all, that it had ever
been beyond the sun.
For he could have been the man of the century, and
now it was not even known if he was alive. And if he
were alive, it would be very odd if he would be hanging
around places like the Plugged Nickel Bar.
This all begins with the award. But before that it
begins with the man.
Professor Aloys Foulcault-Oeg was acutely embar-
rassed and in a state of dread.
“These I have to speak to, all these great men. Is even
glory worth the price when it must be paid in such
coin?"
Aloys did not have the amenities, the polish, the tact.
194
Aloys 195
A child of penury, he had all his life eaten bread that
was part sawdust, and worn shoes that were part card-
board. He had an overcoat that had been his father's,
and before that his grandfather's, willed for generations
to the eldest son.
This coat was no longer handsome, its holes being
stuffed and quilted with ancient rags. It was long past its
years of greatness, and even when Aloys had inherited it
as a young man it was in the afternoon of its life. And
yet it was worth more than anything else he owned in
the world.
Professor Aloys had become great in spite of-or
because of?-his poverty. He had worked out his finest
theory, a series of nineteen interlocked equations of
cosmic shapeliness and simplicity. He had worked it out
on a great piece of butchers' paper soaked with lamb’s
blood, and had so given it to the world.
And once it was given, it was almost as though
nothing else could be added on any subject whatsoever.
Any further detailing would be only footnotes to it and
all the sciences no more than commentaries.
Naturally this made him famous. But the beauty of it
was that it made him famous, not to the commonalty of
mankind (this would have been a burden to his sensi-
tively tuned soul), but to a small and scattered class of
extremely erudite men (about a score of them in the
world). By them his worth was recognized, and their
recognition brought him almost complete satisfaction.
But he was not famous in his own street or his own
quarter. And it was in this stark conglomerate of dark-
souled alleys and roofs that Professor Aloys had lived all
his life till just thirty-seven days ago.
When he received the announcement, award, and invi-
196 Strange Doings
tation, he quickly calculated the time. It was not very
long to allow for traveling halfway around the world.
Being locked out of his rooms, as he often was, he was
unencumbered with baggage or furniture, and he left for
the ceremony at once.
With the announcement, award, and invitation, there
had also been a check; but as he was not overly familiar
with the world of finance or with the English language
in which the check was drawn, he did not recognize it
for what it was. Having used the back of it to write
down a formula that had crept into his mind, he shoved
the check, forgotten, into one of the pockets of his
greatcoat.
For three days he rode the riverboat to the port city
hidden and hungry. There he concealed himself on an
ocean tramp. That he did not starve on this was due to
the caprice of certain lowlifes who discovered him, for
they made him stay hidden in a terrible bunker, and
every day they passed in a bucket to him. And some-
times this contained food. But sometimes offal.
Then, several ports and many days later, he left the
ship like a crippled, dirty animal. And it was in That
City and on That Day. For the award was to be that
evening.
>
“All these I have to speak to, all these wonderful men
who are higher than the grocers, higher even than the
butchers. These men get more respect than a policeman,
than a canal boat captain. They are wiser than a mayor
and more honored than a merchant. They know arts
more intricate than a clock-maker's and are virtuous
beyond the politicians. More perspicacious than editors,
more talented than actors, these are the great men of
Aloys 197
the world. And I am only Aloys, and now I am too
ragged and dirty even to be Aloys anymore. I am no
longer a man with a name.”
For he was very humble as he walked the great town
where even the shop girls dressed like princesses, and all
the restaurants were so fine that only the rich people
would have dared to go into them at all. Had there been
poor people (and there were none) there would have
been no place for them to eat. They would have starved.
“But it is to me that they have given the prize. Not to
Schellendore and not to Ottleman, not to Francks nor
Timiryaseff, not even to Piritim-Kess, the latchet of
whose shoe I am not-but why do I say that?-he is not
after all very bright-all of them are inadequate in some
way-the only one who was ever able to get to the heart
of these great things was Aloys Foulcault-Oeg, who
happens to be myself. It is a strange thing that they
should honor me, and yet I believe they could not have
made a better choice.”
So pride and fear warred in him, but it was always the
pride that lost. For he had only a little bit of pride,
undernourished and on quaking ground, and against it
were a whole legion of fears, apprehensions, shames,
dreads, embarrassments, and nightmarish bashfulnesses.
He begged a little bit when he found a poor part of
town. But even here the people were of the rich poor,
not of the poor as he had known them.
When he had money in his pocket, he had a meal.
Then he went to the Jiffy Quick While You Wait Clean-
ers Open Day and Night to have his clothes cleaned. He
wrapped himself in dignity and a blanket while he
waited, as many years before he had had to forego the
luxury of underclothes. And as the daylight was coming
to an end they brought his clothes back to him.
a
198
Strange Doings
“We have done all we could do," they told him. “If
we had a day or a week or a month we might do a little
more, but not much. We have not done anything at all
to the greatcoat. The workers were afraid of it. They
said it barked at them.”
“Yes, sometimes it will do that.”
Then he went out into the town, cleaner than he had
been in many days, and he walked to the hall of the
Commendation and Award. Here he watched all the
great men arrive in private cars and taxis: Ergodic
Eimer, August Angstrom, Vladimir Vor. He watched
them and thought of what he would say to them, and
then he realized that he had forgotten his English.
“I remember Sir or Madam as the Case May Be. I
remember Dog, that is the first word I ever learned, but
what will I say to them about a dog? I remember house
and horse and apple and fish. Oh, now I remember the
entire language. But what if I forget it again? Would it
not be an odd speech if I could only say apple and fish
and house and dog? I would be shamed.”
He wished he were rich and could dress in fine white
like the streetsweepers, or in black leather like the
newsboy on the corner. He saw Edward Edelsteim and
Christopher Cronin enter and he cowed on the street
and knew that he would never be able to talk to those
great men.
A fine gentleman came out and walked directly to
him.
“
“You are the great Professor Foulcault-Oeg? I would
have known you anywhere. True greatness shines from
you. Our city is honored tonight. Come inside and we
will go to a little room apart, for I see that you will have
Aloys 199
to compose yourself first. I am Graf-Doktor Hercule
Bienville-Stravroguine.”
Why he ever said he was the Graf-Doktor is a mys-
tery, because he was Willy McGilly and the other was
just a name that he made up that minute.
Within they went to a small room behind the cloak
room. But here, in spite of the smooth kindness of the
gracious gentleman, Aloys knew that he would never be
able to compose himself. He was an épouvantail, a
pugalo, a clown, a ragamuffin. He looked at the nine-
teen-point outline of the address he was to give. He
shuddered and quaked, he gobbled like a turkey. He
sniffled and he wiped his nose on his sleeve. He was
terrified that the climax of his life's work should find
him too craven to accept it. And he discovered that he
had forgotten his English again.
“I remember bread and butter, but I don't know
which one goes on top. I know pencil and penknife and
bed, but I have entirely forgotten the word for mater-
nal uncle. I remember plow, but what in the world will I
say to all those great men about a plow? I pray that this
I
cup may pass from me."
Then he disintegrated completely in one abject mass
of terror.
Several minutes went by.
But when he emerged from that room he was a
different man entirely. Erect, alive, intense, queerly
handsome, and now in formal attire, he mounted with
the sure grace of a panther to the speaker's platform.
Once only he glanced at the nineteen-point outline of
his address. As there is no point in keeping it a secret, it
was as follows: 1. Cepheid and Cerium-How long is a
Yardstick? 2. Double Trouble-Is Ours a Binary
200. Strange Doings
Universe? 3. Cerebrum and Cortex-The Mathematics of
Melancholia. 4. Microphysics and Megacyclic Poly-
neums. 5. Ego, No, Hemeis–The Personality of the
Subconscious. 6. Linear Convexity and Lateral In-
transigence. 7. Betelgeuse Betrayed–The Myth of
Magnitude. 8. Mu-Meson, the Secret of the Meta-
morphosis. 9. Theogony and Tremor, The Mathematics
of Seismology. 10. Planck's Constant and Agnesi's
Variable. 11. Diencephalon and Di-Gamma-Uncon-
scionable Thoughts About Consciousness. 12. Inverse
Squares and the Quintesimal Radicals. 13. The Chain of
Error in the Linear-B Translation-Or Where the Cretans
Really Came From. 14. Cybernetics—Or a Brain for
Every Man. 15. Ogive and Volute–Thoughts of Celestial
Curvature. 16. Conic Sections-Small' Pieces of Infinity.
17. Eschatology-Medium Thoughts About the End. 18.
Hypolarity and Cosmic Hysterisis. 19. The Invisible
Quadratic-or This Is All Simpler Than You Think.
You will immediately see the beauty of this skeleton,
and yet to flesh it would not be the work of an ordinary
man.
He glanced over it with a sure smile of complete
confidence. Then he spoke softly to the master of
ceremonies in a queer whisper with a rumble in it that
could be heard throughout the Hall.
“I am here. I will begin. There is no need for any
further introduction. It will be late by the time I fin-
ish.'
For the next three and a half hours he held that
intelligent audience completely spellbound, enchanted.
They followed, or seemed to follow, his lightning
flashes of metaphor illumining the craggy chasms of his
vasty subjects.
Aloys 201
They thrilled to the magnetic power of his voice,
urbane yet untamed, with its polyglot phrasing and its
bare touch of accent so strange as to be baffling; ancient
surely and European, and yet from a land beyond the
pale. And they quivered with interior pleasure at the
glorious unfolding in climax after climax of these before
only half-glimpsed vistas.
Here was the world of mystery revealed in all its
wildness, and it obeyed and stood still, and he named its
name. The nebula and the conch lay down together, and
the ultra-galaxies equated themselves with the zeta
mesons. Like the rich householder, he brought from his
store treasures old and new, and nothing like them had
ever been seen or heard before.
At one point Professor Timiryaseff cried out in baf-
flement and incomprehension, and Doctor Ergodic
Eimer buried his face in his hands, for even these most
erudite men could not glimpse all the shattering profun-
dity revealed by the fantastic speaker.
And when it was over they were delighted that so
much had been made known to them like a great free
gift. They had the crown without the cross, and the odd
little genius had filled them all with a rich glow.
The rest was perfunctory: commendations and testi-
monials from all the great men. The trophy, heavy and
rich but not flashy, worth the lifetime salary of a
professor of mathematics, was accepted almost care-
lessly. And then the cup was passed quietly, which is to
say the tall cool glasses went around as the men lingered
and talked with hushed pleasure.
“Gin,” said the astonishing orator. “It is the drink of
the bums and impoverished scholars, and I am both.
Yes, anything at all with it.”
Then he spoke to Maecenas, who was at his side, the
a
patron who was footing the bill for all this gracious extravagance. "The check I have never cashed, having been much in movement since I have received it. And as to n1e it is a large amount, though perhaps not to others, and as you yourself have signed it, I wonder if you would cash it for me now.'' "At once," said Maecenas, "at once. Ten minutes and we shall have the sum here. Ah, you have endorsed it with a formula! Who but the Professor Aloys Foulcault­ Oeg could be so droll? Look, he has endorsed it with a formula." "Look, look, let us copy. Why, this is marvelous. It takes us even beyond his great speech of tonight. The implications of it!" "Oh, the implications!" they said as they copied it off, and the implications rang in their heads like bells of the future. Now it has suddenly become very late, and the elated little man with the gold and gemmed trophy under one arm and the packet of bank notes in his pocket dis­ appeared as by magic. Maecenas went to his villa in the province, which is to say Long Island. And all the Professors, Doctors, and erudite gentlemen went to their homes and lodgings. But later, and after the excitement had worn off, none of them understood a thing about it at all, not even those who had comprehended part of it before the talk. And this was odd. They'd been spooked.
202 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
Professor Aloys Foulcault-Oeg was not seen again; or, if seen, he was not known, for hardly anyone would have known his face. In fact, when he had painfully
Aloys 203
released the bonds by which he had been tied in the
little room behind the back room, and had removed the
shackles from his ankles, he did not pause at all. Not for
many blocks did he even remove the gag from his
mouth, not realizing in his confusion what it was that
obstructed his speech and breathing. But when he got
it
out it was a pleasant relief.
A kind gentleman took him in hand, the second to do
so that night. He was bundled into a kind of taxi and
driven to a mysterious quarter called Wreckville. And
deep inside a secret building he was given a bath and a
bowl of hot soup. And later he gathered with others at
the festive board.
Here Willy McGilly was king. As he worked his way
into his cups, with the gold trophy in front of him, he
expounded and elucidated.
“I was wonderful. I held them in the palm of my
hand. Was I not wonderful, Oeg?”
"I could not hear all, for I was on the floor of the
little room. But from what I could hear, yes, you were
wonderful.'
It wasn't supposed that Aloys made that speech, was
it? It was stated that when he came out of that room he
was a different man entirely. Nobody but Willy McGilly
would give a talk like that.
“Only once in my life did I give a better speech,” said
Willy. “It was the same speech, but it was newer then.
That was in Little Dogie, New Mexico, and I was selling
a snake-oil derivative whose secret I yet cannot reveal.
But I was good tonight and some of them cried. And
now what will you do, Oeg? Do you know what we
are?”
“Moshennekov."
“Why, so we are!”
>
204 Strange Doings
>
"Schwindlern."
“The very word.”
“Lowlife con men. And the world you live on is not
the one you were born on. I will join you if I may."
“Oeg, you have a talent for going to the core of the
apple.”
”
>
For when a man (however unlikely a man) shows real
talent, then the Wreckville bunch have to recruit him.
They cannot have uncontrolled talent running loose in
the commonalty of mankind.
Entire And Perfect
Chrysolite
Having achieved perfection, we feel a slight unease.
From our height we feel impelled to look down. We
make our own place and there is nothing below us; but
in our imagination there are depths and animals below
us. To look down breeds cultishness.
There are the cults of the further lands and the
further peoples. The Irish and Americans and Africans
are respectable, philosophical and industrial parties, but
the cultishness is something beyond. Any addition to
the world would mar the perfect world which is the
perfect thought of the Maker. Were there an Africa
indeed, were there an Ireland, were there an America or
an Atlantis, were there the Indies, then we would be
other than we are. The tripartite unity that is the
ecumene would be broken: the habitable world-island,
the single eye in the head that is the world-globe would
be voided.
There are those who say that our rational and perfect
world should steep itself in this great unconscious
geography of the under-mind, in the outré fauna and the
incredible continents of the tortured imagination and of
205
206 Strange Doings
black legends. They pretend that this would give us
depth.
We do not want depth. We want height! Let us seal
off the under-things of the under-mind, and exalt our-
selves! And our unease will pass.
Exaltation Philosophy-Audifax O'Hanlon
>
The True Believer was sailing offshore in an easterly
direction in the latitude of fifteen degress north and the
longitude of twenty-four degrees east. To the north of
the coasting ship was the beautiful Cinnamon Coast of
Libya with its wonderful beaches and its remarkable
hotels tawny in the distance. To the east and south and
west were the white-topped waves that went on for ever
and ever. The True Believer sailed along the southern-
most edge of the ecumene, the habitable and inhabited
world.
August Shackleton was drinking Roman Bomb out of
a potbellied bottle and yelping happily as he handled
the wheel of the True Believer:
“It's a kids' thing to do,” he yipped, “but there were
never such beautiful waters to do it in. We try to call in
outer spirits. We try to call up inner spirits and lands.
It's a children's antic. Why do we do it, Boyle, other
than for the fun of it?”
“Should there be another reason, Shackleton? Well,
there is; but we go about it awkwardly and without
knowing what we're doing. The thing about humans
which nobody apparently wishes to notice, is that we're
a species which has never had an adult culture. We feel
that lack more and more as we become truly adult in
other
ways.
tedious to stretch out a childhood
forever. The easy enjoyments, the easy rationality, the
easy governments and sciences, are really childish things.
It grows
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 207
We master them while we are yet children, and we look
beyond. But there isn't anything beyond the childish-
ness, Shackleton. We must find a deeper view somehow.
We are looking for that something deeper here."
“What? By going on a lark that is childish even to
children, Boyle? I was ashamed in front of my sons
when I confessed on what sort of diversion I was going.
First there were the séances that we indulged in. If we
raised any spirits there, they were certainly childish
ones. And now we're on this voyage on the True
Believer. We're looking for the geographical home of
certain collective unconscious images! Why shouldn't
the children hoot at us? Ah well, let us not be too
ashamed. It's colorful and stimulating fun, but it isn't
adult.”
The other four members of the party. Sebastian
Linter and the three wives, Justina Shackleton, Luna
Boyle, and Mintgreen Linter, were swimming in the blue
ocean. The True Believer was coasting very slowly and
the four swimmers were clipped to outrigger towlines.
“There's something wrong with the water!” Justina
Shackleton suddenly called up to her husband. “There's
weeds in it, and there shouldn't be. There's reeds in it,
and swamp grasses. There's mud. And there's green
slime!”
“You're out of your lovely head, lovely,” Shackleton
called back. “It's all clear blue water off a sand coast. I
can see fish twenty meters down. It's clear.”
“I tell you it's full of green slime!” Justina called
back. “It's so thick and heavy that it almost tears me
away from the line. And the insects are so fierce that I
have to stay submerged.”
But they were off the Cinnamon Coast of Libya.
They could smell the warm sand, and the watered gar-
208 Strange Doings
dens ashore. There was no mud, there was no slime,
there were no insects off the Cinnamon Coast ever. It
was all clear and bright as living, moving glass.
Sebastian Linter had been swimming on the seaward
side of the ship. Now he came up ropes to the open
deck of the ship, and he was bleeding.
“It is thick, Shackleton,” he panted. “It's full of
snags and it's dangerous. And that fanged hog could
have killed me. Get the rest of them out of the water!”
“Linter, you can see for yourself that it is clear
everywhere. Clear, and of sufficient depth, and serene.”
“Sure, I see that it is, Shackleton. Only it isn't. What
we are looking for has already begun. The illusion has
already happened to all senses except sight. Stuff it,
Shackleton! Get them out of the water! The snakes and
the crocs will get them. The animals threshing around in
the mud will get them. And if they try to climb up into
the shore, the beasts there will break them up and tear
them to pieces.”
“Linter, we're two thousand meters off shore and
everything is clear. But you are disturbed. Oof, so am I!
The ship just grounded, and it's fifty meters deep here.
All right, everyone! I order everybody except my wife
to come out of the water! I request that she come out. I
am unable to order her to do anything."
The other two women, Luna Boyle and Mintgreen
Linter, came out of the water. And Justina Shackleton
did not.
“In a while, August, in a while I come,” Justina called
up to the ship. “I'm in the middle of a puzzle here and I
want to study it some more. August, can an hallucina-
tion snap you in two? He sure is making the motions."
“I don't know, lovely,” August Shackleton called
back to her doubtfully.
>
a
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 209
Luna Boyle and Mintgreen Linter had come out of
the ocean up the ropes. Luna was covered with green
slime and was bleeding variously. Mintgreen was covered
with weeds and mud, and her hands and feet were torn.
And she hobbled with pain.
“ “Is your foot broken, darling?” Sebastian Linter
asked her with almost concern, “But, of course, it is all
illusion.”
“I have the illusion that my foot is broken,” Mint-
green sniffled, “and I have the illusion that I am in very
great pain. Bleeding blubberfish, I wish it were real! It
couldn't really hurt this much.”
“Oh, elephant hokey!” Boyle stormed. “These
illusions are nonsense. There can't be such an ambient
creeping around us. We're not experiencing anything."
“Yes we are, Boyle,” Shackleton said nervously.
“And your expression is an odd one at this moment.
For the elephant was historical in the India that is, was
fantastic in the further India that is fantastic, and is still
more fanciful in its African contingency. In a moment
we will try to conjure up the African elephant which is
twice the mass of the historical Indian elephant. The
ship is dragging badly now and might even break up if
this continues, but the faro shows no physical contact.
All right, the five of us on deck will put our heads
together for this. You lend us a head too, Justina!”
“Take it, take my head. I'm about to let that jawful
snapper have my body anyhow. August, this stuff is
real! Don't tell me I imagine that smell,” Justina called.
“We will all try to imagine that smell, and other
things,” August Shackleton stated as he uncorked
another bottle of Roman Bomb. In the visible world
there was still the Cinnamon Coast of Libya, and the
blue ocean going on forever. But in another visible
>
210 Strange Doings
world, completely unrelated to the first and occupying
absolutely a different space (but both occupying total
space), were the green swamps of Africa, the sedgy
shores going sometimes back into rain forests and some-
times into savannas, the moon mountains rising behind
them, the air sometimes heavy with mist and sometimes
clear with scalding light, the fifth levels of noises, the
hundred levels of colors.
“The ambient is forming nicely even before we start,"
Shackleton purred. Some of them drank Roman Bomb
and some of them Green Canary as they readied them-
selves for the psychic adventure.
“We begin the conjure,” Shackleton said, “and the
conjure begins with words. Our little group has been
involved in several sorts of investigations, foolish ones
perhaps, to discover whether there are (or more im-
portantly, to be sure that there are not) physical areas
and creatures beyond those of the closed ecumene. We
have gone on knob-knockers, we have held séances. The
séances in particular were grotesque, and I believe we
were all uneasy and guilty about them. Our Faith for-
bids us to evoke spirits. But where does it forbid us to
evoke geographies?”
“Ease up a little on the evoking!” Justina shrilled up
at them. “The snapper just took me off at the left ankle.
I pray he doesn't like
my
taste.”
“It has been a mystery for centuries,” said August
(somewhat disturbed by his wife's vulgar outburst from
the ocean), “that out of the folk unconscious there
should well up ideas of continents that are not in the
world, continents with highly imaginary flora and fauna,
continents with highly imaginary people. It is a further
mystery that these psychic continents and islands
should be given bearings, and that apparently sane per-
>
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 211
>
sons have claimed to visit them. The deepest mystery of
all is Africa. Africa, in Roman days, was a subdivision of
Mauretania, which was a subdivision of Libya, one of
the three parts of the world. And yet the entire coast of
Libya has been mapped correctly for three thousand
years, and there is no Africa beyond, either appended or
separate. We prove the nonsense of it by sailing in clear
ocean through the middle of that pretended continent.”
"We prove the nonsense further by getting our ship
mired in a swamp in the middle of the imaginary con-
tinent and seeing that continent begin to form about
us,” said Boyle. His Green Canary tasted funny to him.
There was a squalling pungency in the air and something
hair-raisingly foreign in the taste of the drink.
“This is all like something out of Carlo Forte,” Linter
laughed unsteadily.
“The continental ambient forms about us, said
Shackleton. "Now we will evoke the creatures. First let
us conjure the great animals: the rhinoceros, the lion,
the leopard, the elephant, which all have Asian counter-
parts; but these of the contingent Africa are to be half
again or twice the size, and incomparably fierce.”
“We conjure them, we conjure them,” they all
chanted, and the conjured creatures appeared mistily.
“We conjure' the hippopotamus, the water behemoth,
with its great comical bulk, its muzzle like a scoop
shovel, and its eyes standing up like big balls—"
“Stop it, August!” Justina Shackleton shrieked from
the water. “I don't know whether the hippo is playful
or not, but he's going to crush me in a minute."
“Come out of the water, Justina!” August ordered
sternly.
“I will not. There isn't any ship left for me to come
to. You're all sitting on a big, slippery, broken tree out
a
over the water, and the snappers and boas are coming very near your legs and necks." "Yes, I suppose so, one way of looking at it," August said. "Now everybody conjure the animals that are compounded out of grisly humor, the giraffe with a neck alone that is longer than a horse, and the zebra which is a horse in a clown suit." "We conjure them, we conjure them," they all chanted. "The zebra isn't as funny as I thought it would be," Boyle complained. "Nothing is as funny as I thought it would be." "Conjure the great snake that is a thousand times heavier than other snakes, that can swallow a wild ass," Shackleton gave them the lead. "We conjure it, we conjure it," they all chanted. "August, it's over your head, reaching down out of the giant mimosa tree," Justina screamed warning from the swamp. "There's ten meters of it reaching down for you." "Conjure the crocodile," Shackleton intoned. "Not the little crocodile of the River of Egypt, but the big crocodile of deeper Africa that can swallow a cow." "We conjure it, we imagine it, we evoke it, and the swamps and estuaries in which it lives," they all chanted. "Easy on that one," Justina shrilled. "He's been tak­ ing me by little pieces. Now he's taking me by big pieces." "Conjure the ostrich," Shackleton intoned, "the bird that is a thousand times as heavy as other birds, that stands a meter taller than man, that kicks like a mule, the bird that is too heavy to fly. I wonder what delirium first invented such a wildlife as Africa's, anyhow?"
21 2 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
"We conjure it, we conjure it," they chanted .. "Conjure the great walking monkey that is three times as heavy as a man," August intoned. "Conjure a somewhat smaller one, two-thirds the size of man, that grins and gibbers and understands speech, that could speak if he wished." "We conjure them, we conjure them." "Conjure the third of the large monkeys that is dog­ faced and purple of arse." "We conjure it, we conjure it, but it belongs in a comic strip." "Conjure the gentle monster, the okapi that is made out of pieces of the antelope and camel and contingent giraffe, and which likewise wears a clo\vn suit." "We conjure it, we conjure it." "Conjure the multitudinous antelopes, koodoo, nyala, hartebeest, oryx, bongo, klipspringer, gemsbok, all so out of keeping with a warm country, all such grotesque takeoffs of the little alpine antelope." "We conjure them, we conjure them." "Conjure the buffalo that is greater than all other buffalo or cattle, that has horns as wide as a shield. Conjure the quagga. I forget its pretended appearance, but it cannot be ordinary." "We conjure it, we conjure it." "We come to the top of it all! Conjure the most anthropomorphic group in the entire unconsciousness: men who are men indeed, but who are as black as midnight in a hazel grove, who are long of ankle and metatarsus and lower limb so they can run and leap uncommonly, who have crumpled hair and are massive of feature. Conjure another variety that are only half as tall as men. Conjure a third sort that are short of stature and prodigious of hips."
E n t i r e a n d P e r f e c t C h r y s o l i t e 2 1 3
214 Strange Doings
“We conjure them, we conjure them,” they all
chanted. “They are the caricatures from the beginning.”
“But can all these animals appear at one time?” Boyle
protested. “Even on a contingent continent dredged out
of the folk unconsciousness there would be varieties of
climates and land-form. All would not be together.”
“This is rhapsody, this is panorama, this is Africa,”
said Luna Boyle.
And they were all totally in the middle of Africa, on
a slippery bole of a broken tree that teetered over a
green swamp. And the animals were around them in the
rain forests and the savannas, on the shore, and in the
green swamp. And a man black as midnight was there,
his face broken with emotion.
Justina Shackleton screamed horribly as the crocodile
sliced her in two. She still screamed from inside the
gulping beast as one might scream under water.
2
The Ecumene, the world island, has the shape of an
egg 110° from East to West and 45° from North to
South. It is scored into three parts, Europa, Asia, and
Libya. It is scored by the incursing seas, Europa from
Asia by the Pontus and the Hyrcanum Seas, Asia from
Libya by the Persian Sea, and Libya from Europa by the
Tyrrhenian and Ionian Seas (the Mediterranean Com-
plex). The most westerly part of the world is Coruna in
Iberia or Spain, the most northerly is Kharkovsk in
Scythia or Russia, the most easterly is Sining in Han or
China, the most southerly is the Cinnamon Coast of
Libya.
The first chart of the world, that of Eratosthenes, was
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 215
thus, and it was perfect. Whether he had it from primi-
tive revelation or from early exploration, it was correct
except in minor detail. Though Britain seems to have
been charted as an Island rather than a Peninsula, this
may be an error of an early copyist. A Britain unjoined
to the Main would shrivel, as a branch hewed from a
tree will shrivel and die. There are no viable islands.
All islands fade and drift and disappear. Sometimes
they reappear briefly, but there is no life in them. The
juice of life flows through the continent only. It is the
One Land, the Living and Holy Land, the Entire and
Perfect Jewel.
Thus, Ireland is seen sometimes, or Hy-Brasil, or the
American rock-lands: but they are not always seen in
the same places, and they do not always have the same
appearances. They have neither life nor reality.
The secret geographies and histories of the American
Society and the Atlantis Society and such are esoteric
lodge-group things, symbolic and murky, forms for the
initiated; they contain analogs and not realities.
The ecumene must grow, of course, but it grows
in wardly in intensity and meaning; its form cannot
change. The form is determined from the beginning, just
as the form of a man is determined before he is born. A
man does not grow by adding more limbs or heads. That
the ecumene should grow appendages would be as
grotesque as a man growing a tail.
World as Perfection-Diogenes Pontifex.
August Shackleton guffawed nervously when his wife
was sliced in two and the half of her swallowed by the
crocodile; and his hand that held the Roman Bomb
trembled. Indeed, there was something unnerving about
the whole thing. That cutoff screaming of Justina
216 Strange Doings
a
Shackleton had something shocking and unpleasant
about it.
Justina had once gone hysterical at a séance when the
ghosts and appearances had been more or less conven-
tional, but August was never sure just how sincere her
hysteria was. Another time she had disappeared for
several days from a séance, from a locked room, and had
come back with a roguish story about being in spirit
land. She was a high-strung clown with a sense of the
outrageous, and this present business of being chopped
in two was typical of her creations.
And suddenly they were all explosively creative, each
one's subjective patterns intermingling with those of the
other to produce howling chaos. What had been the ship
the True Believer, what had been the slippery over-
hanging bole, had now come dangerously down into the
swamp. They all wanted a closer look.
There was screaming and trumpeting, there was color
and
surge and threshing mass. The crocodile bellowed as
a bull might, not at all as Shackleton believed that a
croc should sound. But someone there had the idea that
a crocodile should bellow like that, and that someone
had imposed his ideate on the others. Unhorselike crea-
tures whinnied, and vivid animals sobbed and gurgled.
“Go back up, go back up!” the black man was bleat-
ing. “You will all be killed here."
His face was a true Mummers-Night black-man mask.
One of the party was imagining strongly in that stereo-
typed form. But the incongruous thing about the black
man was that he was gibbering at them in French, in bad
French as though it were his weak second language.
Which one of them was linguist enough to invent such a
black French on the edge of the moment? Luna Boyle,
of course. But why had she put grotesque French into
>
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 217
a
>
>
the mouth of a black man in contingent Africa?
“Go back up, go back up,” the black man cried. He
had an old rifle from the last century and he was
shooting the crocodile with it.
“Hey, he's shooting Justina too,” Mintgreen giggled
too gaily. “Half of her is in the dragon thing. Oh, she
will have some stories to tell about this! She has the best
imagination of all of us.”
“Let's get her out and together again,” Linter sug-
gested. They were all shouting too loudly and too ner-
vously. “She's missing the best part of it.”
“Here, here, black man,” Shackleton called. “Can
you get the half of my wife out of that thing and put
her together again?”
“Oh, white people, white people, this is real and this
is death,” the black man moaned in agony. “This is a
closed wild area. You should not be here at all. However
you have come here, whatever is the real form of that
balk or tree on which you stand so dangerously, be gone
from here if you can do it. You do not know how to
live in this. White people, be gone! It is your
lives!”
“One can command a fantasy,” said August Shackle-
ton. “Black man fantasy, I command that you get the
half of my wife out of that dying creature and put her
together again.”
“Oh, white people on dope, I cannot do this,” the
black man moaned. “She is dead. And you joke and
drink Green Bird and Bomb, and hoot like demented
children in a dream."
“We are in a dream, and you are of the dream,”
Shackleton said easily. “And we may experiment with
our dream creatures. That is our purpose here. Here,
catch a bottle of Roman Bomb!” and he threw it to the
black man, who caught it.
>
>
218 Strange Doings
>
“Drink it,” said Shackleton. “I am interested in see-
ing whether a dream figure can make incursion on
physical substance.”
“Oh, white people on dope,” the black man moaned.
“The watering place is no place for you to be. You
excite the animals, and then they kill. When they are
excited it is danger to me also who usually move among
them easily. I have to kill the crocodile who is my
friend. I do not want to kill others. I do not want more
of you to be killed.”
The black man was booted and jacketed quite in the
manner of a hunting store outfitting, this possibly by
the careful imagining of Boyle who loved hunting rig.
The black Mummers-Night mask was contorted in agony
and apprehension, but the black man did drink the
Roman Bomb nervously the while he begged them to
be
gone
from that place.
“You will notice that the skull form is quite human
and the bearing completely erect,” Linter said. “You
will notice also that he is less hairy than we are and is
thick of lip, while the great ape is more hairy and thin
of lip. I had imagined them to be the same creature
differently interpreted.”
“No, you imagine them to be as they appear,”
Shackleton said. “It is your imagining of these two
creatures that we are watching.”
“But notice the configuration of the tempora and the
mandible shape,” Linter protested, “—not what I ex-
pected.”
“You are the only one of us who knows about
tempora and mandible shape,” said Shackleton. “I tell
you that it is your own imagery. He is structured by
you, given the conventional Mummers-Night black-mask
by all of us, clothed by Boyle, and speeched by Luna
>
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 219
Boyle. His production is our joint effort. Watch it,
everyone! It becomes dangerous now, even explosive!
Man, I'm getting as hysterical as my wife! The dream is
so vivid that it has its hooks in me. Ah, it's a great
investigative experience, but I doubt if I'll want to
return to this particular experience again. Green perdi-
tion! But it does become dangerous! Watch out, every-
one!”
Ah, it had become wild: a hooting and screaming and
bawling wild Africa bedlam, a green and tawny dazzle of
fast-moving color, pungent animal stench of fear and
murder, acrid smell of human fear.
A lion defiled the watering place, striking down a
horned buck in the muddy shallows and going muzzle-
deep into the hot-colored gore. A hippo erupted out of
the water, a behemoth from the depths. Giraffes erected
like crazily articulated derricks and galloped ungainly
through the boscage.
“Enough of this!” cried Mintgreen Linter. Fright-
ened, she took the lead, incanting:
“That the noon-time nightmare pass! The crocodile-
dragon and the behemoth.'
“We abjure them, we abjure them,” they all chanted
in various voices.
“That the black man and the black ape pass, and all
black things of the black-green land.”
“We abjure them, we abjure them,” they chanted.
But the black man was already down under the feet and
horns of a buffalo creature, dead, and his last rifle shot
still echoing. He had tried to prevent the buffalo from
upsetting the teetering bole and dumping all the white
people into the murder swamp. The great ape was also
gone, terrified, back to his high-grass savannas. Many of
the other creatures had disappeared or become faint,
>
220 Strange Doings
and there was again the tang of salt water and of distant
hot-sand beaches.
“That the lion be gone who roars by day,” Luna
Boyle took up the incantation, “and the leopard who is
Pan-Ther, the all-animal of grisly mythology. That the
crushing snakes be gone, and the giant ostrich, and the
horse in the clown suit.”
“We abjure them all, we abjure them all,” everybody
chanted.
“That the True Believer form again beneath our feet
in the structure we can see and know,” August Shackle-
ton incanted.
“We conjure it up, we conjure it up,” they chanted,
and the True Believer rose again barely above the thresh-
old of the senses.
“That the illicit continents fade, and all the baleful
islands of our writhing under-minds!” Boyle blurted in
some trepidation.
“We abjure them, we abjure them,” they all chanted
contritely. And the illicit Africa had now become quite
fragile, while the Cinnamon Coast of South Libya
started to form as if behind green glass.
“Let us finish it! It lingers unhealthily!” Shackleton
spoke loudly with resolve. “Let us drop our reserva-
tions! That we dabble no more in this particular illicit-
ness! That we go no more hungering after strange
geographies that are not of proper world! That we seal
off the unsettling things inside us!”
“We seal them off, we seal them off,” they chanted.
And it was finished.
>
They were on the True Believer, sailing in an easterly
direction off the Cinnamon Coast of Libya. To the
north was that lovely coast with its wonderful beaches
Entire and Perfect Chrysolite 221
and remarkable hotels. To the south and east were the
white-topped waves that went on for ever and ever. It
was over with, but the incantation had shook them all
with the sheer psychic power of it.
.
“Justina isn't with us,” Luna Boyle said nervously.
“She isn't on the True Believer anywhere. Do you think
something has happened to her? Will she come back?"
“Of course she'll come back," August Shackleton
purred. “She was truant from a séance for two days
once. Oh, she'll have some good ones to tell when she
does come back, and I'll rather enjoy the vacation from
her. I love her, but a man married to an outré wife needs
a rest from it sometimes.'
“But look, look!” Luna Boyle cried. “Oh, she's
impossible! She always did carry an antic too far. That's
in bad taste.”
The severed lower half of Justina Shackleton floated
in the clear blue water beside the True Believer. It was
bloodied and gruesome and was being attacked by slash-
ing fishes.
“Oh, stop it, Justina!” August Shackleton called
angrily. “What a woman! Ah, I see it now. We turn to
land.”
It was the opening to the Yacht Basin, the channel
through the beach shallows to the fine harbor behind.
They tacked, they turned, they nosed in towards the
Cinnamon Coast of Libya.
The world was intact again, one whole and perfect
jewel, lying wonderful to the north of them. And south
was only great ocean and great equator and empty
places of the under-mind. The True Believer came to
port passage with the perfect bright noon-time on all
things.
"Wear a mask or die," the alarmists had been saying louder and louder; and now they were saying "Wear a mask and die anyhow." And why do we so often hold the alarmists in contempt? It isn't always a false alarm they sound, and this one wasn't. The pollution of air and water and land had nearly brought the world to a death halt, and crisis was at hand as the stifling poison neared critical mass.
"Aw, dog dirt, not another air pollution piece," you say. Oh, come off of it. You know us better than that. This is not such an account as you might suppose. It will 222
INcAsEd iN ANciENT RiNd
The eye is robbed of impetus By Fogs that stand and shout: And swiftness all goes out from us And all the stars go out.
Lost Skies--O'Hanlon
1
Incased in Ancient Rind
223
not be stereotype, though it may be stereopticon.
“The lights are burning very brightly,” said Harry
Baldachin, “this club room is sealed off as tightly as
science can seal it, the air conditioning labors faithfully,
the filters are the latest perfection, this is the clearest
day in a week (likely a clearer day than any that will
ever follow), yet we have great difficulty in seeing each
other's face across the table. And we are in Mountain
Top Club out in the high windy country beyond the
cities. It is quite bad in the towns, they say. Suffocation
victims are still lying unburied in heaps.”
“There's a curious thing about that though,” Clement
Flood said. “The people are making much progress on
the unburied heaps. People aren't dying as fast as they
were even a month ago. Why aren't they?”
“Don't be so truculent about it, Clement,” Harry
said. “The people will die soon enough. All the weaker
ones have already died, I believe, and the strong ones
,
linger awhile; but I don't see how any of us can have
lungs left. There'll be another wave of deaths, and then
another and another. And all of us will go with it.”
“I won't,” said Sally Strumpet. “I will live forever. It
doesn't bother me very much at all: just makes my nose
and eyes itch a little bit. What worries me, though, is
that I don't test fertile yet. Do you suppose that the
pollution has anything to do with my not being fertile?”
“What are you chattering about, little girl?” Charles
Broadman asked. “Well, it is something to think about.
Gathering disasters usually increase fertility, as did the
pollution disaster at first. It has always been as though
some cosmic wisdom was saying 'Fast and heavy fruit
now for the fruitless days ahead.' But now it seems as if
the cosmic wisdom is saying “Forget it, this is too
O
224 Strange Doings
overmuch.' But fertility now is not so much inhibited as
delayed,” Broadman continued almost as if he knew
what he was talking about.
Sally Strumpet was a bright-eyed (presently red-eyed)
seventeen-year-old actress, and that was her stage name
only. Her real name was Joan Struthio, and she was met
for club dinner with Harry Baldachin, Clement Flood,
and Charles Broadman, all outstanding in the mentality
set, because she had a publicity man who arranged such
things. Sally herself belonged to the mentality set by
natural right, but not many suspected this fact: only
Charles Broadman of those present, only one in a hun-
dred of those who were entranced by Sally's rather
lively simpering, hardly any of the mucous-lunged
people.
“This
may be the last of our weekly dinners that I am
able to attend,” Harry Baldachin coughed. “I'd have
taken to my bed long ago except that I can't breathe at
all lying down any more. I'm a dying man now, as are all
of us.”
“I'm not, neither the one nor the other,” Sally said.
“Neither is Harry,” Charles Broadman smiled snak-
ishly, “not the first, surely, and popular doubt has been
cast on the second. You're not dying, Harry. You'll live
till you're sick of it.”
“I'm sick of it now. By my voice you know that I'm
.
dying.”
“By your voice I know that there's a thickening of
the pharynx,” Charles said. “By your swollen hands I
know that there is already a thickening of the meta-
carpals and phalanges, not to mention the carpals them-
selves. Your eyes seem unnaturally deep-set now as
though they had decided to withdraw into some interior
cave. But I believe that it is the thickening of your brow
Incased in Ancient Rind
225
ridges that makes them seem so, and the new bulbosity
of your nose. You've been gaining weight, have you
not?”
“I have, yes, Broadman. Every pound of poison that I
take in adds a pound to my weight. I'm dying, and we're
all dying.”
“Why Harry, you're coming along amazingly well. I
thought I would be the first of us to show the new signs,
and instead it is yourself. No, you will be a very, very
long time dying.”
“The whole face of the earth is dying,” Harry Balda-
chin maintained.
“Not dying. Thickening and changing,” said Charles
Broadman.
“There's a mortal poison on everything,” Clement
Flood moaned. “When last was a lake fish seen not
floating belly upward? The cattle are poisoned and all
the plants, all dying.”
“Not dying. Growing larger and weirder,” said Broad-
man.
“I am like a dish that is broken,” said the Psalmist,
“my strength has failed through affliction, and my
bones are consumed. I am forgotten like the unremem-
bered dead.”
“Your dish is made thicker and grosser, but it is not
broken,” Broadman insisted. “Your bones are not con-
sumed but altered. And you are forgotten only if you
forget.”
“Poor Psalmist,” said Sally. This was startling, for the
Psalmist had always been a private joke of Charles
Broadman, but now Sally was aware of him also. “Why,
your strength hasn't failed at all,” she said. “You come
on pretty strong to me. But my own nose is always
itching, that's the only bad part of it. I feel as though I
>
>
226 Strange Doings
were growing a new nose. When can I come to another
club supper with you gentlemen?”
“There will be no more,” Harry Baldachin hacked
through his thickened pharynx. “We'll all likely be dead
by next week. This is the last of our meetings.'
“Yes, we had better call our dinners off,” Clement
Flood choked. “We surely can't hold them every week
now.'
“Not every week,” said Charles Broadman, “but we
will still hold them. This all happened before, you
know.”
“I want to come however often they are,” Sally
insisted.
“How often will we hold them, dreamer, and we all
near dead?” Harry asked. “You say that this has hap-
pened before, Broadman? Well then, didn't we all die
with it before?”
“No. We lived an immeasurably long time, with it
before,” Charles Broadman stated. “What, can you not
read the signs in the soot yet, Harry?”
“Just how often would you suggest that we meet
then, Charles?” Clement Flood asked with weary sar-
>
casm.
.
“Oh, how about once every hundred years, gentlemen
and Sally. Would that be too often?”
“Fool,” Harry Baldachin wheezed and peered out
from under his thickening orbital ridges.
“Idiot,” Clement Flood growled from his thickening
throat.
“Why, I think a hundred years from today would be
perfect,” Sally cried. “That will be a wednesday, will it
not?”
“That was fast,” Broadman admired. “Yes, it will be
a wednesday, Sally. Do be here, Sally, and we will talk
>
Incased in Ancient Rind
227
>
>
>
>
some more of these matters. Interesting things will have
happened in the meanwhile. And you two gentlemen
will be here?”
“No, don't refuse,” Sally cut in. “You are so unim-
aginative about all this. Mr. Baldachin, say that
you
will
dine with us here one hundred years from today if you
are alive and well.”
“By the emphyseman God that afflicts us, and me
dying and gone, yes, I will be here one hundred
years
from today if I am alive and well,” Harry Baldachin said
angrily. “But I will not be alive this time next week.”
“And you say it also, Mr. Flood,” Sally insisted.
“Oh, stop putting fools' words in peoples' mouths,
little girl. Let me die in my own phlegm.”
“Say it, Mr. Flood,” Sally insisted again, “say that
you will dine with us all here one hundred years from
this evening if you are alive and well.”
“Oh, all right,” Clement Flood mumbled as he bled
from his rheumy eyes. "Under those improbable condi-
tions I will be here."
But only Sally and Charles Broadman had the quick
wisdom to understand that the thing was possible.
Fog, smog, and grog, and the people perished. And
the more stubborn ones took a longer time about perish-
ing than the others. But a lethal mantle wrapped the
whole globe now. It was poison utterly compounded, and
no life could stand against it. There was no possibility
of improvement, there was no hope of anything. It
could only get worse. Something drastic had to happen.
And of course it got worse. And of course something
drastic happened. The carbon pollution on earth
reached trigger mass. But it didn't work out quite as
some had supposed that it might.
228
Strange Doings
2
We shamble thorough our longish terms
Of Levallosian mind
Till we be ponderous Pachyderms
Incased in ancient rind.
Lost Skies--O'Hanlon
twenty miles
Oh, for one thing, no rain, or almost no rain fell on
the earth for that next hundred years. It was not missed.
Moisture was the one thing that was in abounding
plenty.
“But a mist rose from the earth and watered all the
surface of the ground.”
Rainless rain forests
grew
and
grew.
Ten million cubic
miles of seawater rose to the new forming canopy and
hung there in a covering world-cloud no more than
up. Naturally the sun and moon and stars
were seen no more on the earth for that hundred years;
and the light that did come down through the canopy
seemed unnatural. But plants turned into giant plants
and spread over the whole earth, gobbling the carbon
dioxide with an almost audible gnashing.
So there was more land, now, and wetter land. There
was a near equipoise of temperature everywhere under
the canopy. The winds were all gathered up again into
that old leather bag and they blew no more on the
earth. Beneath the canopy it was warm and humid and
stifling from pole to pole and to the utmost reaches of
the earth.
It was a great change and everything felt it. Foot-long
saurians slid out of their rocks that were warm and
moist again: and gobbled and grew, and gobbled and
Incased in Ancient Rind
229
grew, and gobbled and grew. Old buried fossil suns had
been intruded into the earth air for a long time, and
now the effect of their carbon and heat was made
manifest. Six-foot-diameter turtles, having been ready to
die, now postponed that event: and in another hundred
years, in two hundred, they would be ten-foot-diameter
turtles, thirteen-foot-diameter turtles.
The canopy, the new lowering copper-colored sky,
shut out the direct sun and the remembered blue sky,
and it shut out other things that had formerly trickled
down: hard radiation, excessive ultraviolet rays and all
the actinic rays, and triatomic oxygen. These things had
,
been the carriers of the short and happy life, or the
quick and early death; and these things were no longer
carried down.
-
There was a thickening of bone and plate on all
boned creatures everywhere, as growth continued for
added years. There were new inhibitors and new stim-
ulants; new bodies for old-no, no-older bodies for old.
Certain teeth in certain beasts had always grown for all
the beast life. Now the beast life was longer, and the
saber-tooths appeared again.
It was murky under the new canopy, though. It took
a long time to get used to it-and a long time was
provided. It was a world filled with fogs, and foggy
phrases.
'A
very
ancient and fish-like smell.'
“Just to keep her from the foggy foggy dew.'
‘There were giants on the earth in those days.'
'When Enos was ninety years old, he became the
father of Cainan. Enos lived eight hundred and fifteen
years after the birth of Cainan, and had other sons and
daughters.
230
Strange Doings
‘Behold now Behemoth, which I have made with
thee.'
‘And beauty and length of days.'
"There Leviathan stretched like a promotory
sleeps or swims.'
‘I will restore to you the years that the locust has
eaten.'
“A land where the light is as darkness,” said Job.
“Poor Job,” said Sally Strumpet.
“This is my sorrow, that the right hand of the Most
High is changed,” said the Psalmist.
“Poor Psalmist,” said Sally Strumpet.
The world that was under the canopy of the lowering
sky was very like a world that was under water. Every-
thing was incomparably aged and giantized and slow.
Bears grew great. Lizards lengthened. Human people
broadened and grew in their bones, and lengthened in
>
their years.
>
“I suppose that we are luckier than those who come
before or after,” Harry Baldachin said. “We had our
youths, we had much of our proper lives, and then we
had this.”
This was a hundred years to a day (a wednesday, was
it not?) since that last club dinner, and the four of
them, Harry Baldachin, Clement Flood, Charles Broad-
man, and Sally Strumpet were met once more in the
Mountain Top Club. Two of them, it will be remem-
bered, hadn't expected to be there.
“What I miss most in these last nine or ten decades is
colors," Clement Flood mused. “Really, we haven't
colors, not colors as we had when I was young. Too
much of the sun is intercepted now. Such aviators as
>
Incased in Ancient Rind
231
>
still go up (the blue-sky hobbyists and such) say that
there are still true colors above the canopy, that very
ordinary objects may be taken up there and examined,
and that they will be in full color as in ancient times. I
believe that the loss of full color was understood by
earlier psychologists and myth makers. In my youth, in
my pre-canopy youth, I made some studies of very
ancient photography. It was in black and white and
gray
only, just as most dreams were then in black and white
and gray only. It is strange that these two things nearly
anticipated the present world: we are so poor in color
that we nearly fall back to the old predictions. No
person under a hundred years old, unless he has flown
above the canopy, has ever seen real color. But I will
remember it.”
“I remember wind and storm,” said Harry Baldachin,
"and these cannot now be found in their real old form
even by going above the canopy. I remember frost and
snow, and these are very rare everywhere on earth now.
I remember rain, that most inefficient thing ever-but
it's pleasant in memory.”
“I remember lightning,” said Charles Broadman, “and
thunder. Ah, thunder.”
“Well, it's more than made up for in amplitude,”
Clement smiled. “There is so much more of the earth
that is land now, and all the land is gray and growing-I
had almost used the old phrase 'green and growing,' but
the color green can be seen now only by those who
ascend above the canopy. But the world is warm and
moist from pole to pole now, and filled with giant
plants and giant animals and giant food. The canopy
above, and the greenhouse diffusion effect below, it
makes all the world akin. And the oceans are so much
more fertile now-one can almost walk on the backs of the fish. There is such a lot more carbon in the carbon cycle than there used to be, such a lot more life on the earth. And more and more carbon is being put into the cycle every year." "That's true," said Harry Baldachin. "That's about the only industrialism that is still being carried out, the only industrialism that is still needed: burning coal and petroleum to add carbon to the cycle, burning it by the tens of thousands of cubic miles. Certain catastrophes of the past had buried great amounts of this carbon, had taken it out of the cycle, and the world tVas so much poorer for it. It was as if the fruit of whole suns had been buried uselessly in the earth. Now, in the hundred years since the forming or the reforming of the canopy, and to a lesser extent during the two hundred years before its forming, these buried suns have been dug up and put to use again." "The digging up of buried suns has caused all manner of mischief," Charles Broadman said. ft "You are an old fogy, Charles," Clement Flood told him. "A hundred years of amplitude have made no change at all in you." The hundred years had really made substantial changes in all of them. They hadn't aged exactly, not in the old way of aging. They had gone on growing in a new, or a very old way. They had thickened in face and body. They had become more sturdy, more solid, more everlasting. Triatomic oxygen, that old killer, was dense in the world canopy, shutting out the other killers; but it was very rare at ground level, a perfect arrangement. There was no wind under the canopy, and things held their levels well. How long persons might live now could only be guessed. It might be up to a thousand years.
232 S t r d.
n g e D o i n g s
Incased in Ancient Rind
233
marry this
“And how is the-ah-younger generation?” Harry
Baldachin asked. “How are you, Sally? We have not seen
you for a good round century.”
“I am wonderful, and I thought you'd never ask.
People take so much longer to get to the point now, you
know. The most wonderful news is that I now test
fertile. When I was seventeen I worried that I didn't test
out. The new times had already affected me, I believe.
But now my term has come around, and about time I'd
say. I'm a hundred and seventeen and there are cases of
girls no more than a hundred who are ready. I will
very
week and will have sons and daughters. I
will marry one of the last of the aviators who goes above
the
canopy. I myself have gone above the canopy
and
seen true colors and felt the thin wind.”
“It's not a very wise thing to do,” said Harry. “They
are going to put a stop to flights above the canopy, I
understand. They serve no purpose; and they are
unsettling."
“Oh, but I want to be unsettled,” Sally cried.
“You should be old enough not to want any such
thing, Sally,” Clement Flood advised. “We are given
length of days now, and with them wisdom should come
to us.”
“Well, has wisdom come?” Charles Broadman asked
reasonably. “No, not really. Only slowness has come to
>
us.
.
“Yes, wisdom, we have it now,” Harry Baldachin
insisted. “We enter the age of true wisdom. Long wis-
dom. Slow wisdom.'
“You are wrong, and unwise,” Charles Broadman said
out of his thickened and almost everlasting face. “There
is not, there has never been any such name or thing as
unqualified Wisdom. And there surely are not such
234 Strange Doings
things as Long Wisdom or Slow Wisdom.'
“But there is a thing named Swift Wisdom,” Sally
stated with great eagerness.
“There was once, there is not now, we lost it,”
Charles Broadman said sadly.
“We almost come to disagreement," Baldachin pro-
tested, “and that is not seemly for persons of the ample
age. Ah well, we have lingered five hours over the
walnuts and the wine, and perhaps it were the part of
wisdom that we leave each other now. Shall we make
these dinners a regular affair?”
“ “I want to,” Sally said.
“Yes, I'd rather like to continue the meetings at
regular intervals,” Clement Flood agreed.
“Fine, fine," Charles Broadman murmured. “We will
meet here again one hundred years from this evening.”
>
3
And some forget to leave or let
And some forget to die:
But may my right hand wither yet
If I forget the sky.
Lost Skies--O'Hanlon
We are not so simple as to say that the Baluchi-
therium returned. The Baluchitherium was of an earlier
age
of the earth and flourished under an earlier canopy.
Something that looked very like the Baluchitherium did
appear, however. It was not even of the rhinoceros
family. It was a horse grown giant and gangly. Horses of
course, being artificial animals like dogs, are quite
plastic and adaptable. A certain upper-lippiness quickly
Incased in Ancient Rind
235
appeared when this new giant animal had turned into a
giant leaf eater and sedge eater (“true” grass had about
disappeared: how could it compete with the richer and
fuller plants that flourished under the canopy?); a cer-
tain spreading of the hoofs, a dividedness more of
appearance than of fact, was apparent after this animal
had become a swamp romper. Well, it was a giant horse
and a mighty succulent horse, but it looked like the
Baluchitherium of old.
We are not so naive as to accept that the bronto-
saurus came back. No. But there was a small flatfooted
lizard that quickly became a large flatfooted lizard and
came to look more and more like the brontosaurus. It
came to look like this without changing anything except
its size and its general attitude towards the world. Put a
canopy over any creature and it will look different
without much intrinsic change.
We surely are not gullible enough to believe that the
crinoid plants returned to the ponds and the slack water
pools. Well, but certain conventional long-stemmed
water plants had come to look and behave very like the
crinoids.
All creatures and plants had made their peace with
the canopy, or they had perished. The canopy, in its
two hundredth year, was a going thing; and the blue-sky
days had ended forever.
There was still vestigial organic nostalgia for the blue-
sky days, however. Most land animals still possessed
eyes that would have been able to see full colors if there
were such colors to be seen; man himself stil possessed
such
eyes.
Most food browsers still possessed enough
crown to their teeth to have grazed grass if such an
inefficient thing as grass had remained. Many human
minds would still have been able to master the mathe-
236 Strange Doings
matics of stellar movements and positions, if ease and
the disappearance of the stellar content had not robbed
them of the inclination and opportunity for such things.
(There was, up to about two hundred years ago, a
rather cranky pseudo-science named astronomy.)
There were other vestiges that hung like words in the
fog and rank dew of the world.
And the name of the star is called Wormwood.'
'In the brightness of the saints, before the day-star.”
'It was the star-eater who came, and then the sky-
eater.'
“And the stars are not clear in his sight,” said Job.
“Poor Job,” said Sally.
>
The second hundred years had gone by, and the
diners had met at Mountain Top Club again. And an
extra diner was with them.
“Poor Sally,” said Harry Baldachin. “You are still a
giddy child, and you have already had sons and daugh-
ters. But you should not have brought your husband to
this dinner without making arrangements. You could
have proposed it this time, and had him here the next
time. After all, it would only be a hundred years.
We are not so soft-headed as to say that the Neander-
thal Men had returned. But the diners at Mountain Top
Club, with that thickening of their faces and bones and
bodies that only age will bring, had come to look very
like Neanderthals—even Sally a little.
“But I wanted him here this time,” Sally said. “Who
knows what may happen in a hundred years?"
“How could anything happen in a hundred years?"
Harry Baldachin asked.
“Besides, your husband is in ill repute,” Clement
Flood said with some irritation. “He's said to be an
a
Incased in Ancient Rind
237
>
outlaw flyer. I believe that a pickup order for his arrest
was put out some six years ago, so he may be picked up
at any time. In the blue-sky days he would have been
picked up within twenty-four hours, but we move more
graciously and slowly under the canopy."
“It's true that there's a pickup order out for me,”
said the husband. “It's true that I still fly above the
canopy, which is now illegal. I doubt if I'll be able to do
it much longer. I might be able to get my old craft up
one more time, but I don't believe I would be able to
get it down. I'll leave if you want me to.”
“You will stay,” Charles Broadman said. “You are a
member of the banquet now, and you and I and Sally
have them outnumbered.”
The husband of Sally was a slim man. He did not
seem to be properly thickened to joint and bone. It was
difficult to see how he could live a thousand years with
so slight a body. Even now he showed a certain nervous-
ness and anxiety, and that did not bode a long life.
“Why should anyone want to go above the canopy?”
Harry Baldachin asked crossly. “Or rather, why should
anyone want to claim to do it, since it is now assumed
that the canopy is endless and no one could go
above
it?”
“But we do go above it,” Sally stated. “We go for the
sun and the stars; for the thin wind there which is a type
of the old wind; for the rain even-do you know that
there is sometimes rain passing between one part of the
canopy and another?-for the rainbow-do you know
that we have actually seen a rainbow?”
“I know that the rainbow is a sour myth,” Baldachin
said.
“No, no, it's real,” Sally swore. “Do you recall the
lines of the old Vachel Lindsay: 'When my hands and
>
238 Strange Doings
my hair and my feet you kissed / When you cried with
your love's new pain / What was my name in the dragon
mist / In the rings of rainbowed rain?' Is that not
wonderful?”
Harry Baldachin pondered it a moment.
“I give it up, Sally,” he said then. “I can't deduce it.
Well, what's the answer to the old riddle? What is the
cryptic name that we are supposed to guess?”
“Forgive him," Charles Broadman murmured to the
husband and to Sally. “We have all of us been fog-bound
for too long a time below the canopy.'
“It is now believed that the canopy has always been
there,” Baldachin said stiffly.
“Almost always, Harry, but not always," Charles
Broadman answered him. “It was first put there very
early, on the second day, as a matter of fact. You likely
do not remember that the second day is the one that
God did not call good. It was surely a transient and
temporary backdrop that was put there to be pierced at
the proper times by early death and by grace. One of
the instants it was pierced was just before this present
time. It had been breached here and there for short ages.
Then came the clear instant, which has been called
glaciation or flood or catastrophe, when it was shattered
completely and the blue sky was seen supreme. It was
quite a short instant, some say it was not more than ten
thousand years, some say it was double that. It hap-
pened, and now it is gone. But are we expected to forget
that bright instant?”
“The law expects you to forget that instant, Broad-
man, since it never happened, and it is forbidden to say
that it happened,” Baldachin stated stubbornly. “And
you, man, the outlaw flyer, it is rumored that
you
have
your craft hidden somewhere on this very mountain.
In cased in Ancient Rind 239
>
Ah, I must leave you all for a moment.”
They sat for some five hours over the walnuts and
wine. It is the custom to sit for a long time after eating
the heavy steaks of any of the neo-saurians. Baldachin
returned and left several times, as did Flood. They
seemed to have something going between them. They
might even have been in a hurry about it if hurry were
possible to them. But mostly the five persons spent the
after-dinner hours in near congenial talk.
“The short and happy life, that is the forgotten
thing,” the husband of Sally was saying. “The blue-sky
interval-do you know what that was? It was the bright
-
death sword coming down in a beam of light. Do you
know that in the blue sky days hardly one man in ten
lived to be even a hundred years old? But do you know
a
that in the blue-sky days it wasn't sealed off? The sword
stroke was a cutting of the bonds. It was a release and
an invitation to higher travel. Are you not tired of living
in this prison for even two hundred years or three
hundred?”
“You are mad,” Harry Baldachin said.
Well of course the young man was mad. Broadman
looked into the young man's eyes (this man
probably no older than Sally, he likely was no more
than two hundred and twenty) and was startled by the
secret he discovered there. The color could not be seen
under the canopy, of course; the eyes were gray to the
canopy
world. But if he were above the canopy, Broad-
man knew, in the blue-sky region where the full colors
could be seen,
the
young
man's
eyes would have been
sky-blue.
“For the short and happy life again, and for the
infinite release," Sally's husband was saying. “For those
under the canopy there is no release. The short and
happy life and scorching heat and paralyzing cold. Hun-
>
was
240 Strange
Strange Doings
ger and disease and fever and poverty, all the wonderful
things! How have we lost them? These are not idle
dreams. We have them by the promise-the Bow in the
Clouds and the Promise that we be no more destroyed.
But you destroy yourselves under the canopy.
"
“Mad, mad. Oh, but they are idle dreams, young man,
and now they are over.” Harry Baldachin smiled an old
saurian smile. And the room was full of ponderous
guards.
“Take the two young ones,” Clement Flood said to
the thickened guards.
But the laughter of Sally Strumpet shivered their ears
and got under their thick skins.
“Take us?” she hooted. “How would they ever take
>
us?"
> >
>
“Girl, there are twenty of them, they will take you
easily,” Baldachin said slowly. But the husband of Sally
was also laughing.
“Will twenty creeping turtles be able to catch two
soaring birds on the high wing?” he laughed. “Would
two hundred of them be able to? But your rumor is
right, Baldachin, I do have my craft hidden somewhere
on this very mountain. Ah, I believe I will be able to get
the old thing up one more time.”
“But we'll never be able to get it down again,” Sally
whooped. “Coming, Charles?”
“Yes," Charles Broadman cried eagerly. And he
meant it, he meant it.
Those guards were powerful and ponderous, but they
were just too slow. Twenty creeping turtles were no way
able to catch those two soaring birds in their high flight.
Crashing through windows with a swift tinkle of glass,
then through the uncolored dark of the canopy world,
to the rickety craft named Swift Wisdom that would
go
>
Incased in Ancient Rind
241
up one more time but would never be able to come
down again, the last two flyers escaped through the
pachydermous canopy.
“Mad,” said Harry Baldachin.
“Insane,” said Clement Flood.
“No,” Charles Broadman said sadly. “No.” And he
sank back into his chair once more. He had wanted to
go with them and he couldn't. The spirit was willing but
the flesh was thickened and ponderous.
Two tears ran down his heavy cheeks but they ran
very slowly, hardly an inch a minute. How should things
move faster on the world under the canopy?
a
"The sea is ugly," said Sour John, " and it's peculiar that I'm the only one who ever noticed it. There have been millions of words written on the sea, but nobody has written this. For a time I thought it was just my imagination, that it was only ugly to me. Then I ana­ lyzed it and found that it really is ugly. "It is foul. It is dirtier than a cesspool; yet men who would not willingly bathe in a cesspool will bathe in it. It has the aroma of an open sewer; yet those who would not make a pilgrimage to a sewer will do so to the sea. It is untidy; it is possibly the most untidy thing in the world. And I doubt if there is any practical way to improve it. It cannot be drained; it cannot be covered up; it can only be ignored. "Everything about it is ignoble. Its animals are baser than those of the land. Its plant life is rootless and protean. It contaminates and wastes the shores. It is an open grave where the living lie down with dead." "It does smell a little, Sour John, and it is untidy. But I don't think it's ugly. You cannot deny that sometimes it is really beautiful." "I do deny it. It has no visual beauty. It is monoto-
242
li-tE Uqly SEA
The Ugly Sea
243
nous, with only four or five faces, and all of them
coarse. The sun and the sky over it may be beautiful;
the land that it borders may be fair; but the old sewer
itself is ugly.”
“Then why are you the only one who thinks so?"
“There could be several reasons. One, that I've long
suspected, is that I'm smarter than other people. And
another is that mankind has just decided to deny this
ugliness for subconscious reasons, which is to say for no
reason at all. The sea is a lot like the subconscious. It
may even be the subconscious; that was the teaching of
the Thalassalogians. The Peoples of the Plains dreamed
of the Sea before they visited it. They were guilty
dreams. They knew the sea was there, and they were
ashamed of it. The Serpent in the Garden was a Hydra, a
water snake. He ascended the river to its source to prove
that nothing was beyond his reach. That is the secret we
have always to live with: that even the rivers of Paradise
flow finally into that evil grave. We are in rhythm with
the old ocean: it rises irregularly twice in twenty-four
hours, and then repents of rising; and so largely do we.”
“Sour John, I will still love the sea though you say it
is ugly.”
“So will I. I did not say I did not love it. I only said it
was ugly. It is an open secret that God was less pleased
with the sea than with anything else he made. His own
people, at least, have always shunned it.
“O, they use it, and several times they have nearly
owned it. But they do not go to sea as seamen. In all
history there have been only three Jewish seamen. One
was in Solomon's navy; he filled a required berth, and
was unhappy. One served a Caliph in the tenth century;
why I do not know. And the third was Moysha Ufer-
wohner.”
>
244 Strange
Strange Doings
“Then let us hear about Moysha.'
“Moysha was quite a good man. That is what makes it
sad. And the oddest thing is what attracted him to the
evil sea. You could not guess it in ten years.
“Not unless it was a waterfront woman.”
“That is fantastic. Of all unlikely things that would
seem the most unlikely. And yet it's the truth and you
hit it at once. Not a woman in being, however, but in
potential (as the philosophers have it); which is to say,
quite a young girl.
“Likely you have run across her. So I will tell it all.”
This begins ten years ago. Moysha was then a little
short of his majority, and was working with his father in
an honorable trade not directly connected with the sea,
that of the loan shark. But they often loaned money to
seamen, a perilous business, for which reason the rates
were a little higher than you might expect.
Moysha was making collections and picking up a little
new trade. This took him to the smell of the sea, which
was painful to him, as to any sensible man. And it took
him to the Blue Fish, a water front cafe, bar, and
lodging house.
A twelve-year-old girl, a cripple, the daughter of the
proprietor, was playing the piano. It was not for some
time, due to the primacy of other matters, that Moysha
realized that she was playing atrociously. Then he
attempted to correct it. “Young lady, one should play
well or not at all. Please play better, or stop. That is
acutely painful.”
She looked as though she were going to cry, and this
disconcerted Moysha, though he did not know why it
did. Half an hour later the fact intruded itself on his
consciousness that she was still playing, and still playing
The Ugly Sea
245
badly; but now with a stilted sort of badness.
“Young lady, this is past all bearing. I suggest that
you stop playing the damned thing and go to your bed.
Or go anywhere and do anything. But this is hideous.
Stop it!”
The little girl really did cry then. And as a result of it
Moysha got into an altercation, got his head bloodied,
and was put out of the place; the first time that such a
thing had ever happened to him. Then he realized that
the seamen liked the little girl, and liked the way she
played the piano.
This does not seem like a good beginning for either a
tender love or a great passion. But it had to be the
beginning; that was the first time they ever saw each
other.
For the next three days Moysha was restless. A ser-
pent was eating at his liver and he could not identify it.
He began to take a drink in the middle of the day (it
had not been his custom); and on the third day he asked
for rum. There was a taste in his mouth and he was
trying to match it. And in the inner windings of his head
there was an awful smell, and it made him lonesome.
By the evening of the third day the terrible truth
came to him: he had to go down for another whiff of
that damned sea; and he possibly could not live through
another night unless hë heard that pretty little girl play
the piano again.
Bonny was pretty. She had a wise way with her, and a
willful look. It was as though she had just decided not
to do something very mean, and was a little sorry that
she hadn't.
She didn't really play badly; just out of tune and as
nobody else had ever played, with a great amount of
ringing in the ballad tunes and a sudden muting, then
246 Strange Doings
>
a sort of clashing and chiming. But she stopped playing
when she saw that Moysha was in the room.
Moysha did not get on well at the Blue Fish. He
didn't know how to break into the conversation of the
seamen, and in his embarrassment he ordered drink after
drink. When finally he became quarrelsome (as he had
never been before) they put him out of the place again.
Moysha lay on a dirty tarp out on a T head and
listened while Bonny played the piano again. Then she
stopped. She had probably been sent to bed.
But instead she came out to the T head where he was.
“You old toad, you give me the creeps.”
“I do, little girl?”
“Sure you do. And papa says ‘Don't let that Yehude
.
in the place again, he makes everybody nervous, if
someone wants to borrow money from him let them
borrow it somewhere else.' Even the dogs growl at you
down here."
“I know it.'
“Then why do you come here?”
“Tonight is the only time I ever did come except on
business.”
"Tonight is what I am talking about.”
“I came down to see you."
“I know you did, dear. O, I didn't mean to call you
that. I call everybody that.”
"Do
you
want to take it back?”
"No, I don't want to take it back. You old toad, why
aren't
you a seaman like everybody else?”
“Is everybody else a seaman?”
“Everybody that comes to the Blue Fish. How will
you come to the Fish now when Papa won't let
you
in
the place?”
"I don't know."
>
>
>
The Ugly Sea
247
“If you give me one of your cards I'll call you up.”
“Here.”
“And if you give me two dollars and a half I'll pay
you back three dollars and a quarter Saturday.”
“Here.”
“I can't play the piano any other way. If you were a
seaman I bet you'd like the way I play the piano. Good
night, you old toad.”
“Good night, Bonny.”
And it was then that the dismal thought first came to
Moysha: “What if I should be a seaman after all?”
Now this was the most terrible thing he could have
done. He could have become a Christian, he could have
married a tramp, he could have been convicted of
embezzlement. But to leave his old life for the sea
would be more than he could stand and more than his
family could stand.
And there was no reason for it: only that a twelve-
year-old girl looked at him less kindly than if he had
been a seaman. It is a terrible and empty thing to go to
sea: all order is broken up and there are only periods of
debauchery and boredom and work and grinding idle-
ness, and the sickening old pond and its dirty borders. It
was for such reasons that Moysha hesitated for three
months.
Bonny came to see him for possibly the tenth time.
She was now paying him interest of sixty cents a week
on an old debt which, in the normal state of affairs, she
would never be able to clear.
“Bonny, I wish there was something that I could say
to you.”
"You can say anything you want to me.
“O Bonny, you don't know what I mean.”
“You want to bet I don't?”
248 Strange Doings
“Bonny, what will you be doing in four years?”
“I'll be getting married to a seaman if I can find one
to take me.”
“Why shouldn't one take you?”
“For a seaman it is bad luck to marry a crippled
woman.'
So on the first day of summer Moysha went off to sea
as a lowly wiper. It broke his heart and shamed his
family. He woke and slept in misery for the foulness of
the life. He ate goy food and sinned in the
ports
in
attempting to be a salty dog. And it was nine weeks
before he was back to his home port; and he went to the
Blue Fish with some other seamen.
It was afternoon, and Bonny went for a walk with
him across the peninsula and down to the beach.
“Well, I'm thunderstruck is all I can say. Why in the
world would a sensible man want to go to sea?”'
“I thought you liked seamen, Bonny.
“I do. But how is a man going to turn into a seaman
if he isn't one to start with? A dog could turn into a fish
easier. That's the dumbest thing anyone ever did. I had
an idea when you came to the place today that you
turned into a seaman just for me. Did you?”
“Yes.”
“I could be coy and say 'Why Moysha, I'm only
twelve years old,' but I already knew how you felt. I
will tell you something. I never did a mean thing, and I
never saw anybody I wanted to be mean to till I met
you. But I could be mean to you. It would be fun to
ruin you. We aren't good for each other. You oughtn't
to see me ever again.”
“I have to."
“Then maybe I have to be mean to you. It's for both
of us that I ask you not to see me again. I don't want to
a
>
The Ugly Sea
249
>
ruin you,
and I don't want to be a mean woman; but I
will be if you keep coming around.'
“Well, I can't stay away.”
“Very well, then I'll be perverse. I'll shock you every
time I open my mouth. I'll tell you that I do filthy
things, and you won't know whether I'm lying or not.
You won't know what I mean, and you'll be afraid to
find out. You'll never be able to stay away from me if
you don't stay away now. I'll have husbands and still
keep you on a string. You'll stand outside in the dark
and look at the light in my win
window, and you'll eat your
own heart. Please go away. I don't want to turn mean.'
“But Bonny, it doesn't have to be that way.”
“I hope it doesn't, but it scares me every time I see
you. Now I'll make a bargain with you. If you try to
stay away I'll try to stay good. But if you come back
again I won't be responsible. You ought to go back
uptown and not try to be a seaman any more.”
After that the little girl went back to the Blue Fish.
Moysha did not go back uptown. He returned to the
sea, and he did not visit that port again for a year. And
there was a change in him. From closer acquaintance he
no longer noticed that the sea was foul. Once at sunset,
for a moment, he found something pleasant about it. He
no longer sinned excessively in the ports. Ashore he
traveled beyond the waterfront bars and visited the
countries behind and met the wonderful people. He got
the feel of the rough old globe in his head. In a pension
in Holland he played chess with another twelve-year-old
girl, who was not precocious, and who did not dread
turning into a mean woman. In a pub in Denmark he
learned to take snuff like the saltiest seaman of them all.
At an inn in Brittany he was told that the sea is the
heritage of the poor who cannot afford the land. It was
250 Strange Doings
in Brittany that he first noticed that he now walked like
an old salt.
After a year he went back to his home port and to
the Blue Fish.
“In a way I'm glad to see you,” said Bonny. “I've
been feeling contrary lately and you'll give me an
excuse. Every morning I wake up and say 'This day I'm
‘
going to raise hell.' Then I can't find anyone to raise hell
with. All those water rats I like so well that I can't be
mean to them. But I bet I know how to be mean to you.
Well go get a room and tell me where it is, and I'll come
to you tonight.”
“But you're only a little girl, and besides you don't
mean it.”
you think
a
“ “Then you're going to find out if I mean it. I intend
to come. If
you
love me because I'm pretty
and good, then I'll make you love me for a devil. There's
things you don't even know about, and you've been a
seaman for a year. I'll make you torture me, and it'll be
a lot worse torture to you. I'll show you what unnatural
really means. You're going to be mighty sorry you came
back."
“Bonny, your humor is cruel.”
“When did I ever have any humor? And you don't
know if I'm kidding, and you never will know. Would
you rather I did these things with someone else than
with you?”
"No."
“Well I will. If you don't tell me where your room is,
I'll
go to someone else's room tonight. I'll do things so
filthy you wouldn't believe it. And even if I don't go to
somebody, I'll tell you tomorrow that I did.”
But Moysha would not tell her where his room was.
So late that night when he left the Blue Fish she
The Ugly Sea
251
>
followed him. It was fantastic for a grown man to walk
faster and faster to escape a thirteen-year-old crippled
girl, and finally to run in panic through the dark streets.
But when finally she lost him she cried out with sur-
prising kindness: “Goodnight Moysha, I'm sorry I was
mean."
But she wasn't very sorry, for the next night she was
still mean.
“You see that old man with the hair in his ears? He's
filthy and we don't even understand each other's lan-
guage.
But he understood what I wanted well enough.
He's the one I spent last night with.”
“Bonny, that's a lie, and it isn't funny.”
“I know it isn't funny. But can you be sure that it's a
lie? I only lie part of the time, and you never know
when. Now tonight, if you don't tell me where your
room is, I'm going to take either that old red-faced
slobberer or that black man. And you can follow me,
since you run away when I follow you, and see that I go
with one of them. And you can stand out in the street
and look up at our light. I always leave the light on.”
“Bonny, why are you mean?”
“I wish I knew, Moysha, I wish I knew.”
After a week of this he went to sea again, and did not
come back to his home port for two years. He learned
of the sea-leaning giants.
“I do not know the name of this tree,” said Sour
John, “though once I knew it. This is the time of a story
where one usually says it's time for a drink. However,
for a long time I have been worried about my parasites
who are to me almost like my own children, and this
constant diet of rum and redeye cannot be good for
them. I believe if the young lady would fry me a platter
252 Strange
Strange Doings
of eggs it would please my small associates, and do me
more good than harm.”
He learned, Moysha did, of the sea-leaning giants.
They are massive trees of the islands and the more
fragmentary mainlands, and they grow almost hori-
zontal out toward the sea. They are not influenced by
the wind; from the time they are little whips the wind is
always blowing in from the sea, and they grow against it
and against all reason. They have, some of them, trunks
nine feet thick, but they always lean out over the sea.
Moysha began to understand why they did, though most
people would never understand it.
He acquired a talking bird of great versatility. He
acquired also a ring-tailed monkey and a snake that he
carried around inside his shirt, for Moysha was now a
very salty seaman.
He was prosperous, for he had never forsaken the
trade of the moneylender, and he was always a shrewd
buyer of novelties and merchandise. He turned them
over as he went from port to port, and always at a
profit.
He became a cool student of the ceaseless carnage of
the ocean, and loved to muse on the ascending and
descending corpses and their fragments in the old
watery grave.
He spent seven months on a certain Chinese puzzle,
and he worked it, the only Occidental who ever had
patience enough to do so.
When she was fifteen Bonny married a seaman, and
he was not Moysha. This happened just one week before
Moysha came back to port and to the Blue Fish. The
man she married was named Oglesby Ogburn; and if
you
think that's a funny name, you should have heard the
The Ugly Sea
253
>
a
handles of some of them that she turned down.
The very day that Moysha came to the Blue Fish was
the day that Oglesby left; for the honeymoon was over,
and he had to go back to sea. Bonny was now all
kindness to everyone. But she still put the old needle
into Moysha.
“I've had a husband for a week now, so I won't be
able to get along without a man. You stay with me
while you're in town; and after that I'll get another, and
then another and another. And by that time Oglesby
will be back for a week.”
“Don't talk like that, Bonny, even if I know you're
joking.”
“But you don't know that I'm joking. You never
know for sure."
“How can anyone who looks so like an angel talk like
that?”
“It does provide a contrast. Don't you think it makes
me more interesting? I didn't know you were the kind
who chased married women.”
“I'm not. But O Bonny! What am I to do?”
“Well I've certainly offered you everything. I don't
know how I can offer you any more.”
And a few days later when Moysha was leaving port
they talked again.
“You haven't even given me a wedding present or
wished me luck. And we do need it. It's always bad luck
for a seaman to marry a crippled woman. What are you
going to give me for a wedding present?”
“The only thing I will give you is the serpent from
.
my bosom.”
“O don't talk so flowery.”
Then he took the snake out of his shirt.
“O, I didn't know you had a real snake. Is he for me?
254
Strange Doings
That's the nicest present anyone ever gave me. What do
you call him?”
“Why, just a snake. Ular, that is, he's a foreign
.
snake."
So he went back to sea and left the little girl there
with the snake in her hands.
Bonny was a widow when she was sixteen, as every-
one had known she would be. It's no joke about it being
bad luck for a seaman to marry a cripple. They seldom
lose much time in perishing after they do it. Oglesby
died at sea, as all the Ogburns did; and it was from a
trifling illness from which he was hardly sick at all. It
was many weeks later that Moysha heard the news, and
then he hurried back to his home port.
He was too late. Bonny had married again.
“I thought you'd probably come, and I kind of
wanted it to be you. But you waited so long, and the
summer was half over, that I decided to marry Polycarp
Melish. I'm halfway sorry I did. He wouldn't let Ular
sleep with us, and he killed him just because he bit him
on the thumb.
“But I tell you what you do. What with the bad luck
and all, Polycarp won't last many months. Come around
earlier next year. I like to get married in the springtime.
I'll be a double widow then.'
“Bonny, that's a terrible way to talk even when
kidding."
“I'm not kidding at all. I even have an idea how we
can beat the jinx. I'll tell you about it after we get
married next year. Maybe a crippled girl gets to keep her
third husband."
“Do
you want Polycarp to die?"
“Of course I don't. I love him. I love all my husbands,
just like I'll love you after I marry you. I can't help it if
The Ugly Sea 255
9
I'm bad luck. I told him, and he said he already knew it;
but he wanted to do it anyhow. Will you bring me
another snake the next time you're in port?”
“Yes. And you can keep the monkey in place of it till
I come back. But you can't have the bird yet. I have to
keep someone to talk to."
“All right. Please come in the spring. Don't wait till
summer again or it'll be too late and I'll already be
married to someone else. But whether we get married or
not, I'm never going to be mean again. I'm getting too
old for that."
So he went to sea again happier than he ever had
before.
When she was seventeen Bonny was a widow again as
everyone had known she would be. Polycarp had been
mangled and chopped to pieces in an unusual accident
in the engine room of his ship.
Moysha heard of it very soon, before it could have
been heard of at home. And he took council with his
talking bird, and with one other, technically more
human.
“This other,” said Sour John, “was myself. It was
very early spring, and Moysha was wondering if it were
really best to hurry home and marry Bonny.
“ 'I am not at all superstitious,' he said. 'I do not
believe that a crippled woman is necessarily bad luck to
seamen. But I believe that Bonny may be bad luck to
everyone, including herself.'
“We were on a chocolate island of a French flavor
and a French name. On it were girls as pretty as Bonny,
and without her reputation for bad luck: girls who
would never be either wives or widows. And there is a
way to go clear around the world from one such place
to another.
256 Strange Doings
“ 'The Blue Fish is not necessarily the center of the
earth,' I told him. 'I have always believed it to be a little
left of center. And Bonny may not be the queen. But if
you think that she is, then for you she is so. Nine
months, or even a year is not very long to live, and you
will be at sea most of the time. But if you think a few
weeks with the little girl is enough, then it is enough for
you. A lot of others who will not have even that will be
dead by next Easter.' I said this to cheer him up. I was
always the cheerful type.
“ 'And what do you think?' Moysha asked the talking
bird.
‘Sampah,' said the bird in his own tongue. This
means rubbish. But whether he meant that the supersti-
tion was rubbish, or the idea of marrying with a conse-
quent early death was rubbish, is something that is still
locked up in his little green
head."
Moysha hurried home to marry Bonny. He brought a
brother of Ular for a present, and he went at once to the
Blue Fish.
“Well you're just in time. I was going to have the
banns read for me and somebody tomorrow, and if
you'd been an hour later it wouldn't have been you.”
“I was halfway afraid to come.”
“You needn't have been afraid. I told you I knew a
way to beat the jinx. I'm selling the Blue Fish. I wrote
you that Papa was dead. And we're going to take a
house uptown and forget the sea.
“Forget the sea? How could anyone forget the sea?”
“Why, you're only a toy seaman. You weren't raised
to it. When you go away from it you won't be a seaman
at all. And crippled women are only bad luck to seamen,
not to other men.”
“But what would I do? The sea is all I know.”
“Don't be a child, Moysha. You hate the sea,
The Ugly Sea
257
remember? You always told me that you did. You only
went to sea because you thought I liked seamen. You
know a hundred ways to make a dollar, and
you
don't
have to go near the sea for any of them.”
So they were married. And they were happy. Moysha
discovered that Bonny was really an angel. Her devil talk
had been a stunt.
It was worth all five dark years at sea to have her. She
was now even more lovely than the first night he had
seen her. They lived in a house uptown in the heart of
the city, and were an urbane and civilized couple. And
three years went by.
Then one day Bonny said that they ought to get rid
of the snake, and maybe even the monkey. She was
afraid they would bite one of the children, or one of the
children would bite them.
The talking bird said that if his friends left he would
leave, too.
“But Bonny,” said Moysha, “these three are all that I
have to remind me of the years when I was a seaman.”
“You have me, also. But why do you want to be
reminded of those awful days?”
“I know what we could do, Bonny. We could buy the
Blue Fish again. It isn't doing well. We could live there
and run it. And we could have a place there for the
snake and the monkey and the bird.”
“Yes, we could have a place for them all, but not for
the children. That is no place to raise children. I know,
and I was raised there. Now my love, don't be difficult.
Take the three creatures and dispose of them. And
remember that for us the sea isn't even there any more.”
.'
But it was still there when he went down to the Blue
Fish to try to sell the three creatures to the seaman. An
old friend of his was present and was looking for an
engineer first class to ship out that very night. And there
258
Strange Doings
was a great difficulty in selling the creatures.
He could not sell them unless he put a price on them,
and he was damned if he'd do that. That was worse than
putting a price on his own children. He had had them
longer than his children, and they were more peculiarly
his own. He could not sell them. And he could not go
home and tell his wife that he could not sell them.
“He went out and sat on the horns of the dilemma
and looked at the sea. And then his old friend (who
coincidentally was myself),” said Sour John, “came out
and said that he sure did need an engineer first class to
leave that very night.
“And then what do you think that Moysha did?”
“O, he signed on and went back to sea.'
Sour John was thunderstruck.
“How did you know that? You've hit it again. I never
will know how you do it. Well, that's what he did. In
the face of everything he left his beautiful wife and
children, and his clean life, and went to the filthy sea
again. It's incredible.”
“And how is he doing now?”.
“God knows. I mean it literally. Naturally he's dead.
That's been a year. You don't expect a seaman married
to a crippled woman to live forever do you?”
“And how is Bonny?”
“I went to see her this afternoon; for this is the port
where it all happened. She had out an atlas and a pencil
and piece of string. She was trying to measure out what
town in the whole country is furthest from the sea.
“She is lonely and grieves for Moysha, more than for
either of her other husbands. But O she is lovely! She
>
The Ugly Sea
259
supports herself and her brood by giving piano lessons.”
“Is there a moral to this?”
“No. It is an immoral story. And it's a mystery to me.
A man will not normally leave a clean home to dwell in
an open grave, nor abandon children to descend into a
sewer, nor forswear a lovely and loving wife to go faring
on a cesspool, knowing that he will shortly die there as a
part of the bargain.
“But that is what he did.”
Cliffs That Laughed
“Between ten and ten-thirty of the morning of
October 1, 1945, on an island that is sometimes called
Pulau Petir and sometimes Willy Jones Island (neither of
them its map name), three American soldiers dis-
appeared and have not been seen since.
“I'm going back there, I tell you! It was worth it. The
limbs that laughed! Let them kill me! I'll get there! Oh,
here, here, I've got to get hold of myself.
“The three soldiers were Sergeant Charles Santee of
Orange, Texas; Corporal Robert Casper of Gobey, Ten-
nessee; and PFC Timothy Lorrigan of Boston which is in
one of the eastern states. I was one of those three
soldiers.
“I'm going back there if it takes me another twenty
years!”
No, no, no! That's the wrong story. It happened on
Willy Jones Island also, but it's a different account
entirely. That's the one the fellow told me in a bar years
later, just the other night, after the usual “Didn't I used
to know you in the Islands?"
a
“One often makes these little mistakes and false
260
Cliffs That Laughed 261
>
,
says 'Hell,
starts,” Galli said. “It is a trick that is used in the trade.
One exasperates people and pretends to be embarrassed.
And then one hooks them."
Galli was an hereditary storyteller of the Indies.
“There is only one story in the world,” he said, “and it
pulls two ways. There is the reason part that says 'Hell,
it can't be' and there is the wonder part
that
maybe it is.' ” He was the storyteller, and he offered to
teach me the art.
For we ourselves had a hook into Galli. We had
something he wanted.
“We used the same stories for a thousand years,” he
said. “Now, however, we have a new source, the Amer-
ican Comic Books. My grandfather began to use these in
another place and time, and I use them now. I steal
them from your orderly tents, and I have a box full of
them. I have Space Comics and Commander Midnight; I
have Galactic Gob and Mighty Mouse and the Green
Hornet and the Masked Jetter. My grandfather also had
copies of some of these, but drawn by older hands. But
I do not have Wonder Woman, not a single copy. I
would trade three-for-one for copies of her. I would pay
a premium. I can link her in with an island legend to
create a whole new cycle of stories, and I need new stuff
all the time. Have you a Wonder Woman?”
When Galli said this, I knew that I had him. I didn't
have a Wonder Woman, but I knew where I could steal
one. I believe, though I am no longer sure, that it was
Wonder Woman Meets the Space Magicians.
I stole it for him. And in gratitude Galli not only
taught me the storyteller's art, but he also told me the
following story:
.
.
“Imagine about flute notes ascending,” said Galli. “I
haven't my flute with me, but a story should begin so to set the mood. Imagine about ships coming out of the Arabian Ocean, and finally to Jilolo Island, and still more finally to the very island on which we now stand. Imagine about waves and trees that were the great­ great-grandfathers of the waves and trees we now have.'' It was about the year 1 620, Galli is telling it, in the late afternoon of the high piracy. These Moluccas had already been the rich Spice Islands for three hundred years. Moreover, they were on the road of the Manila galleons coming from Mexico and the Isthmus. Arabian, Hindu, and Chinese piracy had decayed shamefully. The English were crude at the business. In trade the Dutch had become dominant in the Islands and the Portuguese had faded. There was no limit to the opportunities for a courageous and dedicated raider in the Indies. They came. And not the least of these new raiding men was Willy Jones. It was said that Willy Jones was a Welshman. You can believe it or not as you like. The same thing has been said about the Devil. Willy was twenty-five years old when he finally possessed his own ship with a mixed crew. The ship was built like a humpbacked bird, with a lateen sail and suddenly-appearing rows of winglike oars. On its prow was a swooping bird that had been carved in Muskat. It was named the Flying Serpent, or the Feathered Snake, depending on what language you use.
262 S t r a n g e D o i n g s
'Pause a moment,' said Galli. 'Set the mood. Imagine about dead men variously. We come to the bloody stuff at once.'
One early morning, the Feathered Snake overtook a tall Dutchman. The ships were grappled together, and
Cliffs That Laughed 263
the men from the Snake boarded the Dutch ship. The
men on the Dutchman were armed, but they had never
seen such suddenness and savagery as shown by the dark
men from the Snake. There was slippery blood on the
decks, and the croaking of men being killed.
'I forgot to tell you that this was in the passage
between the Molucca Sea and the Banda,' Galli said.
The Snake took a rich small cargo from the Dutch
ship, a few ablebodied Malay seamen, some gold specie,
some papers of record, and a dark Dutch girl named
Margaret. These latter things Willy Jones preempted for
himself. Then the Snake devoured that tall Dutchman
and left only a few of its burning bones floating in the
ocean.
.
'I forgot to tell you that the tall Dutch ship was
named the Luchtkastell,' Galli said.
Willy Jones watched the Luchtkastell disappearing
under the water. He examined the papers of record, and
the dark Dutch girl Margaret. He made a sudden decis-
ion: He would cash his winnings and lay up for a season.
He had learned about an island in the papers of
record. It was a rich island, belonging to the richest of
the Dutch spice men who had gone to the bottom with
the Luchtkastell. The fighting crew would help Willy
Jones secure the island for himself; and in exchange, he
would give them his ship and the whole raiding territory
and the routes he had worked out.
Willy Jones captured the island and ruled it. From the
ship he kept only the gold, the dark Dutch girl Margaret,
and three golems which had once been ransom from a
Jew in Oman.
'I forgot to tell you that Margaret was the daughter of
the Dutch spice man who had owned the island and the
tall ship and who was killed by Willy,' Galli said, “and
264
Strange Doings
the island really belonged to Margaret now as the
daughter of her father.'
For one year Willy Jones ruled the small settlement,
drove the three golems and the men who already lived
there, had the spices gathered and baled and stored
(they were worth their weight in silver), and built the
Big House. And for one year he courted the dark Dutch
girl Margaret, having been unable to board her as he had
all other girls.
She refused him because he had killed her father,
because he had destroyed the Luchtkastell which was
Family and Nation to her, and because he had stolen her
island.
This Margaret, though she was pretty and trim as a
kuching, had during the affair of the Feathered Snake
and the Luchtkastell twirled three seamen in the air like
pinwheels at one time and thrown them all into the
ocean. She had eyes that twinkled like the compounded
eyes of the devil-fly; they could glint laughter and fury
at the same time.
“Those girls were like volcanoes,” the man said.
,
.
“Slim, strong mountains, and we climbed them like
mountains. Man, the uplift on them! The shoulders were
cliffs that laughed. The swaying,”
No, no! Belay that last paragraph! That's from the
ramble of the fellow in the bar, and it keeps intruding.
'I forgot to tell you that she reminds me of Wonder
Woman, 'Galli said.
Willy Jones believed that Margaret was worth winning
unbroken, as he was not at all sure that he could break
her. He courted her as well as he could, and he used to
Cliffs That Laughed 265
advantage the background of the golden-green spicery
on which they lived.
'Imagine about the Permata bird that nests on the
moon,' Galli said, “and which is the most passionate as
well as the noblest-singing of the birds. Imagine about
flute notes soaring.'
Willy Jones made this tune to Margaret:
The Nutmeg Moon is the third moon of the year.
The Tides come in like loose Silk all its Nights.
The Ground is animated by the bare Feet of Margaret
Who is like the Pelepah of the Ko-eng Flower.
Willy made this tune in the Malaya language in which
all the words end in ang.
'Imagine about water leaping down rocky hills,' Galli
said. “Imagine about red birds romping in green groves.'
Willy Jones made another tune to Margaret:
A Woman with Shoulders so strong that a Man
might ride
upon
them
The while she is still the little Girl watching for the
black Ship
Of the Hero who is the same age as the Sky,
But she does not realize that I am already here.
Willy made this tune in the Dutch language in which
all the words end in lijk.
'Imagine about another flute joining the first one, and
their notes scamper like birds,' Galli said.
Willy Jones made a last tune to Margaret:
Damnation! That is enough of Moonlight and
Tomorrows!
Now there are mats to plait, and kain to sew.
Even the smallest crab knows to build herself a
house in the sand.
Margaret should be raking the oven coals and
baking a roti.
266 Strange Doings
I wonder why she is so slow in seeing this.
Willy made this tune in the Welsh language in which
all the words end in gwbl.
When the one year was finished, they were mated.
There was still the chilliness there as though she would
never forgive him for killing her father and stealing her
island; but they began to be in accord.
you
'Here pause five minutes to indicate an idyllic inter-
‘
lude,' Galli said. "We sing the song Bagang Kali Berjumpa
if know the tune. We flute, if I have my flute.'
The idyllic interlude passed.
Then Willy's old ship, the Feathered Snake, came
back to the Island. She was in a pitiful state of misuse.
She reeked of old and new blood, and there were none
left on her but nine sick men. These nine men begged
Willy Jones to become their captain again to set every-
thing right.
Willy washed the nine living skeletons and fed them
up for three days. They were fat and able by then. And
the three golems had refitted the ship.
“All she needs is a stong hand at the helm again,” said
Willy Jones. “I will sail her again for a week and a day. I
will impress a new crew, and once more make her the
terror of the Spice Islands. Then I will return to my
island, knowing that I have done a good deed in restor-
ing the Snake to the bloody work for which she was
born."
“If you go, Willy Jones, you will be
many
years,” said the dark Dutch Margaret.
“Only one at the most,” said Willy.
“And I will be in my grave when you return.”
“There is no grave could hold you, Margaret."
“Aye, it may not hold me. I'll out of it and confront
gone for
Cliffs That Laughed
267
>
you
when
you come back. But it gives one a weirdness
to be in the grave for only a few years. I will not own
you for my husband when you do come back. You will
not even know whether I am the same woman that you
left, and you will never know. I am a volcano, but I
banked my hatred and accepted you. But if you leave
me now, I will erupt against you forever.”
I
But Willy Jones went away in the Flying Serpent and
left her there. He took two of the golems with him, and
he left one of them to serve Margaret.
What with one thing and another, he was gone for
twenty years.
“We were off that morning to satisfy our curiosity
about the Big House,” the fellow said, “since we would
soon be leaving the island forever. You know about the
Big House. You were on Willy Jones Island too. The
Jilolos call it the House of Skulls, and the Malaya and
Indonesia people will not speak about it at all.
“We approached the Big House that was not more
than a mile beyond our perimeter. It was a large de-
cayed building, but we had the sudden feeling that it
was still inhabited. And it wasn't supposed to be. Then
we saw the two of them, the mother and the daughter.
We shook like we were unhinged, and we ran to them.
“They were so alike that we couldn't tell them apart.
Their eyes twinkled like the compounded eyes of a
creature that eats her mate. Noonday lightning! How it
struck! Arms that swept you off your feet and set your
bones to singing! We knew that they were not twins, or
even sisters. We knew that they were mother and
daughter.
“I have never encountered anything like them in my
life! Whatever happened to the other two soldiers, I
know it was worth it to them. Whatever happened to
268
Strange Doings
don't care if they kill me! They were perfect, those two
women, even though we weren't with them for five
minutes."
“Then it was the Badger.”
)
No, no, no! That's the wrong story again. That's not
the story Galli told me. That's part of the story the
fellow told me in the bar. His confused account keeps
interposing itself, possibly because I knew him slightly
when we were both soldiers on Willy Jones Island. But
he had turned queer, that fellow. “It is the earthquake
belt around the world that is the same as the legend
belt,” he said, "and the Middleworld underlies it all.
That's why I was able to walk it.” It was as though he
had been keel-hauled around the world. I hadn't known
him well. I didn't know which of the three soldiers he
was. I had heard that they were all dead. “Imagine
about conspiracy stuff now,” said Galli. “Imagine about
a whispering in a pinang grove before the sun is up.”
“How can I spook that man?” Margaret asked her
golem shortly after she had been abandoned by Willy
Jones. “But I am afraid that a mechanical man would
not be able to tell me how."
“I will tell you a secret,” said the golem. “We are not
mechanical men. Certain wise and secret men believe
that they made us, but they are wrong. They have made
houses for us to live in, no more. There are many of us
unhoused spirits, and we take shelter in such bodies as
we find. That being so, I know something of the house-
less spirits in the depth of every man. I will select one of
them, and we will spook Willy Jones with that one.
Willy is a Welshman who has become by adoption a
Dutchman and a Malayan and a Jilolo man. There is one
old spook running through them all. I will call it up
when it is time.”
>
Cliffs That Laughed 269
'I forgot to tell you that the name of Margaret's
golem was Meshuarat,” Galli said.
>
>
After twenty years of high piracy, Willy Jones re-
turned to his Island. And there was the dark Dutch
Margaret standing as young and as smouldering as when
he had left. He leapt to embrace her, and found himself
stretched flat on the sand by a thunderous blow.
He was not surprised, and was not (as he had at first
believed) decapitated. Almost he was not displeased.
Margaret had often been violent in her love-making.
“But I will have you,” Willy swore as he tasted his
own blood delightfully in his mouth and pulled himself
up onto hands and knees. “I have ridden the Margaret-
tiger before.”
“You will never ride my loins, you lecherous old
goat,” she rang at him like a bell. “I am not your wife. I
am the daughter that you left here in the womb. My
mother is in the grave on the hill.”
Willy Jones sorrowed terribly, and he went to the
grave.
But Margaret came up behind him and drove in the
cruel lance. “I told you that when you came back you
would not know whether I was the same woman you
had left," she chortled, “and you will never know!”
“Margaret, you are my wife!” Willy Jones gasped.
“Am I of an age to be your wife?” she jibed. “Regard
me! Of what age do I seem to be?”
“Of the same age as when I left," said Willy. “But
perhaps you have eaten of the besok nut and so do not
change your appearance.”
'I forgot to tell you about the besok nut,' said Galli.
'If one eats the nut of the besok tree, the tomorrow
tree, the time tree, that one will not age. But this is
270 Strange Doings
always accompanied by a chilling unhappiness.”
“Perhaps I did eat it,” said Margaret. “But that is my
grave there, and I have lain in it many years, as has she.
You are prohibited from touching either of us."
“Are you the mother or the daughter, Witch?”
“You will never know. You will see us both, for we
take turns,
and
you
will not be able to tell us apart. See,
the
grave
is always disturbed, and the entrance is easy."
“I'll have the truth from the golem who served you
while I was gone,” Willy swore.
‘A golem is an artificial man,' said Galli. “They were
made by the Jews and Arabs in earlier ages, but now
they say that they have forgotten how to make them. I
wonder that you do not make them yourselves, for you
have advanced techniques. You tell them and you pic-
ture them in your own heroic literature' (he patted the
comic books under his arm), 'but you do not have them
in actuality.”
The golem told Willy Jones that the affair was thus:
A daughter had indeed been born to Margaret. She
had slain the child, and had then put it into the middle
state. Thereafter, the child stayed sometimes in the
grave, and sometimes she walked about the island. And
she
grew as any other child would. And Margaret herself
had eaten the besok nut so that she would not age.
When mother and daughter had come to the same age
and appearance (and it had only been the very day
before that, the day before Willy Jones had returned),
then the daughter had also eaten the besok nut. Now
the mother and daughter would be of the same appear-
ance forever, and not even a golem could tell them
apart.
Cliffs That Laughed 271
>
> >
Willy Jones came furiously onto the woman again.
"I was sure before, and now I am even more sure that
you are Margaret,” he said, “and now I will have
you
in
my fury.”
“We both be Margaret," she said. “But I am not the
same one you apprehended earlier. We changed places
while
you talked to the golem. And we are both in the
middle state, and we have both been dead in the
grave,
and you dare not touch either of us ever. A Welshman
turned Dutchman turned Malayan turned Jilolo has this
spook in him four times over. The Devil himself will not
touch his own daughters.”
The last part was a lie, but Willy Jones did not know
it.
“We be in confrontation forever then,” said Willy
Jones. “I will make my Big House a house of hate and a
house of skulls. You cannot escape from its environs,
neither can any visitor. I'll kill them all and pile their
skulls up high for a monument to you.”
Then Willy Jones ate a piece of bitter bark from the
pokok ru.
'I forgot to tell you that when a person eats bark
from the pokok ru in anger, his anger will sustain itself
forever,' Galli said.
“If it's visitors you want for the killing, I and my
mother-daughter will provide them in numbers,” said
Margaret. “Men will be attracted here forever with no
heed for danger. I will eat a telor tuntong of the special
sort, and all men will be attracted here even to their
death.”
'I forgot to tell you that if a female eats the telor
tuntong of the special sort, all males will be attracted
272 Strange Doings
irresistibly,” Galli said. “Ah, you smile as though you
doubted that the besok nut or the bark of the pokok ru
or the telor tuntong of the special sort could have such
effects. But yourselves come now to wonder drugs like
little boys. In these islands they are all around you and
you too blind to see. It is no ignorant man who tells you
this. I have read the booklets from your orderly tents:
Physics without Mathematics, Cosmology without
Chaos, Psychology without Brains. It is myself, the
master of all sciences and disciplines, who tells you that
these things do work. Besides hard science, there is soft
science, the science of shadow areas and story areas, and
you
do wrong to deny it the name.
“I believe that you yourself can see what had to
follow, from the dispositions of the Margarets and Willy
Jones,” Galli said. “For hundreds of years, men from
everywhere came to the Margarets who could not be
resisted. And Willy Jones killed them all and piled up
their skulls. It became, in a very savage form, what you
call the Badger Game.”
Galli was a good-natured and unhandsome brown
man. He worked around the army base as translator,
knowing (besides his native Jilolo), the Malayan, Dutch,
Japanese and English languages, and (as every storyteller
must) the Arabian. His English was whatever he wanted
it to be, and he burlesqued the speech of the American
soldiers to the Australians, and the Australians to the
Americans.
“Man, it was a Badger!” the man said. “It was a
grizzle-haired, glare-eyed, flat-headed, underslung,
pigeon-toed, hook-clawed, clam-jawed Badger from
Badger Game Corner! They moved in on us, but I'd take
my chances and go back and do it again. We hadn't
Cliffs That Laughed 273
frolicked with the girls for five minutes when the Things
moved in on us. I say Things; I don't know whether
they were men or not. If they were, they were the
coldest three men I ever saw. But they were directed by
a man who made up for it. He was livid, hopping with
hatred. They moved in on us and began to kill us.”
No, No, that isn't part of Galli's story. That's some
more of the ramble that the fellow told me in the bar
the other evening.
It has been three hundred years, and the confronta-
tion continues. There are skulls of Malayan men and
Jilolo men piled up there; and of Dutchmen and
Englishmen and of Portuguese men; of Chinamen and
Philippinos and Goanese; of Japanese, and of the men
from the United States and Australia.
“Only this moming there were added the skulls of
two United States men, and there should have been
three of them,” Galli said. “They came, as have all
others, because the Margarets ate the telor tuntong of
the special sort. It is a fact that with a species (whether
insect or shelled thing or other) where the male gives his
life in the mating, the female has always eaten of this
telor tuntong. You'd never talk the males into such a
thing with words alone."
‘How is it that there were only two United States
skulls this morning, and there should have been three?' I
asked him.
'One of them escaped,' Galli explained, and that was
unusual. He fell through a hole to the middle land, that
third one of them. But the way back from the middle
land to one's own country is long, and it must be
walked. It takes at least twenty years, wherever one's
>
274 Strange Doings
own country is; and the joker thing about it is that the
man is always wanting to go the other way.
“That is the end of the story, but let it not end
abruptly,' Galli said. “Sing the song Chari Yang Besar if
you remember the tune. Imagine about flute notes
lingering in the air.'
“I was lost for more than twenty years, and that's a
fact,” the man said. He gripped the bar with the most
knotted hands I ever saw, and laughed with a merriment
so deep that it seemed to be his bones laughing. “Did
you know that there's another world just under this
world, or just around the corner from it? I walked all
day every day. I was in a torture, for I suspected that I
was going the wrong way, and I could go no other. And
I sometimes suspected that the middle land through
which I traveled was in my head, a derangement from
the terrible blow that one of the Things gave me as he
came in to kill me. And yet there are correlates that
convince me it was a real place.
“I wasn't trying to get home. I was trying to get back
to those girls even if it killed me. There weren't any
colors in that world, all gray tones, but otherwise it
wasn't much different from this one. There were even
bars there a little like the Red Rooster."
(I forgot to tell you that it was in the Red Rooster
bar that the soldier from the islands told me the parts of
his story.)
“I've got to get back there. I think I know the way
now, and how to get on the road. I have to travel it
through the middle land, you know. They'll kill me, of
course, and I won't even get to jazz those girls for five
Cliffs That Laughed 275
minutes; but I've got to get back there. Going to take
me another twenty years, though. That sure is a weary
walk.'
I never knew him well, and I don't remember which
of the names was his. But a man from Orange, Texas, or
from Gobey, Tennessee, or from Boston, in one of the
eastern states, is on a twenty-year walk through the
middle land to find the dark Dutch Margarets, and
death.
I looked up a couple of things yesterday. There was
Revel's recent work on Moluccan Narcotics. He tells of
the Besok Nut which does seem to inhibit aging but
which induces internal distraction and hypersexuality.
There is the Pokok Ru whose bitter bark impels even
the most gentle to violent anger. There is one sort of
Telor Tuntong which sets up an inexplicable aura about
a woman eater and draws all males overpoweringly to
her. There is much research still to be done on these
narcotics, Revel writes.
I dipped into Mandrago's Earthquake and Legend and
the Middle World. He states that the earthquake belt
around the world is also the legend belt, and that one of
the underlying legends is of the underlying land, the
middle world below this world where one can wander
lost forever.
And I went down to the Red Rooster again the next
evening, which was last evening, to ask about the man
and to see if he could give me a more cogent account.
For I had re-remembered Galli's old story in the mean-
while.
“No, he was just passing through town,” the barman
said. “Had a long trip ahead of him. He was sort of a
276 Strange Doings
nutty fellow. I've often said the same thing about you."
That is the end of the other story, but let it not end
suddenly. Pause for a moment to savor it. Sing the song
Itu Masa Dahulu if you remember the tune.
Imagine about flute notes falling. I don't have a flute,
but a story should end so.
