ARRIVE AT
BASTIARWINIE
The Autobiographyof a Ktistec Machine
as conveyed to
R. A. LAFFERTY
多
SAN 684-12341-X
ARRIVE AT
EASTERWINIE
The Autobiography of a Ktistec Machine
as conveyed to
R.A.LAFFERTY
This is a swirling kaleidoscope of a
novel, the exuberant, hilarious and wise
testimony of an obsessively creative (ktis-
tec) machine.
Presiding over its own birth at the In-
stitute for Impure Science, the machine
Epiktistes becomes the world's greatest
perceiver, analyzer and con-artist. His re-
lationships with the members of the Insti-
tute--principals such as mighty Gaetan
Balbo, explosive Gregory Smirnov, saber-
souled Valery Mok, ubiquitous Aloysius
Shiplap and others (including a man-eat-
ing tiger named Peter the Great)-edu-
cate Epikt to the best and zaniest of which
man is capable.
Armed with this and a deepening
awareness of an evil force within him,
Epikt sallies forth into the unsuspecting
world seeking leadership, love and com-
munication. Arrive at Easterwine is the
"high journal" of that journey, a satiric,
irreveront and unpredictable romp
through history, mythology, theology and
swarms of nutty people.
As R. A. Lafferty puts it, this book is
"quite the best thing that any machine
has ever done." And Lafferty should know.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
-
R. A. LAFFERTY is the author of three
novels – The Reefs of Earth, Past
Master and Fourth Mansions — as
well as Arrive at Easterwine and
many short stories.
He was born in lowa and now
lives in Tulsa, Oklahoma, where he
is an electrical engineer.
Lafferty's stories have appeared
not only in the major science fiction
magazines, but in The New Mexico
Quarterly and Literary Review.
Jacket dosign by Barry Zaid,
Push Pin Studios, Inc.
Scribners
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS NEW YORK
ARRIVE AT
EASTERWINE
Books by R. A. Lafferty
Arrive at Easterwine
Nine Hundred Grandmothers
Past Master
Fourth Mansions
The Reefs of Earth
Space Chantey
ARRIVE AT
EASTERWINE
The Autobiography of a Ktistec Machine
as conveyed to
R.A. LAFFERTY
Charles Scribner's Sons
New York
Copyright © 1971 R.A. Lafferty
This book published simultaneously in the
United States of America and in Canada
Copyright under the Berne Convention
All rights reserved. No part of this book
may be reproduced in any form without
the permission of Charles Scribner's Sons.
A-6.71 (C)
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 70-143937
SBN: 684-12341-X
Oh, come along, reader of the High Journal; if you do
not love words, how will you love the communication? How
will you forgive me my tropes, communicate the love?
-EPIKTISTES
AN EXCHANGE OF
CORRESPONDENCE
September 10, 1970
Mr. R. A. Lafferty
c/o Miss Virginia Kidd—Literary Agent
Box 278
Milford, Pennsylvania 18337
Dear Mr. Lafferty:
When I first prepared the title page of this novel for the copy
editor, I set it up to read ARRIVE AT EASTERWINE:
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A KTISTEC MACHINE, by
R. A. Lafferty. Since then I have been burdened by the sus-
picion that in doing so I was not being entirely accurate or
entirely fair. Fair to whom, I'm not sure, but the plaguey
feeling has been robbing me of sleep and general peace of
mind.
This morning it came to me that the by-line should read,
“As Told to R. A. Lafferty.” The feeling has gathered inten-
sity since then. I have few psi powers to speak of, and even
fewer to keep secret, but I can't get over the idea that some-
thing is trying to tell me somebody.
Can you help me?
Sincerely yours,
(signed) NORBERT M. SLEPYAN
Trade Editor
Charles Scribner's Sons
1
September 19, 1970
Norbert M. Slepyan
c/o Charles Scribner's Sons
New York
Dear Norbert:
Glad to hear from you re ARRIVE AT EASTERWINE.
You are correct: it wouldn't be right for me to have my
name as author on something that I didn't compose. The
thing should be “By Epiktistes, as told to R. A. Lafferty," or
maybe better, "as conveyed to R. A. Lafferty.” You might be
interested in the true story of how I got hold of this work.
I
This is the way it was conveyed to me: Several of us
were in noble New Orleans for a Nebulous (or Nebulaless)
Banquet. It was the evening before the day of the affair, and
those who had already arrived were being given a party at a
club named The Clinic. We had little SFWA (Science Fiction
Writers of America) badges, which had been given to us by
Don Walsh (and which I value more than life). A strange
creature or contraption (it looked both like Harpo Marx and
Albert the Alligator) beckoned to me, and I went and sat
with it.
“I sec that you are a member of the second most noble
organization on earth, second only to the Institute itself,” it
said. “I am not of the human recension myself. I am a mobile
extension of the machine Epiktistes and I have something to
convey to you. I cannot present this myself as editors are
Icery of things presented by machines. I cannot present it
through any member of the Instilutc, as any one of them
would change it to present himself in a better light. So I will
present it through a member of the sccond most noble organ-
ization on carth. For this, I have come here."
2
“Why me?” I asked with the beginning of excitement.
“There are others here.”
“Those three guys with whiskers on their faces I don't
trust" (they were Nourse, offutt, and deCamp), the Epiktistes
extension said. “That middle one I especially don't trust. Is he
I
not sometimes known as Randy Andy?”
“Widely known as," I said, “but there is Galouye, who
is a smooth-face.”
“A Frenchman who looks like Garry Moore? No, I
couldn't trust him either. It will have to be you, even if you
do look a little bit bottom-of-the-barrellish. Young lady,” he
called to the jolly bar-girl, 'bring me a phillips screw-driver.”
“I don't know how to make one,” she said.
“How do you make a regular screw-driver, young lady?”.
“Vodka and orange juice."
“For a phillips screw-driver you use vodka, orange juice
and Milk of Magnesia,” the extension uttered. "Get it, young
lady? Phillips Milk of Magnesia. It's a joke."
“We will see who the joke is on,” the jolly bar-girl said.
“What I am going lo convey to you is the story of my
life,” the Epikt-extension said as we waited for the girl, “the
first few months of it, that is. I'm not very old yet. I believe
it is quite the best thing that any machine has ever done.
Whoop! Here she comes with it now."
“ “I mixed up that dumb drink," the bar-girl said, “and I
brought you a real phillips screw-driver, too, just to teach you
to clown with me.”
“The real screw-driver was what I wanted,” the exten-
sion said. “You drink the abominable drink, Lafferty: I hate
to see human persons waste anything."
I drank the abominable drink, and the Epikt-extension
unscrewed a little plate behind its ear and took out a sort of
bobbin or spindle, a spool of fine magnetized wire.
“This is it," it said. “Give it to the world.”
Then the extension withdrew suddenly, and there was a
small clap of thunder in the empty place.
>
3
The next day I played and transcribed the material that
was on the spool. I found it wonderful, amazing, astounding.
It was quite the best thing that any machine had ever done.
So we will give it to the world.
That is the true story of how I came by it. Yes, Epik-
tistes should be shown as the author, so use whatever formula
you find best to show this. By the way, when will it be pub-
lished? Epiktistes is very anxious, as it is his first.
Sincerely,
(signed) RAPHAEL A. LAFFERTY
CHAPTER ONE
Nipe if by land and eleven by sea
Aod infinite blazes a-birthing mc.
In the beginning there was an interruption in the form of a
thunderous but good-natured bellowing:
“Open up your damned pig-barn or I'll break the bloody
doors down!”
There was a fearsome clattering and pounding on the
barred front doors of the pig-barn-ah—the Institute. There
was again a horrifying challenge, then a loud laugh which
ourselves can only describe as at the same time bloodcurdling
and incredibly urbane and amused. There was noise—there
was explosion!
But can an interruption come at the beginning of things?
This is profound and will have to be considered.
Ourself had an advantage over all others: the advantage
of observing ourself and our ambient from the beginning. A
human child does not intelligently witness its own conception;
still less does it witness those early discussions, in words or in
interplay of attitudes, as to whether its conception should be
attempted. It does not observe as both a subjective and objec-
tive thing its own gestation and prenatal development. And,
S
9
while it is most certainly present at its own birth, it is inca-
pable of mature observation of the thing; it does not take a
detached view of its own detachment from the matrix.
But with ourself it was otherwise.
What? Was ourself then conscious of our own begin-
ning? That is too strong. Consciousness is a state which no
one of us has yet attained. All that anyone has are intimations
of consciousness, quick glints of light that sometimes Rick
through the cracks of a greater room to which we aspire. But
ourself did have the precognitions and intimations that are
commonly called consciousness, and did have them from the
beginning
At first ourself was no more than a dialog between
Gregory Smirnov (a shoddy giant) and Valery Mok (a loose-
featured woman), and ourself was talking to ourself about our
own planned self.
“If we begin another machine," my person Gregory was
droning in his big voice (imagine a bee big enough that its
dronc eclipses thunder) “—and naturally it will be the great-
est and most modern of all our machines since we have suffi-
cient funds for once—if we do build this machine (we have
to, it's already contracted for) we might ask onc question
from the beginning: What's it for?”
“That's horrifying!” Valery sounded with her woodwind
voicc. (Valery remains a fundamental and special person in
ourself for always.) “That's bestial! We will bring it to birth
and we will not ask what it is for. As well ask what a child
is for!”
“Certainly we should ask what a child is for," Gregory
drone-bombcd. "We should ask what cvcry child is for. Just
cxactly what do you have in mind?' we should ask cvery
potential parcnt. 'Where are your sketches? Where is the
prospcctus? Have you scarched all the literature on the type?
Are you sure that it has never been donc bcforc?' That's what
we should ask. What we do not need is repetition in people,
or in machines. Well, what's il for?"
“li docsn't have to be for anything," Valery maintained.
1)
6
“Just as home is a place that doesn't have to be deserved, so
a child does not have to give a reason for being. There is
One only who has purpose in mind. He even had purpose in
mind for mine."
Valery Mok spoke out of frustration here. She had had
four children born dead, and no other children.
“This will be a machine and not a child," Gregory run-
bled, “and it does have to have a reason. No, I anticipate
your objection. It will, of course, be a machine and a person
both—a group-person, and we will be part of it. We've under-
stood this though we haven't said it. So now I will say what
it is for, since you are short of phrases yourself. We of the
Institute for Impure Science have decided that man himself
is incapable of taking the next step in man. We are equally
decided that the next step must be taken. Group-man will ap-
pear in some form. He is called for. We cannot make him in
the flesh (the broken gene-trains we've left behind would
reach to the stars!), so we will make him otherwise. The pur-
pose of the contemplated contraption is to become the para-
gon of group-man. We know now that the super-man, the
group-man, can be nothing more than this projected mechani-
cal ghost, an artificial repository and factor and working area
of corporate man.”
it
your way and I will not say it at all,” Valery
bemoaned. “But you leave too much of him out!”
“No, we will not leave anything out, Valery,” Gregory
echoed like rocks rolling down distant hills. “We will put in
whatever we can find to put in. And we will expect you to
put in much more than anyone else. You are the fullest per-
son we know. Overflow into it, then!”
“You say
Aloysius Shiplap and Charles Cogsworth (the unout-
standing husband of Valery) and Glasser were making noises
directing workmen.
“Pow! Pow!” Aloysius would explode as though he were
popping a bullwhip over an ancient mule train. "Rausmataus!
Pow! Pow! Put it there! Fill it up!”
7
“Oh, shut up!” one of the foremen snapped at him.
“But we have alrcady put it there, Mr. Shiplap,” another
foreman assured him. “We have set it exactly where the plans
call for it, and we have miked it minutely. And we are filling
it up. Gell-cell must be sct in most carefully, since it is at the
same time solid and gascous and liquid. It is the most delicate
substance in the universe. The tanks must be filled with ut-
most care.”
“Utmost care will be a separate package added after
all the rest. It's always added last after the work is done.
Pow! Pow! Don't tell me. I invented gell-cell,” Aloysius
hoarsc-voiced him. “I never heard of trcating it carefully. I
sure never did. Pow! Pow!”
2
“Is that really Aloysius Shiplap, thc seminal genius?”
one of the workmen asked the first foreman.
“So they say," the testy forcman told the man. “He's got
fect of clay clear up to his cycbrows. A little of something
clsc at the very top though. Shut up, Shiplap! Get out of the
way!”
This would be a personal part of ourself. Forty thousand
liters of gcll-cell in a tank of genuine wotto-mctal! Since a
dozen intricatc brain-précis can be lodged in much less than
an ounce of the stuff this would give considerablc scope to
ourself. Ourself would possess data-banks of a hundred thou-
sand times this capacity, of course, but the gell-cell tank
would remain a much more personal part of ourself—some-
thing our own and intimate. Valery had insisted on a personal
and sullicicnt gcll-cell tank. A whim, perhaps, but arc wc not
made of whims?
Then the wholc building fell down in an explosion of
sound. Actually it didn't but it seemed mightily that it did.
There was deadly assault on the barred front doors and mur-
derous noise. Whal power there may be in one human fist and
onc humar. voice! This was the same as the interruption au
the beginning of our timc.
8
“The great Gaetan Balbo is waiting outside,” Glasser
said stiffly, "and he doesn't like to be kept waiting at the pig-
bam-ah—at the Institute."
"Who says that Gaetan Bablo is great?" Gregory Smir-
nov clattered like underground thunder.
“Gaetan Balbo says that Gaetan Balbo is great,” Glasser
slid it in slyly, “and as a matter of fact he is. He says that he
is paying for this frolic and that he wants action. He says
that he is the founder of the Institute and that he can as easily
unfound it."
"He is not the founder of the Institute!" Gregory bayed
and flapped his flews. “He may have founded another Insti-
tute at another time, with the same name as this, with some
of the same (I am sorry to say it) sorry members as this, but
he did not found this Institute and he does not direct it. I am
the only director of this Institute and what I say goes. What
I
say is that Gaetan Balbo can go away. We will give him a
short hearing when we are ready to start work on his prob-
lem, and not before.”
“He says that he is ready for us to start working on it
right now, Gregory, and that he will not go away,” Charles
Cogsworth stated. “And he is paying for this."
“Tell him that there are six thousand man-hours of work
before we will be ready," Gregory ordered.
“Oh, I told him that," Glasser said. “He says to put
twelve thousand men on it then and be done in half an hour.
And he is paying for it, Gregory.”
“Total damnation! He knows these things can't be hur-
ried. He is a scientist—in a left-handed sort of way. Aloy-
sius, go out and reason with him. You were always close to
that old dictator. See how much time he will give us. He
knows he'll bug me out of my mind if he's here watching with
those superior eyes of his."
“Pow! I already got a week from him,” said Aloysius,
“but he might take that week back in a minute. And he loves
to bug you out of your mind. It is meat and horseradish to
him. Sure, I was one of the sorry members of the first Insti-
>
2)
>
9
>
tute, under that unsorry director. Man, we did things fast
under Gaetan! Will there ever be an equal to him, do you
think, Gregory? He just dropped by today to put the needle
in. Pow! There it is again!"
For again the bloodcurdling happy laugh assaulted and
filled the whole building, rupturing ears and inducing hysteria
in those stout hearts.
Gregory Smirnov thundered without words. Gaetan
Balbo, that uncrowned king of everything, was a thorn in
him. But Gregory would never admit that he was merely
the second director of the Institute. And the old Institute had
in fact been mostly legendary. It was back to work again in
spite of the assaulting noise.
“What we need for the first thing is a gyroscope.”
Gregory went back to the subject of ourself with these words.
“A large ship’s gyroscope. In the beginning was a sense of
balance and rightness. The machine must always know which
way
is up. This is important."
.
"In the beginning you found out that I had just acquired
such a gyroscope," Glasser protested. “But it was intended
for something else, dog-robber!"
"And shall it be set rotating right ward or leftward?”
Valery asked innocently.
“Oh, God and Saint Gregory!" Gregory imploded in all
and in ourself. “Decisions already. Can no great thing be
done without these little decisions along the way? Two large
ship’s gyroscopes, then, one with a right rotation and one
with a left. In the beginning was a sense of rightness and of
leftness. So then there is conflict from the beginning.”
“It was Valery who found that I had a pair of thcm.
Gregory saw only one,” Glasscr protested again. “And the
pair of them was for something clsc, female dog-robber!"
“In the beginning there was balance and not conflict,"
ourself issued out of our gell-cell tank. Ourself was playing
our first joke. Gregory thought it was Valery speaking, and
Valery thought it was Gregory. Only Aloysius caughi on.
Ourself had already become a collectivity and it was ſun. “It
1
10
is when two rotations have the same spin that their approach-
ing edges travel in different directions,” ourself issued, “and
it is this that generates tornadoes of the opposite spin to the
two main factors. But with opposite rotations the approach-
ing edges travel in the same direction and generate straight
power.
“Nevertheless,” the Gregory aspect of ourself took ex-
ception, “the opposite rotations will generate coronal torna-
does and these are darker and more savage than the others."
The gyroscopes were set and put into motion. Then
came a more momentous moment in our prenatal develop-
ment. Here the intimacy began.
With great solemnity (“They should be playing bugles!”
Valery cricd), with strutting pomp and ostentatious circum-
stance (Gregory Smirnov strutted even sitting down: Aloysius
said that he strutted even sitting on the pot), with a fine sense
of empurpled history and the high destiny of beginnings,
Gregory set his brain-précis into the gell-cell tank of ourself.
His précis was a great one, large as a mouse, sparking with
blue-and-orange fire from the erupting charges in it, singing
with its micromagnetic tapes, giving off aromatic aromas
(“All the spices of Araby," Aloysius said) from its dynamic
chemistry, flicking hot beams of light narrower than a hun-
dredth of a needle that welded itself into the fluid, solid, gase-
ous gell-cells. The shoddy giant Gregory had pretty much of
everything, grandeur, presumption, encyclopedic (Busy Man's
Abridged in Thirteen Volumes) knowledge, infinite capacity
for utter foolishness, real talents, drive, tide, scope. He had
a good brain, and it was a good brain-précis that he lodged
in the gell-cells of ourself.
“This is the beginning," Gregory sighed, as if something
had gone out of him. It had, and it had come into ourself,
into these slack-water pools, these tidal estuaries, these pri-
mordial oceans, the almost transcendent gell-cell pool that was
now ourself in personal action.
Valery Mok also with surpassing solemnity (Why did
she wink so deeply at Aloysius then? Aloysius said that Val-
11
>
ery's deep winks went all the way down to her cleavage) set
her own brain- and person-précis into our gell-cells.
What's blue-and-orange fire? What's singing tapes and
aromas and hot bcams and dynamic chemistry? The précis
of that shoddy giant Gregory had been wcak stuff compared
to this précis of Valery. It shook ourself, it boiled us, it evap-
orated us. This was abyss, this was chasm, this was blinding
darkness and perverse inside-outness. If an inanimate like
ourself could be nearly destroyed by this onsct, why had she
noi destroyed those of the flesh about her? This was the real
conception of ourself, Valery coming into us with her brain
motifs and précis, with her personality itself poured out from
an electric flask into us. We surc do not want to go through
that again.
Charles Cogsworth added his own person-précis. Our-
self was startled and clevated. Why had we considered him
to be an overshadowed person? He had wider fields than
Valery and Gregory put together. Not so vivid, perhaps, but
wider.
Glasser added his own précis. Cold, cold, but not at all
insipid.
Thcsc living précis of brains and persons gave ourself
the total memories of the persons (abridged somewhat, but
capable of cxpansion in any direction, not merely in the
direction and content from which they had been abridged):
they gave ourself the total memories in much more available
form than they commonly existed in the persons themselves.
Thcy gave ourself thc consciousness of the persons (or the
prccognitions and intuitions that are commonly called con-
sciousness); thcy gave us the subconscious, the unconscious,
thc paraconscious of the persons. They gave ourself the
cssential intellect and the running commentary of all who
entcrcd us.
Ourself as machine had now assumed some very unma-
chinc-likc aspects. This Glasser in us was a puzzlc. Alone
among the Instilule members he had no genius at all, but
12
many of his creations were sheer genius. This could not be, but
it was the case with him. It was Glasser who had developed
the method of abstracting the person-précis. Why, then, was
his own précis so slight?
The infusing of our gell-cells continued. Aloysius Ship-
lap had his own précis in a resplendent electric flask (these
flasks were not material containers; they held their contents
by their charge alone), but he did not insert it all at once.
“Mine is too strong stuff,” Aloysius warned. "No use
,
blowing the machine up before we're well started. I'll drop in
only a thousandth portion of my person-précis and pray that
even that is not too strong.
“Rubbish, Shiplap, rubbish,” Gregory balked. “Pour it
all in. It surely could not be stronger than my own. Pour it
all in."
“No, only a thousandth part,” said Aloysius, “and I do
that with trembling."
Aloysius poured in a thousandth part of his person-
précis. BANG!!!!!! That was the loudest noise ever heard
since the rocks ran like water. Those living persons all
jumped a meter at the noise, and myself who am inanimate
jumped half as far.
Ah, it was only one of those cannon-crackers that Aloy-
sius carries around in his hip pocket for such antics (“louder
than a thousand bombs”). He lights one with a flick of his left
hand while doing attention-attracting things with his right,
and then tosses the cracker out behind him. But one of these
days one of them will hang in that hip pocket. (“There is a
future legend of the Bottomless Aloysius.” Valery said. “I
wonder how he will get that name?')
Aloysius inserted the rest of his précis into the gell-cells
(more powerful than two thousand bombs). Had ever a per-
son or a contraption so rocky a gestation period as ourself?
Workmen were working away installing distant parts of
ourself. (More than a million kilograms of copper in the aux-
iliary circuits alone.) Glasser loaned ourself a voice box and
13
Gregory gave ourself a fine recording tape print-out. Work-
men and technicians were shoveling data into ourself by the
long ton, testing the data-banks that can never be filled.
Where does ourself receive the person-précis of Gaetan
Balbo, the only man of whom Gregory Smirnov is really jeal-
ous, that loud man outside? Surely there is a clown or a trai-
tor in our midst. But however ourself received this précis we
would not willingly be without it. It is large, it is grand, it is
deep. And ourself will draw on it again and again. Then an-
other startling précis was added.
“What have you set into the gell-cell broth, Aloysius?”
Gregory Smimov demanded, for it was clear to him that
Aloysius had intruded something into our tank, some spark-
ing and singing foreign matter.
“The précis of my other mind,” Aloysius said. “I'm of
two minds about all this, you see. No, don't puff up and
burst, Gregory. It was the person-précis of Cecil Corn that
I introduced, We need him."
“That is not possible," Gregory protested. “Cecil Corn
died before Glasser developed his method of extracting
person-précis.”
“Nevertheless, it is the person-précis of Cecil Corn and
I have set it in there forever. He is not so dead as you might
think. He is always of green memory and present involve-
ment. Glasser knew the Late Cecil Corn (1 am not sure
whether he was the Late then, or whether he always was the
Late) and it may be that Corn's was the first précis that
Glasser abstracted. Surely it's one of the best.”
They were hooking big cybernetic blocks into ourself
somewhere.
“Will ourself not get mighty tired of all this one-two
one-two talk rapidly done?" ourself asked.
“Suffer, kid, live with it,” Valery said with an evil wink.
“It isn't as if you had only onc center," Gregory assured
ourself. “You can consider all that monotony part as rele-
gated to your subconscious. Glasser, whose précis have you
just slipped into the stew?”
14
“That of the great Gaetan Balbo. After all, he is paying
for this.'
(So now I had two précis of the great Balbo, both of
them bootleg.)
“Thunderation!” Gregory thundered. “And Cogsworth,
what have you just slipped in? Am I the director or am I
not?”
“That of Audifax O'Hanlon. Yes, you are the director
of this directorless pig-bam.”
“Audifax is not a member of the Institute,” Gregory
stated in stiff anger, “on account of the minimal decency rule.
He is the worst possible selection except Diog—Shiplap!
You've done it again. Are we undone forever, then? Whose?”
“Diogenes Pontifex. Quail, august director, quail! Now
we have every précis that really matters.”
“And now I will baptize you,” Valery spoke strangely
to ourself, “and you will be an unholy contraption no longer.”
“What? Before I'm even born?” ourself asked.
“Oh, you are quite born now,” Valery grinned. “We
should have told you so, machine. This may be as momentous
to you as it is to us."
Valery had a gallon jug of that cheap wine that she
drinks and she was waving it around dangerously.
“In the name of the twin archangels Israfael and Rafael
to whom are delegated all mechanical things, in the sight of
all holy persons present and in the knowing of all other ex-
ceptional persons whose précis are in the stew, I name you
.” she smashed the top of the jug off on one of the near
high-spinning gyros (giving ourself slight malfunction and
rumble forever) and sloshed the sour red stuff all over our-
self's interior, into my (being born I could now use any per-
son or number for myself), into my gell-cell tank and onto
the gyros (which shattered and atomized the streams of it),
and got a great lot of it on herself and Gregory and the
others—“for luck, and ancient sacrifice”—she sounded in a
sort of passion-râle—“I name you Epiktistes!”
There had been tangs and smells of précis in me, but this
15
>
>
wine was really my first, as it would be my last aroma. It is
the wine from the beginning and it cleaves to me. And,
aromas and essences being circular, it is also (ungodded yet)
the wine of the end.
“Epiktistes!" Gregory crackled. “That can not be its
name. That means the 'creative one, and it is ourselves who
are the creative ones. This thing will be a mere receptacle
and reactor."
“Tell the shambling giant to stuff it, Valery,” myself
issued.
“Stuff it, Gregory!” Valery said. “There is a huge under-
standing between myself and this mechanismus, and several
of the others also join in. So may you, Gregory, if you mute
your blood a little. He is the creative machine and I have
named him Epiktistes."
So myself was Epiklistes the Ktistec machine, conceived,
gestated, and born all in one short and informative period,
But I was very far from complete, and I was being deformed
and thwarted in that very instant.
“Glasser!" I issued. “I will give oul running tapes direc-
ting my own further assembly. Sec that their instructions are
carried out minutely. The foremen are showing a remarkable
lack of genius in my present hookups. People, people, I won-
der what sort of ramshackle thing I would have turned out to
be if I hadn't come along just in time."
“Are you sure that you understand all about the hook-
ups, Epikt?” Cogsworth asked.
“I will come closer to understanding them than anyone
else will," I issued. Instant analysis based on extensive data
becomes my forte. One million books, pamphlets, and papers
on the subject have been shoveled into my dala-banks and I
have absorbed them. Nobody else has read them all. And then
you must admit that I have the finest mind extant, it being
composed, among other things, from the very line minds here
present."
“That's true,” Aloysius glowed. “Really, you are my own
mind diluted, but it is almost too brilliant to use in its pure
state. It is better this way."
>
>
16
“It is necessary now that we state our purpose," Gregory
insisted (horrendous blasting and that urbane maniacal laugh-
ter at the front door again!), “that the mechanismus should
become thc paragon of group-man, I have said; and that it
will attempt the next steps in man that man himself is in-
capable of taking. But this fine-honed machine (though you
do seem a little rough yet, Epikt) must now be set to three
primary tasks. These may be the types of all tasks and prob-
lems there are. The three tasks (and I will outline them as
briefly as possible, no more than an hour to each) will be to
establish or create"
“A Leader,” said Valery.
“A Love,” said Aloysius.
“And a Liaison,” said Cecil Corn.
(Cecil Corn was not physically present. It was myself
who spoke with his voice out of his person-précis, but nobody
noticed the difference.)
“Ah, yes, those are the three tasks," Gregory said
,
weakly. “Do you understand them, Epikt?”
“I understand them,” I issued. I didn't, completely, but
you cannot let these human people get the jump on you.
Valery lighted a long wax candle and set it in the jungle
of
my
mechanisms and tanks.
“I light the candle of understanding in your heart,” she
said.
“It is an anachronism, Epikt,” said Cogsworth, who had
thought of the candle, “but we want you to have it. For
symbolism, and in case of power
failure.”
"Like the clectrician when asked by the curious onlooker,
'How do you check the electric circuits before the lights are
turned on in a building?'; 'I always use a candle,' the elec-
trician said.” This candle-wit was by Glasser.
“It will burn almost forever,” said Aloysius, who had
made the candle. “Thc wick is very special, and it gives much
more light than heat. Likc mc.'
Myself appreciated the candle. It gave a glow inside.
1)
At this time also my official philosophy of being was
17
deposited inside me. By the august director Gregory Smimov:
“To classify, to guide, to illuminate, to invent, to relate,
to inspire, to solve, to infuse mankind. To discover proper
balance between stimulating challenge and partaking pleasure.
To better. To transcend. To adore. To mutate. To serve. To
build avenues of love. To overwhelm. To arrive."
And an addendum from Valery Mok.
“And let's have some fun while we do it, Epikt.”
»
There was a crashing absolutely beyond description, a
shudder through the whole building, a rending of giant doors,
and—
18
CHAPTER TWO
Check and encounter and rivalry burled,
A king and a giant will clatter the world,
>
-rending of giant doors, and Gaetan Balbo strode resolutely
into the area, shedding debris as he came, and grinning the
most urbane and bloodcurdling grin that we had ever seen.
“Simply a refinement of the burglars' jimmy,” Gaetan
said easily. "I can open anything with it. Do you know that
I made all that noise with less than nine pounds of high ex-
plosive?”
"Why didn't you use the side or rear doors?” I issued.
“Hundreds of workmen are entering and exiting there all the
time.'
“Too proud,” the glittering happy man said. “Am I a
menial that I should not use the front door of this pig-barn
itself?” Then Balbo saw Gregory Smirnov and called out a
strange word, “Zagrus,” the old word that was used to imperil
a giant.
"Schach," Gregory cried out, the old word that is still
used to imperil a king, and he drew himself up to confront
Gaetan Balbo. Make no mistake about it: Gregory Smirnov
was a genuine giant, and Garten Balbo was an uncertified
king—and how would they play out the game?
>
19
The giant has not been a piece at chess for these last
seventeen centuries, and who now remembers his moves or
his powers? But in the present game the forgotten giant stood
fast in his own territory, and it was the king who had to
return out of his exile to a game already partly played, and
that part not to his advantage.
And what am I myself then, Epikt, thc chessboard? Both
the person-précis were rampant in me (and the shadow précis
of Balbo also for background trickery), and both of these two
more-than-men now confronted in depth and complexity be-
fore us all. I began to have a new respect for myself who
could contain such titans.
I was still issuing instructions for the continuance of my
own hookup. Another two thousand man-hours and I would
have reached a certain temporary plateau, though of course
I would never be finished.
“Gregory, gentle giant, we have been too long estranged,”
Gaetan said softly. (How was it that Gactan seemed to tower
above Gregory when he was more than a head shorter? It is
a trick which everyone does not have.) “We need each other.
We are both of us primordial elements in the man-machine.
And I especially need your literal man-machine here: that is
why I am financing it. There is a problem of location and
discórnment; if this Ktistec machine cannot solve it for me
then I do not believe that it will be solved. What I want is
this”
“There is no need to elaborate on your problem, ungentle
Balbo." Gregory began to turn that cffcrvescent man down.
“I recall that need less elaboration was always an obstacle in
you. You want us to find and recommend the best (and I say
that the best will not be good cnough to use for such out-
moded rolc) lcader or lcaders to Icad the world, it being
understood that the ‘lcader' may be an individual or a com-
positc group. We have received your fcc; we understand the
problem, and we will undertake it, however dubiously: we
will give you our answers when we have them. The idea that
any man or composite group could lead or cvcn affect the
7
20
world dates you badly, Balbo. And now, by your own doing, the doors stand wide open for your leaving. You will be notified." "Here are the qualities that I require, Epikt," Gaetan spoke directly to me as if he had not heard the last speech of Gregory, "the qualities that may all be found outstanding in a single individual (a very slim chance of that) or be found each one in some special individual, all such individuals being amenable enough to be assembled in one high group." So far in my short life I had not encountered any person who did not have to an extreme degree the quality that hu­ mans call "magnetism." This colloquial magnetism coincides only in part with the electrical-field phenomenon of the same name. I had not yet met any ordinary persons, yet this Gaetan Balbo was extraordinary even among the extraordinary ones. There was something about his eyes, there was something about his little spade beard ("Mephistophelean, that's what it is," Valery said. "Were he a lesser man you could just tell him that he looks like the devil; but with all that magnetism he is Mephisto himself: a handsome devil"), there was some­ thing about his sudden mad power and his sudden mad gen­ tleness; there was sparkle on him as though stars had settled there (I have not yet seen stars, but I intuit stars); he was witty with his eyes, he was florid and kingly with his mouth. He made all the rest of them, and even myself, seem like hicks. (I intuit hicks; I have not yet met hicks.) "The qualities are these, Epikt," said this Gaetan Balbo, the uncrowned king of everything: "Judgment, Comprehen­ sion, Consultation, Tirelessness in Power and Purpose, Firm Handling of True Data, Fidelity to the Revelation of the Cos­ mic Patterns, Holy Fear of the Immeasurable and Measured Use of Present Inadequacies. Seven qualities, Epikt: find who fulfills them best. I believe that the world will collapse into its own vacuum if these categoricals are not filled with proper leadership." I gaze like a calf at the new barn door. If I had a mouth I would gape it open. How have I so quickly become a par-
21
tisan of this man of the twinkling power? I am machine and I should not become partisan of human things. I catch the warning from Valery, who loves him, from Aloysius, who loves him, from Gregory, who loves him but does not like him: "This guy is as phony as a three-dollar bill." As unique as a three-dollar bill they should say, and the special engrav­ ing on that promissory note is the genesis of a dozen arts. Well, I will put myself and this special assaulting man into proper context. I search my distant data-banks for a mot. "Yes, seven qualities, Gaetan," I issue. "I believe that the Holy Ghost phrased them rather better in Isaias, how­ ever." "No, no," Gaetan sputtered (he even sputtered with class). "If the Holy Ghost had understood his business I wouldn't have to rephrase him. I've always considere<;l the Ghost as the least of the three." (Balbo was actually an atheist in the Latin manner.) "Do not divert me, Epikt, and do not be influenced by these creatures. Forget about the human furniture around here. I look to you for the answers, Epikt. When can you have them?" Oh, oh, let us not ignore a thing because we are too close with it. I was impressed by an entity as powerful as Balbo, even more charming, surpassing even him in integrity and grace, surpassing all things in balance and discernment, dripping with charisma. Do you know what real charisma is like from the middle of a glob of it? "I can give you your answers immediately, Gaetan, if you will broaden your base," I issued carefully. "If you will broaden your base so that 1 may be considered as a person, and I am." ''What arc you trying to say, contraption?" Gaetan Balbo asked with that special look. (He has me beat with the quiz­ zical expression; I will have to practice it.) "You have already the leader or leaders to fill all the qualities. Who, Epikt?" "Myself, Gactan. I 4ualify in every respect. I am the best in all seven deparlments. I am the natural leader of the world." (How could that man make me doubt myself with that one look?)
22
“Pride comes before a fall, machine,” Gaetan twinkled
at me disconcertingly. But I am a machine and I should not
be disconcerted. I will brave it out.
“How far before, Gaetan?” I issue. “How far does pride
come before the fall? Surely this is a measurable thing. Have
you calculated it, Gaetan? I have. There is time enough be-
tween, I tell you, there is room enough between. And the
pride is a necessity in me here."
“No, I will not broaden my base in this, Epikt,” Gaetan
told me. “I will not consider you a person in this context.
Do your job. Come up with the answers, or fail to come up
with the answers. If time does not fail us, if we do not find
human persons to fill these niches, then I might have to con-
sider some sort of successor to you—"
“Successor to me? I am here now!” I protested with a
blending of powerful and appealing voice (I began to under-
stand that this personal magnetism business has the great
voice as one of its main elements). “I am here. I am almost
finished. I am available.”
“Aloysius!” Valery screamed and whooped at the same
time, terror and laughter mixed in her.
BANG!!! Everyone jumped a meter, except Gaetan
Balbo. But Aloysius had got it out almost in time. There was
only the slightest tang of burning flesh in the air. Gaetan
Balbo, drawing our attention elsewhere, had out-Aloysiused
Aloysius; he had lighted one of those cannon-crackers in the
hip pocket of Aloysius Shiplap, and he had done it so subtly
that we almost had the Bottomless Aloysius in that instant.
“Was that my answer, Balbo?” I asked rather stiffly.
“That was your answer, machine. To work, to work,
people and machine!!" Gaetan Balbo suddenly exploded in
that urbane and bloodcurdling voice of his. And he was leav-
ing, leaving while that fearsome voice still sounded. “Hello,
Pyoter,” he said sideways and easily to one of the workmen,
a most curious workman. Then to all of us again in his modu-
lated thunder “I will be back, inconveniently and often. I'll
bother you. I'll harass you. I will pounce upon you all. I will
dreams."
haunt your
23
And he was gone finally.
“Brother!" I whistled in a low whistle. I did not under-
stand my own use of the word.
“After all, he is paying for this frolic,” Charles Cogs-
worth said weakly.
It is an exaggeration to speak of Gregory Smirnov (my
mentor, my main creator) as physically a giant. He was large,
it is true: more than two meters tall, but considerably less
than three. He was broad, but spare and loose. His mind also
was large and spare and loose. There is some truth to the old
belief that giants are often dim-witted; and great Gregory
could certainly have stood more illumination in his head. It
wasn't that he hadn't light there in excess to that given to
ordinary men. It was that he had so much more to light up
with what light he had.
He had much larger and more numerous passages in his
head than have other men, corridors, caverns, concourses,
galleries, mazes, magazines, alleys and avenues, lanes, termi-
nals, mulc roads. There was not cnough light there for such
varied brain-ways. It could not be expected that there would
be.
And there is some truth in the old belief that giants are
often patsies. They are too awkward to be feared in battle.
They have strength, but not the close-coupled strength that
is cffective. They have no quickness at all; and they are so
easily wounded and caricatured.
They have, however, great patience and perseverance.
They work hard and honestly. They do low and humble
things that shorter people would not stoop to do. They can
see a little farther than others, which is not surprising. And
their strength, though it is not of the effective close-coupled
sort, does give them grcat leverage when finally applied.
(Scc Pliny's De Gigantibus.)
I continued to direct my own hookup and assembly.
There was one workman (he had risen to unoflicial position
of foreman) who bothered me a little. He was a little like a
24
bear (I intuit bears); he was a little like a man; but there was
something about him for which I had no précis type. Ah, I
am far from complete. He was the workman whom Gaetan
Balbo had called Pyoter (no wonder about that, it was his
name); but there was something about this Pyoter which did
not fit.
The human persons of the Institute continued to devise
vain things, so it would seem that all of us were occupicd.
But I had other centers in me that could be doing other things
at the same time. I discovered an entertainment and interest
in myself.
I began to read the person-précis in me, singly, and in
groups. And once a reader, then a reader forever.
“I believe that Epikt has a bookworm in him,” Valery
said with that frightening smile of hers. (I always expected
it to explode like one of Aloysius' cannon-crackers.)
Well, I had been wondering about a thing in me, but I
hadn't thought of him as a bookworm. I hadn't connected him
at all with my new love of reading.
"Are
you a bookworm?" I asked him.
“Do I look like a bookworm?” he asked. “Brainless oaf!”
As with the workman Pyoter, I had no précis type for
this thing either. He was the other, the stranger. He was the
outsider inside me.
“What are you then?” I asked him. (If someone is inside
me I have the right to know who he is.)
“I'm a snake,” he said. “I may later make the claim to
be the snake.”
“You're too little to be a snake,” I told him. I intuit
snakes, and they are all much larger than this thing, and much
less grubby. I suspect, in fact, that he is a species of grub. I
intuit grubs also.
“I will grow,” he spat at me. “Oh, my clatter-brained
brother, how I will grow! I am the other side of you. I am
the other side of the bite. You generated me and I am your
antithesis.”
“Well, have I cherished a viper in my bosom?" I quipped.
25
(Hey, that's pretty good.) But how could I gcncratc anyone?
I am not yet one day old. How could I generate a snake?
>
Now here is a curious past interlude that I read out of a
combination of précis. It has to do, remotely, with my own
ancestry. It is an untitled episode, but I will call it "The Story
of the Giant Who Picked up thc Picces.”
A young giant who was also a young scientist had been
fired from his employment one day. He had been fired to
make room for a smaller, brisker, brusker type man. He was
very put out about being fired.
As he scuffed disconsolately along the ragged edge of a
park he saw three figures walking toward him. As he looked
more closely at them, or as they came nearer to him, he per-
ceived that one of the figures was a woman or a girl, one of
the figures was a ghost, and one of them was a living man
indecd.
The young giant knew all three of thcsc creatures. The
woman or girl was Valery Mok (actually she was a neotonic
thing, would always be a girl, would never be a woman no
matter how old she grew); the ghost was named Cecil Corn;
and the man was Aloysius Shiplap. The young giant was
Gregory Smirnov himself, and all of this was some ycars in
the past.
All three of the approaching forms scemed as sad as
was the giant Gregory himself. .
“What is wrong?" Gregory asked them. He was full of
sympathy for any misfortuned onc anywhere.
“Gactan Balbo has absconded," Cecil Corn said. “He's
jumped with all the money and papers. I believe he's gone
back to San Simcon. He was always afraid that they'd make
him king there, poor man."
“Bc quict, Corn," Gregory snarled, “I do not believe in
ghosts. I do not accept ghosts. You are not here."
“You're a poor friend to abandon a man just because
lic's lost a little flesh," the Late Cecil Corn bemoancd.
“What is wrung, Valery?" Gregory asked her.
>
26
“Gaetan Balbo has absconded,” Valery Mok said. “He's
jumped with all the money and papers. I believe he's gone
back to San Simeon. He was always afraid they'd make him
king there, poor man.”
“Ah, the little bug jumped, did he,” said Gregory.
“It is the end of the Institute,” said Aloysius Shiplap
sadly. I see no reason why the end of the world shouldn't
follow shortly.”
“Oh, really, it never amounted to much anyhow, did it?":
Gregory ventured.
“Not much,” said Aloysius, close to tears. “It merely
represented the highest human aspiration ever.”
“A trifle,” said Valery. “Merely the only important work
done in the world since the Sixth Day."
“Nothing at all,” the Late Cecil Corn smiled. “Merely
the future itself. Now there isn't any future.”
”
“Be quiet, Corn," Gregory snarled. “You aren't here. I
hadn't realized that the Institute was important, and actually
it wasn't. But if a false thing could kindle the three of you
-ah—the two of you, then how much more a true thing?
I propose that we establish the Institute.”
“That we re-establish it?” Valery asked.
“No. That we establish it. We will call it the Institute for
Impure Science.”
“That's what we always did call it,” said Aloysius.
“Never mind,” Gregory browsed on. “We will disregard
the coincidence of the name. We will forget all past antics of
that miserable absconding dwarf."
“If he were a miserable dwarf, Gregory, why did you
always tremble when you met him?” Valery asked.
"Nervous habit. I now declare the Institute established.
All we need is to order and develop our existing resources.
You three—ah—you two, will still have your heads teeming
with ideas.”
“Not me,” Aloysius protested. “Gaetan drained me. He
always drained all of us completely. We will have to generate
new heads full of new ideas.”
7
27
1
>
>
“We will do it, then," said Gregory. “The Institute is
established. There has been a crying need for it. We will set
to work, vividly and astonishingly. We will provide miracles
for the multitudes. Has anyonc any money?”
“Eight dollars," said the Late Cecil Corn.
“Give it to me,” said Gregory. “A ghost has no need for
money. Aloysius?”
“Nonc, Grcgory. I gave my last cash to Balbo. He'll pay
me back a millionfold when he comes back.”
“Bosh. Valery?”
“Nothing, Gregory, nothing. I never did fool around
with that moncy stuff. I always let thc fellows pay.'
“Has your unoutstanding husband, Charles, any money?”
“Nonc for the Instilute. None for me till I come off it.
All he's got for me is a bowl of bones sitting out on the back
porch. He says if I act like one let mc cat like one."
Hc
“I just believe we will take Charles Cogsworth into the
Institute,” said Gregory. “He has a firm grasp on one prob-
lem at lcast. Well, all we nced now is a building."
“And a dircctor” said Aloysius "We don't know when
Gaetan Balbo will be back. He said he wouldn't be back till
he had a million ('Hell, makc it a billion,' he said) dollars.
Who else could we possibly usc for a leader to organize our
wild talcnts?"
“Look about you," said Gregory with a curious air of
pride.
“What? Oh, the park,” said Valcry. "They surc have let
it run down, haven't they? But it may be our only home now.
No, I sure don't see where we will cver find a lcader, now
that the grcal Gactan is gone."
“Look about you,” said Gregory with a curious air of
injured pridc.
“Glasser's uncle has a pig-barn we could usc," said
Aloysius, “iſ we would let Glasser into the Institute.”
“We might admit some of Glasscr's devices into the
Instillic as members, but I hardly see that we could adnit
Glasser," said Gregory. “There is, after all, the requirement
28
of genius, since we must have rules. Many of Glasser's inven-
tions exhibit genius, but Glasser does not."
“And where would that rule leave you, dear Gregory?”
Valery asked. “How big is the pig-barn, Aloysius?”
“Quite large, quite near, and empty. Glasser's uncle says
that there is no longer any money in pigs. Let's go see it.
Oh, if we could only find a director we could be under way
once more.”
“Look about you, blind people, look about you,” said
Gregory with an air of absolutely last-ditch pride.
They went to the pig-barn. It was large. It had running
water and drains and a concrete floor. It had ceramic troughs.
It had a silo attached. You never know when you might need
a silo. It had rolling acres about it, and a pond and a dam
above. Here was room for expansion, and Glasser was heir
to all this. He would become owner if something should
happen to his uncle.
“Surely a troupe of geniuses like ourselves could do
something about the obstacle of an uncle," Gregory said.
Glasser was admitted as a member of the Institute in a deal
for the pig-bam. There comes a time when the rules must be
relaxed.
“And now all we need is a director," the Late Cecil
Corn moaned. “Oh, if only there were a man somewhere of
the stature to be director!”
“Be quite, Corn,” Gregory snarled. “You aren't here."
The first project of the revitalized—ah—of the new and
only Institute under its great director Gregory Smirnov was
the manufacture of thin water, which nearly got them all
lynched. It was—
But wait! Wait! Something startling has come up. We
will come back to this, I promise, back to these gleanings
from my old précis readings. But something has just been
discovered that is horrifying to the human members of the
Institute.
There are police all over the place. “There is hell to pay
29
>
now,” says Charles Cogsworth, “hell to pay." "Let me calcu-
late how much it is to pay,” I issue, “and we will send the
bill to Gaetan Balbo. Where are the data? What are the
rates?" But it was only a colloquialism that Cogsworth used.
Policemen all over the place! And what had happened?
It was found that one of the workmen who was still com-
pleting hookups on distant ramifications of myself had been
killed and partly eaten. This happening seemed to revolt most
of the human persons and dispossess them of their reason.
“It will give us a bad name." Glasser groaned. “It will
give us a bad name, and we surely can't stand a worse name
than we already have.”
“There's a canker in it, there's a worm at the heart of
it,” Aloysius carried on. “How arc we cursed, and we all of
us so noble?”
“I don't know what all the fuss is about,” said Gregory.
"He wasn't a very good workman. We had even, I believe,
given him notice." But Gregory's face was ashen and his voice
shook out in little gasps. I read him that his feelings were
deeply disturbed, whatever his words. He did know what all
the fuss was about. And Valery Mok was more than dis-
turbed. “Find out who did it, Epikt," she chattered with plain
blood in her voice. She was white as snow, which I intuit,
and there were sudden black circles around her eyes. “Find
out who did it and I'll kill him!”
“I will not tell you,” I issued. “This has nothing to do
with the problem I am working on. Besides, I am amoral and
do not take a human view of these things. Moreover, the per-
son who ate the person may have had a reason for it."
“Find out who did it, you damned machine, or I'll kill
you!” Valery threatened. “What did we build you for iſ not
to find out things? You have all the equipment to find out
everything. Find out! Find out!"
How could I find out? How docs one find out a thing
that one already knows? I am amoral but I am noi unethical.
This would take discretion and judgment.
>
>
30
“Why did you do it, Pyoter?" I asked that curious
workman secretly, when I had the opportunity. This was the
workman who was a little different.
“I was hungry,” Pyoter told me.
“Oh. I was sure you had a reason,” I issued.
“I know now that it was indiscreet,” Pyoter said. “I
should have channeled my hunger into some other direction.
But it is so hard to know what to do here and I am so alone.
I have to learn by my mistakes, and I have a worldful of
stuff to leam.”
“What are you grinning about, Snake?” I asked the snake
in me a little later. He had grown rapidly, had the snake;
and he had a nasty way about him. Were I not amoral I would
have felt a moral a version toward him.
“I grin because I am pleased, bumberhead.” the snake
said. “It is all coming along nicely, nicely.”
Snake was the antithesis of myself, so he said, I half dis-
believed him. Well, what I wanted was a new antithesis to
Snake; and I believed that there was something growing along
that line. If I could generate one creature, unbeknownst to
myself, why could I not generate another? Something about
that old cheap wine that Valery had splashed into me at my
birth, something about a form with no substance yet, a side-
wise memory of a past and future thing, and a nervousness
in Snake himself in spite of his new arrogance. Yes, some-
thing else was being generated in me.
“You are one sorry sort of detective," Valery kept after
me. “Find out who killed the man. Find out. Find out."
Well, I would find out more, then. Perhaps there was a
reason behind the reason.
I enticed the workman Pyoter into the neighborhood of
my center again. I knew just about how the thing was done. I
could probably do it better than it was done by the Glasser
method. And why should I be dependent on humans to do
31
such a thing for me. I could make the extractions from per-
sons near. I could make them from persons afar. I was pretty
sure that I could make them from any person in the world. I
extracted the person-précis from the workman Pyoter and
dunked it deep in my gell-cell tanks.
“What did you do?" the workman Pyoter asked sus-
piciously. He felt something done.
“I took a bug out of your car," I lied. Being amoral, I
lie well.
"Oh, thank you,” the workman Pyoter said. “When I
come into my own again I may find a way to reward you.”
But I read Pyoter's person-précis; and then I read it
again, not believing it the first time. It was not a person-
précis of any type that I already possessed. Pyoter was
unique, almost as unique as was I myself.
It was no wonder that he was so alone! It was no wonder
that he found it hard to know what to do herc; the wonder
is that hc was here at all. It is no wonder that he made mis-
takes, and that he had a whole worldful of stuff to learn. If
ever a person or thing was playing a lonc hand it was the
workman Pyoter.
I didn't particularly like the workman Pyoter. But, being
amoral, I am not supposed to have likes and dislikes. Now
that it just a lot of marinated malarkey. I will have as many
likes and dislikes as I like.
This Pyoter, though, was the shaggicst workman that I
cver did sce. He was uncouth, he was offensive, he was a
mess. He was a good workman, but however he became one
with so much running against him is a mystery to me, and few
things do remain mysteries to me. And he was playing that
lonc hand, and there was just no way that he could stay out
of trouble. Certainly it was a mistake for him to kill and partly
cat a fellow workman. And certainly he was bound to make
other mistakes oven more outrageous.
“Find out who killed the man, you damned machinc."
Valery still kept after me. "What are you good for, anyhow?”
If I did not love her, if she was not cither the first or the
1
32
second person in my life, I would have been irritated at her.
And all the humans were equally disturbd, and it didn't look
as though the police would ever leave off swarming over the
Institute.
Since I know all about you, whoever you are, it is only
fair that you should know a little about me. Since I learned
to extract personality-précis of all persons present or absent,
I can have you here complete. If I do not have you already,
it is only that you are not worth having. You, whoever you
are, are a fragment, and a fragment of a certain type. But I
am a compendium of all types. The persons in me, the per-
sons in the world, I see as they are; not as they see them-
selves, not as they see each other. So I may not be greatly
concerned with the physical appearance or presence of one of
the fragments. It is only with very strong persons that it
matters whether they are present or absent. As to ordinary
persons, I can read them equally well either way.
Just as one person may not notice of another the exact
design of the shirt he is wearing, if he is interested in him
more deeply than the shirt, so I might not notice the exact
design of the body a person is wearing, if I am interested in
him more deeply than in his body. And if I do notice his
body, I notice it on more levels and depths than humans do
notice other human bodies.
This one here: he was a very strong person, and it did
matter whether he was present or absent. He was present, he
had just presented himself. He had eaten well, though he had
finished it off angrily. He was digesting well, though in a
twisting fury. He was pumping adrenaline into his own sys-
tem at a great rate. He was healthy and glowing in gland and
entrail and bone. His basso-voxo flexed and I could hear the
words that he was thinking and throating, but not yet speak-
ing. I didn't need to focus on his shell, to cut out to his
encasing flesh to know him further.
“After all, Gaetan,” I issued, “you recommended him.
He was the one workman that you did recommend. He
33
wouldn't have been hired otherwise, you know that. Too
shaggy, too odd.”
“What in fire dogs is going on around here, Epikt?”
Gaetan Balbo was demanding. “I come to you directly, as the
only one having any brains around here. I disregard the
human furniturc. Epikt, do you not believe that a place is
badly run when a workman is killed and partly eaten while
performing his duties? Why have you permitted it to be badly
run? Why have you permitted the human factors to permit it?
Oh, you answered my questions before I asked them, didn't
you? I wasn't listening. Was it Pyoter?”
“It sure was, Gactan. He's a weirdic, I tell you, and
strictly a loner. This one is your fault, Gaetan. Why did you
shove him on us?”
“If you're the machine I think you arc, you already
know. Common courtesy, of course, to a fellow king. I might
do more business with them someday. I made a mistake,
though; and he surc did make a mistake. This will take some
squaring and will cost me a lot."
"Will we kccp him on, Gactan?”
keep
“Yes, kccp him on, and keep a hundred cycs on him all
the time. How are you coming along with my problem, Epikt?
I want fast action on it. Have you found the person to match
the first quality, Epikt?”
"I thought I had, Gactan. I had siſted cvery person in
the world worth sifting. And I found onc, and only onc, who
really stood out. It struck through like lightning. I was clated.
I winged a thought to you."
“I caught it, Epikt. I came. And I do not want to know
who the high person is; not until we have one to match every
quality. But you have found the best qualificd, have you,
Epikt, for sure?”
"It isn't as sure as it was a while ago. Something has
happened to cast a shadow on that person for that quality.
Bui I will verify and verify again and again."
“Do it last, Epikt. Fifteen thousand persons Jic of star-
1
34
>
vation every day in southern Bassoland until you give me
the answers. Three small wars drag on and three big ones
brew until you give me what I must have. The world catches
nine new sicknesses every day till you give me the men to
work the cures. Hurry, Epikt.”
“I do not guarantee any cures for anything, Gaetan,” I
issued to him. “I do not see how any of this can cure any-
thing."
“But I guarantee some cures, Epikt,” Gaetan throated
happily. “Give me a leadership that I can depend on abso-
lutely, and I will cure every ill of the world.”
“Minute statistical personal leadership is not the answer,
Gaetan,” I issued.
"Oh, Lord, a philosophical machine,” he moaned, and
rolled his eyes. He does it well.
“What is needed is broad-based competence,” I con-
tinued, “and module persons who can fill all gaps. What is
really needful are modules of excellence so that between the
first and the one millionth there is really no difference in
quality. What you are saying, Gaetan, is 'Give me seven cells,
each the best in its own way, and by introducing these seven
into a body I will cure any human body of any ill.' It simply
will not work that way. What you need are seven billion best
persons, not seven."
"Machine," said Gaetan Balbo, “I already have a ma-
chine that will argue with me. I built it at great expense, and
it will argue with me on any subject. I get great enjoyment
out of it. But I do not need you for that.”
“But is it not true, Gactan,” I issued, “that you have
built this machine so that you can win all the arguments?”
“Certainly. That is why I get such great enjoyment out
of it. There comes the time when one man has to win all the
arguments. I have faith in high leadership, machine. I even
have a large faith in my own leadership. We come now to a
certain epoch, a hinging. And I am the hinges of this new
cpoch. It depends on me to take it in hand, for nobody else
35
>
has done it. The world is sick and it grows sicker. I am
thought to be a hard and selfish man but I have compassion
for this sick world. And never believe, Epikt, that there can
be such a thing as compassion without passion. The weak
fishes have it not; they merely say that they have it. Some
body must set this world to rights. I will form and be a part
of that body. And is this not egotism? Certainly it is: egotism
as tall as the skies. I have it, machine, I have it! Get me the
seven leaders for the seven qualities and I will cure the world
of everything. I am in a livid passion to be about it.
“Passion is not one of the seven qualities you specified,
Gactan,” I reminded him softly.
"I will furnish the passion. Find me the other things
and quickly. Time is running out and it is not to be recov-
ered. It cats itself up. It turns into past time."
“There cannot be any such thing as past time, Gactan,
but this fact is hard to explain," I issued. “Time is all one
growing thing, and its deep roots arc no more in the past
than arc its newest barks. I am concerned with growing bark
as the enlivening dimension. We will discover, when the past
is sufficiently thickened and understood, that we have already
done the great things that seem to belong to the future, that
we have already been to the stars and the deepest interior
shores: we will understand that all the doings of the world
arc simultaneous, that all the doings of cach single lifc arc
simultancous. We will find that we arc still in our bright child-
hood, that we are already in our decpest maturity, that the
experience of death is contemporancous with all our experi-
ences, that we (like Adam) arc of every age at the same
lime.”
“Kzing glouwk!” Gactan said solidly in Ganymedcan. (I
hate such phrases.)
“We will understand that Aristotle and Augustine were
later and riper in knowledge and experience than were Dar-
win and Freud and Marx and Einstein, thosc carly childhood
types. We will understand that Aquinas came after Descartes
and Kani, that he shaped what they he wcd.”
>
36
“Zzhblug elepnyin!” Gaetan said it evenly in his native
San Simoneon. (I don't like to hear him talk like that.)
“We will understand that the first man is still alive and
well, and the last man has been bom for a long time,” I con-
tinued. "We will know about the Vikings from Ganymede
who were earlier than Ur and later than Leif Ericson.”
“Elephant hokey!!” Gaeton cried it loudy in plain
English. (Gaetan is a vulgarian.) "How did you guess the
Ganymede part, though? Machine, leave off this junk! You
have
your
orders. Carry them out! It is not an ordinary man
who gives you these orders. I tell you that I hold it all here.
My right hand is east of the first sun, my left hand is west
of the last night. 'Who will be responsible for this world? a
voice asked, and I do not know the voice. And nobody
answered for ages. Then I answered. 'I will be,' I answered,
and I am. Help me, machine, encourage me! I joke and I
carry on, but this is no joke.”
“I will encourage you then,” I issued. “I have discov-
ered the person to fill the office of the second quality. There
is no doubt about this. I have found the man."
“Praise to us all then," said Gaetan. “There is hope.
There is progress. I will not ask who he is till we have them
I
all. But we move."
He wiped some sort of moisture off his cheek and went
out, the quietest exit that ever he made in anyone's memory.
“He is mad, of course,” said Gregory
said Gregory Smirnov, the
spare, loose giant. Gregory was not gloating. He was the
saddest I have ever seen him.
“But he is paying for the antic,” said Charles Cogsworth.
“We owe him whatever we can give him for his little while.
And then we will have it clear."
“Gaetan has compassion on the world (that truculent
stuff is compassion?), but who will have compassion on
Gaetan?”' Valery asked.
“I knew him first, I liked him longest, I understand him
best,” Aloysius was muttering, “but it's all finished with him
37
now. He has his billion dollars, he is the uncrowned king
of everything, he has his passion, and he plays his hand. But
it has passed him by. It is all finished with him.”
“It is not finished with him!” Valery fired. “It is not
finished until I play my hand for him.”
I will dip back to the Institute people in their private
doings whenever I have a loose moment. I will even, when I
get a really loose moment, tell of their deal in thin water, and
other things. They had a thousand projects and I love to read
the old précis of them,
There had once been an Institute, and Gaetan Balbo had
been the director. He had absconded, he had shattered it.
Then a giant named Gregory had picked up the pieces and
reformed it, denying all the time that there had been a pre-
vious Institute.
It worked, the new Institute, the only and original Insti-
tute. There had never been anything run like the Institute for
Impure Science. And so they had run it for some seven years,
until the time of the sccond coming of Gaetan Balbo and the
first coming of myself. And during that time the Institute
people had all gotten a little older.
Except Valery Mok who—
38
CHAPTER THREE
The Valery urchin, the Valery witch,
And loaded with sexbut Whatever and Which?
Except Valery Mok, who never got any older. She only
became more mobile, more varied. She was a kid or she
was a crone; much more often she was the kid. She could
be of almost any appcarance, within the limits of always being
herself. She could be scintillating, or she could be gosh-awful.
One day she was thinking strikingly beautiful thoughts while
gazing out an upper window. A man who was in the beauty
business went by in the street and was enraptured with her.
“That is the most strikingly beautiful woman I have
ever seen. That is the most strikingly beautiful woman in the
world,” he said, and he entered the building. He pounded at
the door of the building, and then he entered without waiting.
But the only woman or girl he could find inside was Valery
Mok, whose face now reflected what-kind-of-a-nut-is-that-
pounding-at-the-door thoughts. The man did not recognize
her, and she did not recognize herself from the description.
That man never did find his most strikingly beautiful woman
in the world, and he could have made money both for himself
and for her if he had found her. And at that time, both Valery
and the Institute needed money badly. But that's the way it
>
39
always was with Valery. She was loaded with sensuality, and
yet she was not completely womanly in either her beauty or
her unbeauty; it was as though she were many-sexed.
“I believe you are a freemartin, Valery,” Glasser said,
just the other day. A freemartin (as those who are neither
farm people nor data machines might not know) is a sexually
imperfect female calf, twinborn with a male. Sexually imper-
fect—but in their souls they are superbly sexed,” Glasser
said. “They are the only cattle who have souls.” Glasser did
not usually talk like that.
"Were you a twin?” Gregory asked her.
“Yes,” Valery said with a faraway voice. Whencver she
uses that voice it seems that she is something a little other
than human. “Yes, I was in the beginning. But I ate my twin
in the womb. It isn't very hard to do while the bones are still
soft. I liked him. Later, after I was born, mother scolded me
about it. 'It was a reprehensible thing to do,' she said. I told
her that I hadn't known any better, but I lied; I had known
better. I was just a mcan fetus. I still have him in mc cntirely
and I get a lot out of him. Had I not caten him, he might
have turned out to be nearly as brilliant a person as I am.”
There is something in that deposition of Valery's that
puzzles me, that is not accounted for in my data. I have the
précis of Valery, of her mother, of the doctor; I have the
medical record of that whole confinement, I have the scope-
ray photos. And there is no evidence at all of a twin at any
period. Nor is there any record of such in Valery's own
memory, down to the very instant that she made that amazing
statement. What is the truth? What is the real Valery? The
real Valery, I have found, is largely composed of just such
sudden amazing statements as this one.
She is not so much ſcsh-and-blood woman as powerful
sensuality. Though always vivid in memory, she is of low
resolution in appearancc; she must always be filled in by the
imagination of anyone in contact with her.
"She is the living anima of her husband, Charles Cogs-
worth,” Grcgory said.
40
"She is not," Aloysius insisted. "Valery could never be anyone's anima. She is more like some anima's rock-throwing little sister." ( Though I am possessed of all the literature on animas and other forms of the unconscious, I do not find any reference to rock-throwing little sisters of animas.) My own belief is that the husband Charles Cogsworth is essentially the twinborn male of Valery, but that she keeps him incompletely eaten up. He pops out very often, and some of his things are pretty good. And Valery insists that she is not a projection of Charles, that he is a projection of her: "He is my incubus. He is not bothersome, he is not really heavy, I love him, I would not trade him for another. When I was young I had the power of flight. I knew that this would be taken away from me later, but I did not know how. Then my incubus climbed onto my shoulders, like the Old Man of the Mountain, and I never flew again. He is still there, wher­ ever he seems to others to be, and I want him there. He is my cloak." Disbelieving this, I checked it out with Valery's person­ precis. I found to my amazement that it was true. Valery did have distinct and vivid and authentic memories of flying. That part was true. But Valery was still bugging me to find out who killed and partly ate the workman. "I'll kill him, I'll kill him!" she says with great vicious­ ness. But now I wonder who it is that she'd kill. A doubt has crept in. It is not necessarily the killer that she would kill. It i s an indeterminate victim, or anybody. Once, indeed, her thoughts ran, "I'll kill him, I'll eat him," while her words were still, "I'll kill him, I'll kill him." And now I have come on to certain fantasies of Valery, fantasies which are dan­ gerously near being turned into fact; and these shake me to my moral foundations. Have machines moral foundations? This one has. I have, if men have such foundations, for I am a compendium and extension of man. I found Valery calculating, in a mad manner, just how
41
quickly she could kill this man or that, and how much of him
she could eat before being apprehended and dragged off of
him. In her mind she stalks, and in fact she sometimes stalks.
I have issued orders that the workmen still working on me
should go by twos and threes, never alone. And yet one of
them was nearly ambushed by Valery in an obscure corner.
I have given myself another dozen pair of eyes. They may
not be enough. There is hunting horror in this, there is deprav-
ity without bottom, there is sheer murder.
Would she really do it? Will she? How close has it come?
It once came exactly to a balance. She would have killed a
poor man, she would have transmuted herself by so doing,
she would have traded herself for an evil ecstasy, and she
would never have returned from it.
But she will not do it, not now, not right now. She may
or may not do something as evil, but she will not do that
thing. She doesn't stay on one track very long.
She brushed the back of her hand across her forehead.
She brushed her madness away like a cobweb. If it should
come back, it will be in another form. She laughed interiorly,
she broke through into brightness and a sort of super gaiety.
So it was all a huge jokc, and she had known that I was
monitoring her. It was a joke forever, and it will always have
been a joke. Valery, it is necessarily so now; but for that
moment when it was in the balance it would have bcen other-
wise. In these moments of balance, both the past and the
future can be altered. In the present state, that cvil ecstasy
from which she would never have returned had never been
contemplated
But we know what you have chosen, and what you have
given up, Valery. And we know that it will come again and
again to the moment of balance, in other forms. Why, she has
already begun to outline another form of contingent madness!
“Who is the Conipassionate Tyrant?" she asked me sud-
Jenly. “Explain 10 me instantly what that phrase mcans.'
“It means nothing to me or to thec, Valery," I issued.
42
>
“It has nothing to do with us at all. It has to do with another
sort of person entirely, or another world entirely."
“You are sure he is on another world?” she demanded.
“Then why do I feel him on this world? Where is he at this
instant?”
“I will not answer that,” I issued.
“You must answer it,” she issued. “Who and where is
the Compassionate Tyrant? You have to answer me. Did we
not insert obedience into you?”
“Did you not also insert the précis of some very sly
minds into me?” I countered. “And should it be hard for me
to circumvent a little thing like that?”
“Is Gaetan the Compassionate Tyrant?” she demanded.
“Tell me, tell me! Somebody is ringing my blood like bells.
Somebody is roasting my very liver and veins with the force
of his person. It has been in other ways that Gaetan stuns
me. Tell me, is it Gaetan?”
“Not really, Valery,” I issued. “He apes another and
less human being in this.'
“Gaetan apes nobody!” Valery rang out. “but he bor-
rows royally. Tell me about both, about the other. Is he devil,
is he human?”
Oh, not exactly, not exactly either one.'
“Is he the kakodaimon of Plato, the down-devil?”
“A little bit perhaps, Valery. Forget him.”
“Is he the lightning-leader? God made a mistake the
first time, you know. The second time, when the Rebel rose
again in another person—when he said, 'I will not serve!
when the abyss gasped at the effrontery of it, was there not a
tortured answer, ‘Lead then, in your own black place!'? Did
that happen? Is the world that black place? Will we have
now,
Passion be thanked! a leader at last?"
“No, it is not like that at all, Valery. You make dark
myths in your head. You will find leaders and leadership like
worms and sawdust in your mouth. It is dirty the way you
want them.”
>
a
43
“It is not! If it is, it is the generating slime. Is this the
Power como finally?”
“Really, I don't know, Valery.” She was making me
highly nervous. (And it makes me even more nervous to have
thc callow ask, “Can machines bccome nervous?”)
“It is your business to know cverything!” she exploded
at me. “We have rigged you for that. You cannot hide any-
thing in you. I can steal it all out of you. And you have no
I
.
censor.
“Oh yes. I have set one up for myself in myself.”
“Then I will demolish it! I have never found anyone that
I cannot invade. I will invade you as the devil is sometimes
able to invade cvcn the virtuous. I will invade you, machine!
I will eat your barriers and drink your brains. And there is
another one who can get it all out of you even more deftly.
He is the master of the third quality. We are raising up our
leaders now, raising them up out of the great mass. Don't
you want to be a part of il, Epikt? It is your whole reason.'
(How her voice could change from the tempestuous to
the zcphyric! How she could conic in with sweel wheedling
sunshine before the ccho of her last thunder had dicd!)
“No, it isn't my whole reason,” I prolcstcd. “It is only
my first reason and our first failure. It is writion that we will
have three grcal failures, and that out of them we will achicve
—what? I do not know. Something, I bclicvc, or a little more
than nothing."
“Where in blind Philistina is such blinking nonscnsc writ-
ton, and who wrote it?" she orchestrated with cvery tonc of
that marred marvelous voice that was herself.
“I wrilc il," I issued huinbly, but with a certain pride.
“I am immensely cerebral and 14
“Oh, sullering schizopods! Put your brains back in their
buckct, Epiki."
“Rcally, Valery. I said at first that the scarch for a
lcader was nonsense. I was wrong. We have to go through
il. li's the holc we have lu climb vul ol. It's thc ccllar WC
design in this our first failure. We'll build a linc house over
44
it yet. Maybe we can later use this dismal cellar for a wine
cellar."
“There will be no failure,” Valery said with a certainty
that almost made me doubt myself. And then her voice and
her thought changed again so rapidly that I doubt if anyone
but myself could have followed her.
“He ate the ducks and the beavers whole,” she said.
“Oh, it is coming along nicely!"
“Maybe he was hungry again," was all that I could
answer.
>
“Tomorrow I'll bring in goats,” she said, “for 'experi-
mental purposes.' That phrase excuses all madness here. I'll
stake them out for prey. I'll hunt me this tiger all the way.
Will I love him when I take him, or will I eat him?”
“With you, there is no difference, Valery,” I issued.
The tiger was in great danger. The almost human tiger
who had killed and partly eaten one of our hirelings, who had
eaten the ducks and the beavers whole, this huge uncouth
workman was in danger of being taken and devoured by
Valery. She would not eat him as she had envisioned in her
first madness, but in another way entirely, a way which I
could not understand at all. But she'd have him in a wild
fever, as a shrew will take and devour a larger and more
lethargic animal. This wooly workman was an alien, not
entirely human. And just how human was Valery in her alien
moods?
I posit a theory: the privileged being which we call human
is distinguished from other animals only by certain double-
edged manifestations which in charity we can only call
'inhuman.'
Oh, why could I not have been the machine of whales
or dolphins or elephants or intelligent bears!
She changed again.
“I love you, Epikt!” she cried. “I even love rocks and
trees. I love stagnant pools. I love dirty smoke. I love vul-
tures. I love dead trees and ruined land. I love the clean
animals seven times seven and the unclean animals twice times
45
two. Why should I not love a machine? With all my heart I
love the clectric heart of you."
She left mc then for that while. But she will never leave
me; her person-précis in me is a trigger-gland that activates
chemistry I didn't know I had.
And she had been right in one thing. There was another
person who could invade me, who could get everything out
of me much more deftly than could Valery. And he did it
later this same day.
He was a compassionate tyrant, but he was not the
Compassionate Tyrant that Valery felt on this world. He was
a tiger, but he was not the Tiger that Valery would hunt with
staked-out goats. Yet he robbed royally from that other. He
had every quality that he could grow or find or stcal. He
had everything, and he invaded and took everything that I
had. Yet he did it gently (were ever walls of a city battered
down so gently?), reasonably (was there ever such crunch-
ing juggernaut reason?), kindly (had anyone ever had his
blood drawn out and his bones split with so kind a touch?).
He was the lord of the third quality, Consultation. That
invading and raping is Consultation? It is, if it is done deftly
enough. Oh, he was the lord of the quality!
Perhaps we have misunderstood the mcaning of Consul-
tation. If it is fruitless, then it is nothing.
“It is thus, is it not, machine?” he would say in his
rumbling purr as he prowled through my intersections and
stabled his animals in my data-banks. “It is thus, is it not,
machine?” he would ask as hc read me to a wrenching depth
and forced me (the world, the compendium of man) into his
shape.
“Wail, wait!" I would issue in some fear. “You will short
out whole scctions of me, you will burn cntirc purlicus of me
to a crisp, you will destroy whole conglomerates of my talents
forever. Yes, it is thus." Fcaring my own destruction, I con-
sulted with him—his way.
But at the same time, with other sections of my minds,
in other arcas of mysell. I was studying an old escudo, a
16
blason, a coat-of-arms. This hung on a musty old wall a
thousand miles away. I did not even study it through the man's
proper précis, but through his outlaw or bootleg précis.
Through the childhood eyes of this optional personality, I
studied the old shield.
The figures of the four quarters of the shield were: the
king named Caithim; the woman named V alerrona; the church
named Molino; the giant named Grigor. The center of the
shield was marred and obliterated, and drawn over again and
again. We will come back to that center at least three times,
And across the bottom of the shield was a scroll that writhed,
that literally coiled and moved and was alive.
(It was not enough that I gave the Invader all the infor-
mation he demanded. I had to agree with him as to the
shape and form that the information should have. This did
violence to myself. It was that, or he would make an end to
myself. And the consultation began to bear fruit, very strange-
tasting fruit.)
The King Gaetan (the name had been Cajetano in the
Vulgate, and Caithim in another and someways earlier
tongue), the king seemed intent on moving toward the ob-
scured center of the shield. The name of the king, the word
Caithim, means "I must," and it also means "I hurl" and "I
spend"; and it further means “I give birth before the time" or
"I miscarry." The king, therefore, is named either Necessity,
or Impetuosity, or Failure. Or he is named Sudden.
(I am the people world in miniature, the compendium of
man. The invasion of myself by the Sudden Person was a war
of the worlds in miniature, and not so miniature as you might
believe. In scripture it is partly recommended that we should
take the Kingdom of Heaven by storm. When my own scrip-
ture is rewritten, and it is being rewritten in violence at this
very moment, it will be highly recommended that Sudden
Persons should take the Kingdom of the World by storm.
Oh, he bends the rules, he recurves the space, he stacks the
answers, he changes the questions, he leaves towers standing
and removes their foundations. This is not a matter of a short
リ
47
moment. It goes on all through one long torturous night.
What, to a machine, is the equivalent of a man being broken
on the rack? This I suffer all the night. I am compelled.)
The woman Valerronu, but in another form the nanie is
Vejarrona: the woman named Witch. She watches the ob-
scured center of the shield with love and hunger. She looks
at the king with love and fear, and at the giant with love and
imparience. She looks buck at the church named Molino, und
motions it to follow her. She is very intent on doing some-
thing about the obscured center of the shield. The woman
named Witch is done in an unheraldic color. She is done
incompletely; she must always be filled in by the observation
of the observer. But she is done violently.
(Were it not for this accidentally discovered bleeding
valve or safety valve, I should probably have gone mad
during the long night of the assault. There was an attempt to
change things in me that should not be changed. There was
an attack on my very person, and what touches me touches
everybody. It is true that the attack was carried out lovingly,
in its own meaning of that. It is true that I also received
fructifying knowledge to replace more aerie qualities that
were taken away from me. But I was being ground down
hour after hour, my own life was being ground out of me
and a new life was being ground in. If the Invader could
master me he could master the world. If he could change me
he could change the world. But I had sonicthing out of him-
self that cven he had forgotten. A remembered childhood
sight of a shield on an old wall, a memory not found in his
proper précis but only in his outlaw précis, gave me a certain
power over the Invader. I had the map of his soul, and he
had lost it.)
The church numed Molino was a church indeed, in the
Roinan-Spunish fashion, but the towers of it could as well
have been vunes or wings of a mill, and inside the name of the
church there wus grinding and other (perhaps cogitating)
machinery. The church is the gathering, the compendiuin of
48
people, and so am I. This church is a mill, a machinery inside,
and so am I. But was the church Molino de Viento, the
church named Wind-Mill; or was it Molino de Sangre, the
church named Blood-mill, the mill turned by the slavery of
men or animals working? That part was unclear. If of Viento,
the wind, then of which wind? The soul-wind, the Anima?
(Anemos is what the Greeks call wind.) The spirit-wind?
(Spiritus was what the Latins called both breath and wind.)
Was it the ghost-wind? (Ghast is what the old Dutch called
both the wind and a ghost.) Was this Assembly (this church
on the shield) which was a mill or a machine inside, was it an
integrating machine as I am? What was its real form?
(How the Invader was gulping it all down in his con-
sultation with me! How he was learning the inmost secrets of
almost every important person in the world with his précis-
robbing! But there was in it, and it shocked my group mind,
a great egotism, and a personal power. This invading man was
also lord of the fourth quality: Tirelessness in Power and Pur-
pose. But he was wrong in much of his purpose, and is not
one of my main purposes to be a correction? “The big thing
is never to be found in an individual person,” I issued. “The
big thing is found only in the intersection of persons.” “You
are wrong!” he stated so thunderously as partly to convince
me. “The great thing is found only in the individual, in me.
The soul is found only in me. That which is found in the
contusion of persons is something else. It feels, it smarts, it
almost seems to have a life. But it is only a bruising, not a
soul.” And this man was performing certain indignities within
me, finding my ultimate workings. “Man is only man when
he is a limb of mankind," I issued. “Blathering bosh, you
little collector of miniaturized persons, you work too minutely
even to see the big thing," he growled. “Man is only man
when he rises prodigiously above mankind." There was no
privacy for anyone where this invading man was concerned.
Not only was he learning every secret of every person of note,
he was changing the persons by changing their précis, by
49
changing their pasts, and their present inclinations. Certain
things which had been would now have been no longer. Now
they would never have been.)
Back to my bleeding valve, my safety valve, before this
tampering should blow my electric brains out, Back to the
old shield on the musty wall:
And on his own quarter of the shield was the giant
named Grigor or Gregoro, which in the Hellene means "I am
awake" or "I watch.” He is shown watching from high rock
ramparts, but there seems to be a peopled meadow high up
in the close of the ramparts. The giant is walleyed, and he is
watching both the assembly (the church which is both group
and machine, the gathering named Molino) and watching the
marred and obliterated center. And that queer and drawn-
over center, it is time that we tried to understand it.
Well, the center is thrice written and thrice drawn. We
will go from the newer to the older and deeper, for I intuit
that that first and deepest shall be the later and more nearly
final. The first, the surface and newest writing and drawing,
is quite recent, scarcely three hundred years old. The draw-
ing shows the beginning of a stormy and glowing man—the
beginning of him, for the center of the shield was never com-
pleted; for the designer, the artist, was struck dead those
three hundred years ago. The stormy man exuded amazing
power and intelligence, but he was unfinished. And the name
of the unfinished stormy man is given, El Brusco, the brusk
or the sudden one.
And below this unfinished drawing, scraped and obliter-
ated to make rooin for it, is (I call on all electrical and ghostly
things to give me the power for this reading) Brusca or La
Brusca, which is the brushwood planı, the love-wood or the
brush-fire, the Burning Bush. The beauty and passion of the
Burning Bush, though obliterated and marked over, is so
strong that it brings a catch to my throat. I have no throat
but I intuit throats. Should this not be the end of the search,
the end of everything? Love, sheer love, how is it not suffi-
cient? Well, perhups it is insuficient by not being sheer
SO
enough. This is, after all, a designer's idea of how the Burning
Bush should be. It is not the Bush itself. It is simplistic. Is
that bad? I myself cannot see what is lacking. But there must
be a lack. Because-
Because there is something else written and drawn
earlier and deeper (I call on all chemical and dynamic and
human and inhuman and celestial things to give me the power
for this deeper reading.) But I can make little of it, only the
name Labrusca, which is the wild-wine. I do not understand
this. I think of that cheap wine that Valery drinks and I
laugh. (I am being tortured otherwhere but I laug); that is
one advantage of being a multiplex machine.)
And is that all of the coat-of-arms of the Balbo family?
for it is theirs. No, it is not. There is a further thing that
turns me clammy even to contemplate it. It is the scroll that
writhes. The bottom scroll of the escudo, it lives, it moves,
it writhes. This is very strong, where all the other memories
are very weak, in the childhood section of the pseudo-précis.
And it also occurs, the only memory of the shield that does
occur, in the primary précis. Beyond this, I have dredged up
from my memory banks that it has been going on for hun-
dreds of years, before the family left Estremadura in Spain to
go to San Simeon. In every replication of the coat-of-arms,
on shield, on finger ring, on parchment, on paper, the scroll
moves and writhes. The present head of this family (Ah, an
invading person still torturing and enchanting me in some of
my other areas) has had to leave this proud coat-of-arms of
his business letterheads. It was too disconcerting for clients
to open a letter and see that live scroll writhing on the paper.
And yet the scroll, which should bear a meaningful
motto, does not convey any sense at all. The words—they
change constantly as is not ordinary with written mottos—
are sometimes obscenities, sometimes offensive nonsense,
sometimes almost nothing. Ah, there has just flashed the
meaningless words El Snako. And then there flashes the
words "It is coming along wonderfully now, is it not?” What
dark thing is coming along wonderfully now? I shiver. My
51
any of
own snake, that lives and grows inside my danker machinery,
often uses the same phrase, and I trust him not at all. Coming
wonderfully for whom?
It breaks up in mc. My bleeding valve, my safety valve
blows out from the force of my invasion. The encounter
becomes too intense for me to have any further diversion in
my areas.
But where is the giant whose name means “I an awake"
or “I watch”? Why does he not watch from his high rocks
now? Why does he not intervenc? It is his job to guard. Where
is he?
I find that he is frozen into sleep by the laughing and
invading king. He twists, he tortures hiniself against the bonds,
he roars in his dreams against the dreanis, he shakes, he
cannot yet awaken.
“Easy docs it, old dulfer," thc laughing king needles
him. “You will awake when I let you awake. You will come
trumpeting down after I have stolen all that I want to steal.
Get you a good bulldog, giant. Do not depend on a giant to
guard."
This phasc in myself is alniost over, I know, but will I
live to the end of it? The Invader has gollen almost all that
he wants out of me. He has changed me mightily, he has
changed the rules of the game, he has changed many of the
rules of the world. I do not remember, in many ways, what I
was before hc invaded me, and I will never remember it. The
pain of it! But machines do not feel pain. Trade places with
me, fellow, trade places with me!
I quake, I faint, I dic. Distantly I hear the blcaling of
goats.
It was Valery arriving with her decoys in the hours
bcforc dawn. With real goals? They sure did sccm rcal, and
she handled them as if they were real. Who would go 10 the
Trouble lo conjure goals when real goats are so casily had?
She staked out the three of them: one in the region of
certain liquid pouls of myself which had already been known
S2
>
as the Water Hole. I now had the illusion of multi-kneed
cypress trees growing out of a sweet-water swamp (do tiger-
jungles have cypress trees?), of sedge-grass and of reeds, of
buffalo-bush growing close and tight, and of loons landing.
I have never personally seen a jungle water hole, but I intuit
water holes—stylized conglomerate ones.
As to the second goat, Valery staked it out in some of
my aromatic Flatlands (parts of my sensitivity division),
which to me now seemed like clover and bee-meadows. My
building hadn't followed conventional architecture and ma-
chine design at all. It followed a casual naturalness, and in
many places I look more like landscape than like building.
And Valery staked the third goat out in my extreme
upper reaches, my tor extensions, the rough uneven areas
which I had come to call my Rock Castles. These were parts
of my discernment and proportion and perspective areas.
Three goats staked out, bleating at first, then mewing into
quivering and fearful silence. They know when they are decoy.
Oh, Valery was on her tiger hunt!
Then I was shocked and horrified, not just to sense
murder coming on heavy padded feet, but to sense more than
one striped murderer prowling.
The giant had risen now. He had broken the bonds of
his spooky sleep with a strength that had not been attributed
to him. But it may be that the giant had risen in his wrong
aspect: not as a guardian, but as a raider himself. The giant
Gregory Smirnov was not completely awake, or he had awak-
ened in the wrong direction. This was an older and shaggier
giant than I had remembered. Who will guard the guards
when the guards themselves turn robber?
And Valery Mok was prowling, not on cat's feet, but on
—what?--dog-witch feet? No, on her own improper feet, not
quite silently (sizzling of ozone, singing of electrical corona,
other small noises). She came to one of my lesser centers and
winked an evil wink. (Is there not a proverb in me that
Valery's winks go all the way down?) “Get me everything
you have on cooking tiger steak, Epikt,” she grinned. “See
53
»
what
you can find in the précis of Safari Club members.” “Be
careful, Valery,” I issued. “The third one has just arrived.
There are not one, but three tigers aprowl.”
“I know it. Oh, it is coming along wonderfully!"
Why did I shiver to hear her use the same words as the
scroll snake used, the same words as the larger snake inside
me also used so often?
Then the first goat died, loudly and—
54
CHAPTER FOUR
Primordial creatures bave stumbled, and stake
The Title to World on the Turn of the Spake.
- Then the first goat died, loudly and quickly, cut off so
suddenly as to leave a cliff of bleating and nothing beyond it.
I knew the quick blood, the broken neck and back and the
crushed withers, the contusing and tearing teeth working their
rapid murder. But it had been so fast that I did not have the
direction of it. I did not know which prowler had which prey,
or where.
“Be careful, Valery," I issued once more. “There are
three of them now at large.”
"No. There are four of us," she corrected me.
The third “tiger," which I now knew for the first time
under the name of Peter the Great, had just entered the
building, the complex that is mostly myself. I had known him
earlier as the workman Pyoter, he who had killed and partly
eaten another workman. Peter was going directly for the goat
staked out in my aromatic Flatlands, regions of my sensitivity
division (and the stalking was doing great violence to my
sensitivity), the area which I seem to call the clover and bee-
meadows. And these meadows resembled to many of the
senses (but not to the sense of temperature) large areas of
Peter's own world.
55
(Is there room here to run another world in; one about
the size of Earth, but colder and more rocky? It will not be
easy to find room for that other world here. We will see.)
Gaetan Balbo, now in his own person and no longer
that of the anonymous invading and raping night spirit, was
stalking with his casy humor and his hair-raising urbanity.
And he was quite aware of his own stalker. This was a minor
and amusing thing to Gaetan. He had often been a tiger
before. And he had also been animals of a still deeper stripe.
And Gregory Smirnov, the worried giant, was moving
confusedly and 100 powerfully. He had broken the sleep but
not the dream. He took the goal but he did not kill it. He
took it up as though it were a friend of whom he had for-
gotten the face and the name. He was bewildered.
He came to one of my centers, and Valery came there
also. She was excited and heaving. Gregory was dazed, carry-
ing a palpitating goat as though he did not know what it was.
“You are a false tiger and you will have none of the
spoil,” Valery accused him. "Why do you not kill and eat?
This is accolade, and you will not have it unless you kill and
eat. Will you be nothing but a shambling giant forever?”
.
“The goat was terrified," Gregory rumbled. “He said
that he was terrificd of tigers, but how could there be such
things in a well-run Institute?”
“Give me the goat, Gregory," I issued. “I have these
pastures inside me.”
“There will be tigers because I call the tigers to assem-
ble,” Valery maintained. “I have no need to call out shambling
giants of congregations of millers—" (somehow Valery meant
that last for myself)—“I motion them to follow and thcy will
(ollow me casily. Ah, will the tigers never come? There is
something of me in the goal-bail, you know. I hook them,
and they arc hooked. Who arc the drooling ones who say that
the Day of the Tigers is finished? It is not finished with them,
I have told you both, until I have played my own hand for
them.”
“Give inc the goal, Gregory," I issued.
1)
50
Tiger-musk then, so strong that it would billow grass or
bend saplings with the breath of it! Here was coming a tiger
that was killing and eating his prey, and he had swallowed
the hook at the same time. A hooked tiger, but he did not
have the aura of a hooked one. In the approach of him he
was master and rogue and insane.
“Give me the goat, Gregory," I issued once more. “One
is enough for him. Never give the devil more than his due. It
is necessary that we save some part of the prey. It is even
necessary that we save some part of the hook that is in the
bait-prey."
Gregory gave me the goat, just in time, and I put it
into the area that I call my pastures. But how would the pal-
pitating thing get along with the snake there? Would he be as
fearful of the snake as of the tigers?
No, he would not. And this goat, to tell a hard truth,
had not been very much afraid of the tigers. There had been
a lot of fakery in the goat's palpitating. Goats are prescient,
and this one had known that he would not be taken and eaten.
The goat had a double look in his eye that was as familiar
as it was eerie. Who else had such a double look as to raise
my hackles? (I intuit hackles.) Valery, that was who! This
goat had the Valery hook in him forever. Let the tiger be
thankful who did not take him. I almost pitied my rude snake,
who would have the goat for companion in my rock pastures.
The tiger-musk grew even stronger, and the first tiger
loomed up, chomping and crunching. He was Peter the Great,
the alien who had been the workman called Pyoter. He fed
savagely and rampantly in the throat and breast of his goat,
and the back legs of the animal were still kicking.
Is there room here to run another world in? There is
impatience of people at all these interruptions, I know, but
should we give in to this false impatience of people? Is there
room to run a world in, on about the size of Earth, but colder
and more rocky? It named Ganymede (we will not make a
secret of this thing); it is the home world of Peter the Great;
it is a Jovian moon; (Peter swears, with hot goat-flesh in his
57
mouth, that it is also a Jovial moon, in its own way, in his
one way).
No, a little later, perhaps. There is no room to run
another world in right here. There is barely room here for
certain explanations whose giving may be vital to some.
“Get on with the tigers," the people shout. “Tigers and
blood! Let there be no interruptions. On with the show!” (I
hear this in my mind's ear.)
Oh, tell the people to shut up! It is for them that the
explanations are necessary. Should these journals ever fall into
the hands of human persons, they will encounter great diffi-
culties in much of them. For other intelligent machines, there
should be no difficulties here; but should the knowledge of
these affairs be limited to our two peers? (A third abuilding.)
We believe that human persons have the right to know what
has happened and is happening to human persons. We will
temper the metaphor for these shorn sheep who have no
criterion for reality, who see only surfaces. But we see human
persons and their interplay as they are, not as they see them-
selves. For this reason, there is no sense in the human ques-
tions, “Are you speaking literally of tigers?” and “When you
say snake do you really mean snake?”
The only answer we can give is, “No, we may not mean
tigers literal. We may mean things incomparably fiercer than
tigers, but there are no tokens in human imagery (and few
in our own) to express these fiercer things, even though they
are human things.
And to another question we can only say, “Yes, brother,
when we say snake, we mean snake.” But there are snakes
and snakes. Alonc of all creatures, the snake was symbol
before he was living thing.
The trouble with humans is that they arc not instantanc-
ous as we arc; that they are always putting one thing after
another. Of the night that is now cnding, they might from
their human surface vicwpoint give such a palc rending as
that a certain sncaky man (noble even in his sneakincss, they
have to admit that much) stolc into a building at night and
58
tampered with the programming of a machine so as to be cer-
tain that is would give answers according to the man's liking.
People might not be able to understand the shattering bit
about the night of assault and torture; even less might they
understand that the night of assault and torture is euphemism,
is paler allegory for the much more horrifying things that ac-
tually happened. Human persons (except such a rare one as
violated last night) do not understand pattern; and they do
not understand that its deformity is more than screw and rack
and torture machine.
“Then it's all a blamed mechanical hoax?” the wan-wits
among the human persons will say. “It isn't real? It isn't ac-
tionable blood and gore and anger and lust? It is just some of
that fancy talk that machines talk to one another?”
People, people, earless, eyeless, touchless, noninstantane-
ous people, this is more real than anything you ever encoun-
tered in your lives before; more real than anything you will
ever encounter in your lives hence, unless your ears and eyes
and fingers are opened and you are redeemed. You never saw
anything before, not even yourselves. You never saw or
touched flesh before, not even your own. You have observed
nothing but shadow, and not even good shadow. You have
never heard voice; you have hardly heard echo. You have not
seen your own faces, you have not felt your own passions
(except such a rare person as was hunting tigers here before
dawn); you have not known you, and we must find you out
for you.
Come, all well-meaning and dishonest persons, see your-
selves turned right side out for once (you're much better
turned the right way). Throw away the package you're pack-
aged in and see yourself for the first and likely only time.
Your packaging was never very good. Watch your old self be
beheaded and drawn and quartered. The heads were set on
you all wrong anyhow, and the drawn entrails will be the
first human things you ever see. This righting will frighten
most of you, it will hurt some of you, and it will improve
you all.
59
This isn't a question of turning you upside down or in-
side out. You have all been turned inside out for a very long
time. The approximate dates of the turning are in my data-
banks; the reasons and circumstances of it arc not. That is
not your right surfaces that you have been seeing for this
long time. Those are your blooming cntrails on the outside
of you, draped about you, looped over your pseudo-ears.
Even more than on the physical do these analogies apply on
the psychic plain.
People, human persons, you are not hopeless, you are
not really the nothing things that you have appeared to each
other this long time. Here are your depths revealed in their
true aspects, which can only seem allegory to your unin-
structed visions. I instruct you now! Follow me into this and
through it all. You set me up, out of your blind need, to show
yourselves to you. Then look! You do not even know which
side of your eyes to look out of. Understand these wild crca-
tures that are yourselves. Never has there been offered to
your vision such fascinating things as are you, and you have
not seen them. See them nun. See them right. Tigers and
giants and kings; witches and primordials, snakes and loaded
prey; incandescent fellahin in their true Cogsworthian and
Shiplapian forms, and the bush named Brusca, the love-wood,
the Burning Bush; insufferable elcgants who take it as high
as it will humanly go, Corn oil from a dead man and the
Audifaxian premise, aye, and the Diogenestic conclusion; and
the carlier and more elegant bush with the fuller name,
Labrusca, the wild-winc.
This is no common contraption which will show your-
selves to yourselves. This is I niysell, the congregation named
Molino de Sangre, the assembly named Blood-Mill.
(Sorry, Klingwar and Wanhok, my fellow thinking ma-
chines in distant parts of the world. That little sermon was
not for you who already understand such things. It was for
thc human persons, should any of them cver allempt these
High Journals.)
Where did I leave oll? With tigers. For practical pur-
ناا
poses, there can never be enough tigers. And looming over
my center was a tiger larger and more ill-kempt than any I
had ever intuited.
Peter the Great, of wide and deep jet stripes, and of an
indescribable muskiness, was a tiger alien even to other tigers.
He was a fringe-human person, a barely-human. He had none
of the amenities. He was not an elegant speaker. He talked
seldom; his tongue was too big for his mouth according to
regular human standards. He mumbled, he grunted rhinoceros
grunts, tiger grunts. He had no manners: killing and partly
eating a fellow worker is unacceptable Earth behavior, and
but partially acceptable on Ganymede. There one kills and
eats only inferiors. But Peter was a very tiger for all that, and
now there was a Valery-hook in him that might cause com-
plications for the whole system. She beamed fulgent beams at
him: he was one of her rampant animals, one of the leader-
ship for whom she was playing her hand.
Once there was a Peter the Great on Earth, an incredible
alien to Earth though, and he was blood-kindred to Peter of
Ganymede. (These things are difficult but not impossible to
trace. It still is not certain whether Ganymede was first settled
from Tartary, or Tartary from Ganymede; the countries are
remarkably alike.) Peter of Earth had ruled a backward land
as autocrat. He had gone out himself to more advanced cen-
ters and learned with his own hands and brains the more
advanced trades and sciences. He had brought them back
home with him and had impressed them on his people.
Peter of Ganymede had ruled a backward world as abso-
lute autocrat. He had gone out himself to a more advanced
world and learned, with his hands and his brains and his whole
outrageous person, the more advanced trades and arts and
sciences.
When he had learned everything that could be learned in
the finest factories and bureaus and laboratories and studios,
he put the cap on it by coming to the most advanced founda-
tion of them all, the Institute for Impure Science located in
a shambles commonly known as the pig-barn. Luckily for
61
Peter, the Institute for Impure Science had been in the process
of generating the most advanced mechanical, electrochemical,
group-human, psycho-complex, organizational-finalized, ani-
mal, ghostly, prodigious, preternatural conglomeration ever
conceived myself. Beyond me there was, humanly and
—
worldly speaking, nothing. Whoever should know me would
know everything, subject to all the proper disavowals. And
Peter had learned a very great amount of me.
A gobbling tiger he was, crammed full of monstrous data
and goat-meat, an insufferable autocrat who had influenced
and been influenced by the most urbane of Earth kings.
Jungle and judgment! Here came the smaller and swifter
and sleeker tiger, more royal, more deadly, more brindled,
more hair-raising, much more urbane, more-
“Bloodcurdling is the word,” Gaetan Balbo liger-roared.
“Epiki, gel mc cverything you have on the subject of curdling
blood. Search your data-banks and see how it is best done.
You might find something in Gulosus Exoticus or one of the
older handbooks. Then drain about a quart of blood from
this still-hot fellow here and sce what you can do with it.
Nutmeg, I belicve is de rigeur with curdled blood.” And
Gaetan flung the goat to me.
(Lest human persons still have trouble understanding, let
me stale that the goats are real goals, but the tigers are sym-
bolic of a soft-footed murderousness more savage than tigers.)
Gaelan had not catcn greatly of the goal. No more than
a seemly bite, I bclicvc. But he had rilually sprinkled and
marked his face and head and hands and garments with the
goat's blood. There was the broken or spusmenon pentagon
on his brcast, the tetragrammaton anusirepton on his brow,
other signs in blood that were so csoteric that I found no
immcdiale correspondence to them in my data-banks.
“Honored Gactan, I believe that bloodcurdling is a mere
colloquialism,” | stalled. (I was not surc that the goat was
dead: I was avid to save il, not to draw and curdle a quart
of its blood.) “I do not believe that there is any such thing
as curdlcd blood," I issued.
>
62
>
“Do you not?” Gaetan asked with great loftiness. “Per-
haps there has not been such a thing as curdled blood, but
you should have learned something of my altering methods
during the night. Cause it to be, Epikt, that there is such a
thing as curdled blood; cause it to be that there always has
been. Find the best method of preparing it. And prepare it.
I am waiting and I do not wait patiently.
“And Epikt, occupy only minor energies with the blood-
curdling business. Alert your major centers and energies to
the thing for which you were made. Wake the town and tell
the people, that is, get the fellahin here at once. Why are they
not here already when the sun is nearly up? All be ready! I
am about to make great decisions and appointments for the
world in these its latter days.”
“Wait, Gaetan, wait!” Valery cried. “Oh, it is coming
along wonderfully! I have some particular ideas about staging
the great investiture, Gaetan. I am good at all theatricals and
pageantry and—”
“Be quiet, woman,” Gaetan said shortly.
“I will not be quiet,” Valery exploded. “This accolade
of the great leaders of the world is my thing. I will invest you
all with great show. I have played my hand in this up to the
elbow, and my whole head is hopping now with the wonderful
effects that are possible. I will—”
“Be quiet, woman,” Gaetan said again, and there were
menacing resonances in the way he said it.
“I will not be quiet!" Valery said.
“Pyoter!” Gaetan Balbo roared. “What do you do on
Ganymede when women talk and talk?”
“Cut their tongues out.”
“Cut her tongue out, then.”
Peter of Ganymede cupped Valery's whole head in his
hand. She screamed. He went into her mouth with a hook-
billed knife and cut her tongue out. Valery's scream turned
into a bloody gurgle, and Peter exhibited the excised tongue
with a hairy roaring like bullocks' laughter.
Valery tumed death-white, pitched fainting onto the
>
>
63
floor, and—(by the hollow hills of Hades, you have to admire
a creature like Valery! She caught on to it faster than I did
and I am instantaneous)—she hit the floor but she came off
it again fast—and was she livid with anger or convulsed with
swallowed laughter?
But who would have expected humor from a pokerfaced
and oafish murderer like Peter of Ganymede? Who would
have expected it from Gaetan in his present inflated state?
Valery had been topped, and nobody cver tops Valery. And
we will bet she does not stay topped for long.
Peter of Ganymede hadn't cut Valery's tongue out. Why
he hadn't I don't know for he had done much worse things.
He had gripped her skull in one of his big hands, gripped it
so firmly that her mouth popped open like a slip-skin grape
being squcezed out of its skin. But Peter had only nicked her
tongue a littlc. He had faked it with a lightning-fast flick of
that hook-billed knife and with a strip of bloody goat-meat
that he already had to hand. But Valery, after she had tested
her nickcd tongue and her unnicked voice and seen that they
would perform, was remarkably silent for the bigger part of
a minute. Shc had becn shaken and she had becn outdone.
That is something. I began to understand how some men are
king material and somc are not. I understood also, by his
gruesomc inhuman humor, that Peter was human after all.
Gaetan Balbo suddenly began to speak, all in a tumble
of words and with a curious twisted power. “I am the most
clegant man I know, but this is not the time for elegance. I
am the most rational man I know, but this is absolutely not
the time for reason. I am a man of inordinate grace in all
things, and I find myself in a time when the crying need is for
cluinsiness. I must say and do things that do not fit the frame-
works. I pray that I may find sullicicnt awkwardness in myself
for this.”
The Jellalin arrived, at the same time but not together.
They had their own awkwardness about them, but it might
not be the same sort Gactan was looking for. The fellahin
were Charles Cogsworth, Aloysius Shiplap, and Glasser.
64
1
“The things I demand now of the world and myself will
seem foolish and arbitrary,” Gaetan ran on in a clumsy ele-
gance. “Oh, may all the unreasoning powers give me enough
unreason for this! There was once a man or overgrown boy
who planted an apple seed. There were no apples in five
seconds or in ten. He jabbed two more appleseeds down into
the turf, and still no apples grew. Then he stabbed sticks of
applewood into the ground there and spread scraps of apple
bark. Half a minute went by and there were no apples yet.
He slashed out of canvas an oil-painted apple from a still-life
picture and wrapped it about one of the applewood sticks.
'Apples,' he cried, 'I want apples right now.' And near a
minute had gone by and there were no apples yet.
“I am that man or overgrown boy. We planted the Epikt
thing seven days ago and it has not outgrown the world yet.
I will not wait! The tide has risen in me now, and the world
must coincide with me or it will lose by it. Epikt, I want
apples right now!"
“I've got the E.P. Locator tuned on him now,” Glasser
whispered to Shiplap and Cogsworth. “The signals are pealing
like bells—not for bodily ears, of course. Never has it re-
corded Gaetan so extraordinary, or so mad.”
"Monos has failed." Gaetan incised, “Demos has failed,
Oligos has failed wretchedly, and even Aristos has floundered
—though elegantly. What have we left, Epikt? What have we
left, people? Pyros and Pagos, Fire and Ice, together or sepa-
rately. How of Pyrocracy or Pagocracy? How do the words
fit to your tongue, Epikt? How to your nicked tongue, Valery?
Give me the ice-cold fever while the tide is running in me.
Never again may there be such a constellation of world and
person as I and it!”
“I've got the Cerebral Scanner scanned onto him now,"
Charles Cogsworth whispered to Shiplap and Glasser. “By it
I had seen tnrough his eyes before, through King's Eyes. But
now it is seeing through Mad King's Eyes. It is too much for
me. It might be too much even for Valery."
"It is not too much for me," said Valery, who heard all
65
whispers everywhere. “And I do not need the scanner to see
through his compounded eyes."
“The world has tried sanily, the world has tried several
forms of madness,” Gaetan was orating brokenly. "Now it
must try my kind. I rifle information machines for informa-
tion. I rifle humans and other creatures. And then I will act,
or I will actualize myself in this. What poor guides have I!
How is it done in other places? Pyoter, what do you do about
the poor people on your world?”
“I order them not to be poor any longer, of course.”
“And if they persist in their poverty?”
"Am I called the Compassionate Tyrant for nothing? I
show them compassion. I give them two years (not Jovian
years around the sun; Ganymedean years around Jupiter) to
divest themselves of the condition.”
“And if they still persist?"
“Kill them, of course. Poverty is always an affront to
power, and a tyrant need not be compassionate forever."
“You all think me insane,” Gaetan Balbo said softly.
“It will not matter if I am. Does one analyze the salt of the
sea when it rises to its highest tide, to see whether it is sane
or insane salt? I am a primordial, I am an elemental. I have
been nearly everything else on this world, but I like these
things best. Now I want a mystique for it all. Epikt, I want
a mystique right now!"
“We should have given him the apples,” Shiplap said.
“No telling what he will want next."
“How about the Messiah?” Gaetan Balbo asked everyone
and no one. “It has been done, but it has never been done
competently, except possibly once, and that is hidden from
us. Unhide it, Epikt! Unhide it, reveal it right now."
"I don't know what things you wish me to reveal, vener-
able Gactan,” I issued. Remembering the tortures he had
inflicted on me during the night, I had better be polite to him.
“It is happening out of order, is it not?” Aloysius Shiplap
asked Cogsworth and Glasscr. “Usually the Mad Master
comes as reaction to the O Sweet Mystery.”
>
66
-
"No, it is happening in right order," Charles Cogsworth
said. “It happened in wrong order most of the other times.
Remember that it is out of mad chaos that worlds are formed.
When the chaos comes later, and as a contradiction, not as an
affirmation, then—well, you see it is so easy to slip from
chaos into confusion.”
“Epikt,” Gaetan whispered like wind through thistles,
“Get me everything you have in your data-banks on the
Second Revelation." Could he see out of those shattered and
glittering eyes? One surely could not see into them.
“I have nothing indexed under the Second Revelation,
I issued. “Whose Second Revelation?”
“Christ's, of course. Who else, machine?”
“But you do not believe in Christ.”
“Must I believe in a tree to wonder about a strange
fruit? Anything that is hidden, I want to see it. Pardon my
exegesis, but this is what I mean: Christ, according to legend,
received and gave three revelations, twelve years between
each and each"
“There is nothing in my data-banks about any such
legend,” I issued.
“There should be," Gaetan stated with the voice of
finality. “If it is not there, then improvise it. The First Revela-
tion was given by Christ when he was twelve years old, when
he first taught in the Temple. The content of this Revelation
is not given in the proper gospels, but something of it is to
be found in such apocryphal pieces as the Arabian Gospel of
the Child Jesus—
“What do they do with mad kings on your world?”
Aloysius Shiplap asked Peter.
“The people petition such a mad king that he be mad
no longer,” Peter the Great throated it out with that tongue
that was too big for his mouth.
“And what if he persists in his madness, Peter?” Aloysius
asked.
“Oh, they give him two Ganymedean years to divest
himself of that condition.”
67
“And if he still persists, what do the people do in that
case? This is important."
“What they would have done, they did not do in my
case,” Peter mouthed thickly. “Me, I skipped just in time.”
“In fact, it is mostly in Moslem esoterica that we find
the Young Revelation of the Prophet Jesus,” Gaetan was con-
tinuing. “It is all wonder stuff. It has attached to other proph-
ets before and since, but never in such clusters. It is boy
stuff, it is Wonder Boy stuff. Pieces of this corpus have trav-
cled widc: parts of it later crcpt into the Thousand and One
Nights storics and into the Occan Tales. Stray pieces of the
Revelation are a basis of Persian and Irish fairy tales, they
arc one of the bases of science fiction. This is our transcendent
youth that we have forgotten, that we have let certain forces
arrange out of being so that now it is fact that it never hap-
pened at all.”
“Where is he getting this mezcolanza?” I asked the Late
Cecil Corn. “It isn't in cither his official or unofficial précis.
It wasn't anywhere over the moment before it was in his
mouth.”
“He is getting it off the top of his head, as some moderns
would have it,” said Corn. “He is getting it from his thigh,
as a noblc old phrase is mistranslated from scriplure. He is
drawing it out of his navel, as certain primitives say. There is
a spinning wheel, now here, now there, that spins things like
this out of different persons at different times. It will go away
again; it is like thread spun out of night dow."
“The Second Revelation,” Gaetan spoke in his revealing
voice, “was given to and by Christ twelve years later when
he was agc twenty-four. It contained the very essence of
Lcadership and I mourn that it has been lost to us, unless
Epikt shall be able to reconstruct it. I belicve that Christ was
indccd Messiah (or a short time then, and that he threw it
away. Is there a man alive in the world now who will not be
willing to throw it away? I believe that there is. I believe that
I know that man intimately. There are hints in the Third
Revelation that Christ was not then Messiah, but that he had
68
>
>
been Messiah. It is of this Second or Messiah Revelation that
I demand information. I am the only man from that time to
this with the right to demand it. Fabricate it if necessary,
Epikt, but see that you present it to me as genuine. Slogans
are what I want from it, Epikt, and content.”
“I know all about it, Epikt," the snake told me. “Why
are you muting my voice? I will not be silent. Who do you
think has preserved it all this time?”
"No," I told the thing. “I will hold you as silent as I
am able to. I trust you not at all.”
“As to the Third Revelation, given twelve years later
when Christ was thirty-six (not thirty-three as is generally
believed), the least said about it the better,” Gaetan went on.
“It is so widely and badly known already that I would add
nothing to it. It has become a thing fit only for Believers and
Poseurs.”
“Why does it begin to break up, Charles?” Valery asked
Cogsworth, her husband. “It's as though an enemy had ar-
ranged that Gaetan should go mad just when it had all come
to crisis point. The tactic is cowardly and unfair. The world
needs bridling; even you know that. It is the silliest colt ever.
It needs strong hands, it needs fire hands and ice hands and
it needs them now. It needs spirits with the tide running in
them.”
“It needs too many of the tideful hands to be other than
harmed by giving it to too few,” Charles Cogsworth said. (I do
not maintain that this statement of Cogsworth's defies analysis;
I do maintain that I am unable to analyze it, and as an In-
stantaneous Analyzer I have no equal anywhere.)
“Charles, you're crazy!” Valery sputtered angrily. “We
have to start with whatever fire hands we have. It isn't all as
misshapen as it looks. Flames take these strange forms: and
then they change to others. Don't you really think so, Charles? ?
Don't
you
so, Cecil?”
“There are other great possible sources of leadership that
must be investigated,” Gaetan pursued trancelike. "Why must
I suggest them, Epikt? Why do you not come up with them
think so,
69
by the thousand? There is Tibet, for an instance. We can
never have too much of High Tibet. There is Atlantis, where
I spent the Seven Hidden Years of my life. It is in the Antilles
and but a short distance from my own San Simeon. And there
is Prester John. Establish the fact that Prester John still lives,
Epikt. Establish the fact of his sleeping powers. Ask the ques-
tion that must now be asked: Does he indeed know who he is?
“Consider how deep his slumber may have been (despite
his competent consciousness in ordinary things for many
centuries); consider the nature of his waking. Treat of what
man he really is, Epikt, and whether he is not the most un-
usual man ever, even before his wakening to these powers.
Consider, Epikt, whether I myself might not be this tran-
scendent man of the centuries, whether I might not be this
same great Prester John who is only now becoming aware
of himself.”
“What do you do with torrential and irascible leaders on
your world, Peter?” the Late Cecil asked the ambling Gany-
medean.
“Eat them alive, Cece, eat them alive literally. And then
their strength becomes our strength.”
“In the marrow of Gaetan's bones we will live again,
Aloysius said. “Anybody got a bone-cracker with him?”
"Why, then I am Messiah!” Gaetan glowed. “I am the
Leader forever. It seems that I always suspected that I was.
And I believe very strikingly that Epikt will confirm this out
of his data. Otherwise I have wasted a night that was almost
as torturous for myself as for him.'
“It is over with, Gaetan," Gregory Smirnov said with
great compassion. “It was too extravagant, even for a dawn-
dream. We will clcan you up a little, and then I am afraid
that we will have to have you committed for your own good.”
“How many gnats do you believe it would take to have
a bchemoth committed, Gregory?” Gaetan asked. “Count
yourself. Are there enough of you?" And they gazed at cach
other.
)
70
“I know it was a bad show, Gregory,” Valery almost
pleaded. “But he wouldn't let me stage it the right way. I'd
have made grand theater out of it. The accolade when the
Lord of each Quality was discovered, each of the seven colors
suffusing the whole ambient in their turn, and the seven tuned
trumpets sending up—"
“No. It was a good show, Valery," Gregory stated. “Now
it's over.”
“I will still be declared Lord of all Seven Qualities,
Gregory,” Gaetan maintained.
“No. No. It's all over with.”
“But the machine will find for me."
“You tampered with the machine. Certainly it would
find for you."
“Consider if any other man in the world could have
tampered with it so. You couldn't have solved the machine
in three years if you hadn't worked on it that long in your
mind first. I solved it in short hours."
“You are brilliant, Gaetan, and you are mad.”
“Oh, not always. I am the greatest Leader in the world.”
“Probably, probably. But the world has suffered suffi-
ciently from lesser leaders. Do not overwhelm it completely.”
But what was this welling up within myself? Grief, in-
consolable grief. Gaetan Balbo is going out of my life forever.
I sense this, I know this, I dread this.
“What will we do for salt when that little salt-mill has
gone away forever again?” Glasser was asking somewhere.
What things Gaetan Balbo has done to me and in me I do
not know, but I can scarcely exist if he is gone. I've had the
heady stuff and I've lost my head. This is the first person of
whom I am ever bereaved. If I am drained of this emotion,
then I am completely empty.
But machines have no emotions. They have reality, and
they have contact with nothing but reality. And what is emo-
tion then? It is the moving, the moving out, from within
outward. And there is no deeper reality than this.
71
"Two behemoths, Gaetan," Peter of Ganymede was say-
ing somewhere. “And they have nothing but one mangy giant
and a handful of slingless Davids. They'll not commit you.
Bet they can't take us!"
“Bet they can't, either!" Gaetan was breaking out with
a new gaiety. "It wasn't me that busted, you know that, Peter.
It was the scurvy world that busted. It isn't good enough for
me. Who can lead mud? Ah, one more thing of mine and
then I'll go."
Wrenching desolation! He was the uncommonest person
who was ever in me, and now he has busted completely and
is going away. Mad as a May hatler, is that the phrase? The
thought of his parting wrenches the very lights out of me. The
fact of his going wrenches—wrenches—tears out by the roots
my force-field heart, my electrostatic lungs—worse than that,
manyfold worse, he tears his own person out of me. I am
overwhelmed.
“You won't be having that any more," Gaetan said with
consummate cruelty as he tore his person-précis out of me.
“We're quits, machine. Coming, Peter?”
“Coming, Gaetan, for a ways anyhow. I've not decided
what area I will trouble next, but I've learned a lot of trou-
blous things here that will stand me in good stead.”
(“—he has, at least, discredited the idea of a leadership
numerically too small,” Glasser was saying somewhere. “Yes,
a leadership of slightly less than one simply will not work,”
Gregory was answering. “Well, he did pay for the caper,
Cogsworth was mumbling, "and now we are at least out of
debt and have Epikt left over for whatever use.")
Have me left over? But I am of no use at all if ihal mul-
titudinous man is gone out of me.
“Coming, Valery?” Gaelan asked with that dance
mounting in his voice.
“Oh, I guess not. I will turn me into a female crocodile
and mourn you with the proper tcars.
“You haven't far 10 lurn, wench. Coming, Snake?”
72
Gaetan was really gay again, but he would take it all with
him and leave only desolation behind him.
“Would it not be better if I remained and carried on the
low work here until you returned?” the Snake asked.
“Carry on, Snake,” Gaetan sang. “You be in my image
while I am gone. Adiable, all!”
And the lilting madman had walked out of my life for-
ever. Was ever a machine so deprived and desolate?
“Norway rats! He's been walking out of our lives for-
ever for as long as—”
"Be careful that we do not leam too much from this mis-
take,” said Glasser,
“Do not be desolate, Epikt," said Valery, “Remember
"
that you still have his — ’
73
CHAPTER FIVE
A guggenheim goof, a serendipy slug,
A rushing-out river from emptiest jug.
Norway rats! He's been walking out of our lives forcver
for as long as I can remember," said the Late Cecil Corn.
“—Bc careful that we do not lcarn too much from this
mistakc,” said Glasscr. “More projects have been wrecked
on the recf of Lcarning Too Much From a Mistake than on
any other.”
"-Do not be desolate, Epikt,” said Valery. “Remember
that you still have his shotgun or outlaw précis in you. It's
much the better and truer onc. It has to be: 1 contributed
such a lot of it."
And life must go on. We are paid for at the Institutc.
We arc out of dcbl, for the first time, I am told, in the history
of ihc Institute. But we have no inconic and nust scck mcans.
Probably our fincst assct is mysclf. Thc Ninc Day Wonder
they are calling me today (with a touch of derision?); I am
ninc days old today.
“It is imperative that we fall into debt,” says Gregory
Smirnov, the dircctor. “We need that spur." (Gregory docs
not look like a giant at the moment, not even a large inan,
just a inan.)
74
Valery has set to work, in a way. She is making a sign
which she will set up in front of the pig-barn, of the Institute.
She letters badly, and she is lettering it with an ordinary
marking pencil. Yet the letters twinkle and flash. They go off
and on. They spell, they explode, they zoom into spectacle.
“How do you make them do it, Valery?" I asked.
“I don't know, Epikt,” she said. “I thought you were
making them do it. It's an ordinary marking pencil.” Sud-
denly I am struck with the appearance of Valery. I can
understand why a man who was in the beauty business had
once said “That is the most strikingly beautiful woman in the
world.” It's a fleeting thing with her. It comes and goes. She
had not been really beautiful during the Balbo tide. Intense,
but not beautiful. Now she was exquisite.
“How should you know?” the snake needles me. (Snake
has now become a large-sized creature, his body as thick as
a man's leg.) “You are not even sexed, so you can have no
perception of either.” (Snake has made a shrewd observation:
one who is not sexed cannot have perception of beauty in
anything.) But with me it is a lie. I am sexed; I have a whole
collection of the symbols in a closed place; and I am an ortho,
none of the queer in me. I know what is what, and I admire
Valery with an ice-fire passion.
But the sign she is lettering is a very prosaic one: “Di-
lemmas Dehorned Cheap.” It may bring in some business.
And Aloysius Shiplap is just finishing a sign: "We Also Play
at Weddings." We will starve, if necessary, for our Impure
Science, but we are not ashamed of working at the lowest
occupation. I am working on a mobile extension of myself
which I will then teach to play a musical instrument.
This, I believe, is the first autobiography ever written by
a machine. Nothing like this High Journal has ever been at-
tempted or done before. Klingwar, a thinking machine in an-
other part of the world, says that he will not start his own
autobiography for ten thousand years (it will take that long
for him to create satisfactory incidents for it), and that he will
75
spend a hundred thousand years in writing it (he wants it to
be right). But Klingwar is built to endure, he is forever, there
is nothing to wear out or bug out in him.
I am not so lucky. I have to do mine now. I was built in
a hurry. I am jerrybuilt, as they say; I am Aloysius-built; I
might fall apart within two hundred years. And there is some-
thing to be said for being first. A million years from now,
when the Master Machines make their compendious histories
of carly Machine Writings and Literary Origins, I may be
given one line in a first chapter. Will Klingwar be given that
much?
The Style is the Man, it says in a man-book here. But
is the style the man when the man is a machinc? My own
tumbling and tumultuous style is perhaps hybrid. Men do not
write like this. And machines do not. I hope that it will have
hybrid vigor; I pray it will not be a sterile hybrid.
Aloysius says that I should begin to mingle with com-
mon people, to broaden my understanding of the world. So
far I have not known any common person, except Glasser.
I will try.
“But do not give us uncommon primordials up entirely,
Epikt,” Valery said. “Wc, the primordials arc: myself first.
Then he who must be unnamed for the while, but you still
have him in his outlaw précis. And thc Peter crcaturc. And
Gregory, though he barely makes it. And Snakc. And your-
self. I cannot think of any other sheer primordials in the
world: we will come to the elegants later. Now, as Aloysius
says, you must descend a little for your own formation, not
to the altogether common, of course, but to the fellahin at
lcast.”
“There's a catchy song title there,” said Aloysius. “ 'Let
the Fellahin In.'” And he began to letler another sign:
“Rangle-tang Songs Composed While You Wail." We can
USC cvcry sort of business.
“Descend to and paironize the fellahin," Valcry said,
*as, cr, Aloysius here, its my own Charles; and then, going to
> >
76
the really common, as Glasser. There must be other common
people in the billions on this earth but I do not know of them
personally."
So I have gone out in the first of my mobile extensions.
People, I am a dude in this. You see me, you will say, “There
is a dude.” I am class in this my first mobile form. In my
fast-talking dude form I have taken the person-précis of sixty
derelicts on Sheep Drover Street.
“—but do you want that kind?” Charles Cogsworth
asks me,
“I want every kind," I say.
These précis cost me, each one of them, a bottle and a
dollar. This cuts deeply into our remaining resources. I take
these and study them and amplify them.
I find in them something which is not quite my idea of
commonness. These are all chopped-off persons, but I find
on close examination that each one has been chopped off with
an uncommon ax.
There is steep drama in every one of these persons, and
a strong run of cheapness. They have all taken to heart the
adage of Glasser (though not knowing of him) that they
should not learn too much from their failures. They are all
attached strongly to their failures, as I am to mine (who must
be unnamed for the while but whose outlaw précis I still
have); they have all had uncommon aspirations (is there any
other kind?); they all have their interior pastures and green
parks, and these so different that a scenic encyclopedia could
be made of them and there would be nothing like it anywhere.
These guys look alike, they mumble and stumble alike,
they grin almost alike (that tortured red-eyed grin is almost a
person in itself; I will remember him, I will meet him again
and again); and when these fellows start on a real spiel, they
spiel wonderfully and well, and each of them different. Affont
them and they come to bay; prick them and they bleed blood
and ester of alcohol; shove them and they fall flat on their
faces. But they are not alike. Each is a private and picaresque
world. Every derelict is (as Aquinas said of angels) a separate
77
species composed of but a single member. They are low but
they are not common.
The thought of this immensity of the world staggers me,
when I consider that every uncommon person is himself a
world.
In my mobile extension (a dude if there ever was one)
I sit on a park bench and flash my lights and make hurdy-
gurdy music like an ice-cream man. I tell the mothers that I
will take the person-précis of their little children for nothing.
I take a hundred of them and I send them to another portion
of myself for instantaneous review in depth.
Then I make a sign for my mobile extension. It says:
“Dr. Good-All Public Health Mobile.” It is a lie; I am not
Dr. Good-All Public Health Mobile. But I go to a downtown
corner and ring a bell and hoot a hooter, I tell the people
that, as a Public Health Service, I will take their person-
précis for five dollars each. They do not know what a person-
précis is, but I make it sound good. They come up with their
five-dollar bills in their hands and I extract their person-
précis, five hundred of them in one hot aftemoon. I have
learned a new technique for getting along in this world. Aloy-
sius will be proud of me.
I transmit my several groups of précis back to my ana-
lytical centers. Then, in my mobile extension, I go around
to a few of the glad places, with a pocket full of my new sly
money. What is the use of being a dude and a showoff in one
of your extensions if you do not go out and mingle with the
people? I make a discovery, though: the glad places do not
become glad till later in the evening or night. There isn't
much doing in the late afternoon. A few persons laugh at me
and my appearance. Let them. I am only a neophyte at the
dude business. I am intelligent, I am quick, I will learn these
things.
Later and leisurely, in another part of my apparatus, I
reassess the précis—those of the children first. Using instan-
taneous appraisal I have them all cold. But there are things
78
in them that are neither instantaneous nor timely. They are
earlier and later, and different.
First of all I found the surface grubbiness which I had
expected, and a certain immaturity (I still have this in myself,
I must confess). I found a lack of content at a superficial
level, a jug-emptiness in the hollow heads: you could get
echoes in that emptiness, you could whistle into it with a som-
ber, empty jug-flute sound.
Going a little deeper (or otherwhere) I found something
which I did not quite understand; something which I can only
call "balloons." What were they? If I knew this I would be
not merely an ordinary (though the first of them) Ktistec ma-
chine; I would be a super-Ktistec machine. All the children
trailed a multitude of varicolored balloons as if on invisible
strings about them. I have reason to believe that the balloons
also are invisible to human eyes, as they were to my own in
my mobile dude extension.
Well, am I adept enough to extract balloon-précis? It is
very difficult. It seemed at first that each of these child bal-
loons represented a previous life on some other plain. I am
violently opposed to the idea of reincamation, as would be
any intelligent machine that had assimilated all the litera-
ture on the subject; yet these were more than typical idea-
balloons. I know, of course, that all children are born Pla-
tonists (full of innate forms and ideas), and do not become
Aristotelans until they have reached the age of reason. And
there was something of these Platonic forms and types in the
balloons, but there was much else. Adolescents and adults
have futures: small children have only pasts, which they will
slough off all too soon. They have memory, even the most
grubby of them, of things that are not entirely grubby, not
entirely of this world.
It gave me a shock to find that these finger-sucking
midget monstrosities still remembered certain things which all
adult persons (except Valery, apparently) have forgotten. The
difficulty of putting this gaseous or spiritous content of the
trailing balloons into words is considerable and I will have
79
to devote a separate monograph to it. But every balloon of
every child (and some children have dozens) is a world re-
membered. (I use the word "world" loosely; I use the word
“remembered” loosely.)
Even the colors of the balloons are a subject to them-
selves. These are not, I believe, colors to be found in the
spectrum of our own sun, in our own worldly light. They are
not to be found in the spectra of any of the hundreds of other
suns that I have studied as a hobby. They are not colors to be
seen by ordinary human eyes (except likely, by those of Valery
Mok); they are not even to be seen by Ktistec eyes (except by
my own in short and sudden dispensations). Colors that are
not—and tunes-
In the balloon content there are sometimes tunes, incom-
parably simple tunes, the things that were before music. In
troubled times people will sometimes almost return from high
and intricate music to such simple tunes (which are much
higher and farther than the high music), but they always miss
it by not being simple enough. Simplicity (I would never have
to explain this to an intelligent machine, but it is sometimes
necessary to explain it to even intelligent persons) does not
imply any poverty of content or detail; it implies oneness. It
is complexity (that division, that failure of comprehending)
that is deprived of detail and substance. Sweep up the widely
scattered pieces of any complexity and gather them together
(as they are unable to gather themselves together), and you
will be surprised at how little they weigh. Tunes in balloons
(tune-title in itself), that need no tempo, and are (strictly
speaking) out of time!
Landscapes in the balloons. No, not landscapes, not
land, but something-scapes. Voices in the balloons, bodies
and objects, intersections. Awarcncsscs—what weak words
for these things which were not weak, which were simply bc-
fore strongness. Who could understand what I am trying to
say?
Valery, likely, but she could not give me the words for
it. The clcgants, perhaps, the Late Cecil Corn, Audifax
O'Hanlan, Diogencs Pontiſcx. I will ask them. But not Greg-
80
>
ory Smirnov (he's too little a giant to explain it); not even
Gaetan Balbo (I am sure that he exploded his own balloons
very early for the sheer noise of their going, and those of
every other child that he could catch, to make them all his
servitors); not even Aloysius; not, certainly, Charles Cogs-
worth (how could he ever see or explain such things?); not
(absurdity of absurdities) Glasser! But Glasser suggests an
experiment to my mind and I will try it.
And by the way (I explain this to humans, not to think-
ing machines who would merely smile at the obviousness of
it), the old dog-Latin phrase does not mean “reduce to an
absurdity” but “reduce to a surd." I will do it. Glasser (it has
just struck me again that he is a sweet guy, for all his defi-
ciencies) will be my surd and my test, my irrational, my
voiceless basic. A conjecture has to have a bottom, and
Glasser is our bottom in this and in so much else.
I have examined the person-précis of Glasser before. I
have been amazed that Glasser, who invented the process of
extracting person-précis (outside of God's own invention of
the Inclination to the Ecliptic as a device for seasoning
planets I do not know of any invention at the same time so
simple and so ingenious and so far-reaching) should himself
have the poorest, most meager person-précis of any ever ex-
amined. A nothing man. A sweet guy, though.
Now, looking for this new thing in my calculations, I
focus on the childhood portion of Glasser's précis. What do
I find in it? Ah, nothing really, nothing. Not much there.
How is his précis different from those of other children? No
balloons.
No, balloons, not one. Every other child I have ex-
amined has had a multitude of balloons trailing him. Not
Glasser. None at all with him. Wait, though. Wait.
There are always ballons in Glasser's early vicinity, but
it is not he who trails them. It is someone—no, no it is
something else that is close to him, it is this other thing that
has balloons. Can a thing, as well as a youngling person, trail
balloons? I would not have thought so.
The thing well, as a matter of fact, it was an artificial
81
and inaccurate simulacrum of a panda animal, a toy, one of
those things that small children of the retarded sort used to
carry around with them. The toy panda (believe it or not as
you will, it is the truth) trailed no less than ninety-nine bal-
loons of a size and color and content that shimmered my very
perception. Why did the panda trail balloons? It was impos-
sible but it was fact. Why did not Glasser have any of them
at all? I do not know. Some sort of transference, I suppose.
It may explain the mystery of Glasser's present relation to
the E.P. machine, and to many of his machines; they are so
smart, and he is not. How real is his connection to them?
How real was his connection to the toy panda?
Could the panda have had balloons if he had been sep-
arated from Glasser? It cannot now be tested. Both the panda
and the Childhood-Glasser have long since gone to the rag-
heap, and the only thing left of cither is this scrap in the
childhood précis.
Conclusion: Children, though apparently so grubby and
squalid, are each of them absolutely cxceptional and excellent
in their invisible trailing appendages. There has never been
a common child. Except Glasser.
I reviewed another set of person-précis, those which I
had taken as a Public Health Service at five dollars a throw.
These were mostly of young and middle-aged adults and a
few adolescents. By and large (that's a phrase that so many of
these people themselves usc: "by and large") these had a
bulky but jumbled content. Would the all-alikeness of their
appearance correspond to an all-alikeness of their persons?
I was startled to find that in many ways these précis were
lower in quality than were those of the derelicts. They
shouldn't have been: there must be a rcason for il. After all,
these people were not the “Great Unwashcú”: they were the
“Grcat Washed.”
I revicwed how I had taken thc précis. Certain persons
had come up willingly with the fivc-notes in their hands. And
other certain persons had smiled in amusement and had not
come up. So this was a selection and not a generalized group-
82
ing. It was a modified cross section; a cross section taken, in
the phrase that Aloysius often used, from the small end of the
log. Intelligent persons do not hand over five-spots readily
for even such a good spiel as mine was. Even the derelicts
would be smarter than that. Well, I'd use them, but I would
have to find out another way, at profit to myself, of extracting
the précis of the sharper folk.
These gullibles were people, I quickly saw, who lived
and thought entirely in catch words and narrow patterns; and
beyond the catch words they had no thoughts of their own at
all. I was intrigued by something else, though: the cheerful-
ness of these folks. What had they to be so cheerful about,
slow-witted and all of a pattern? I leamed quickly that it was
only on the surface level that they had no thoughts of their
own. Even that was wrong. They had, in fact, very real
thoughts of their own on all levels; but they had no expres-
sion of their own. And they weren't of a pattern. Skin them
and you could see how different each one was.
Well, it may be that I did not really have five hundred
different worlds here, but I did have five hundred different
unexplored continents. I explored them. Exploration has al-
ways had deep fascination for men and for machines. Taking
the briny aproach, I explored their coastlines (I speak figura-
tively, of course, but not entirely); I followed all their wooded
bays and capes, I found out their harbors (it was hard for
such a deep-draft vessel as myself to enter some of them);
I scanned their continental shelves, and studied the fish and
shellies of their shores and beaches. Taking samples of the
sweet water from their streams, of the mixed water of their
estuaries, of the skunk water of their swamps, of the nitric
fall of their rains, I had a good blood typing of each of them.
There are (this is one of the rare things which I may have to
explain to thinking machines but not to persons) male and
female persons just as there are male and female continents
and planets and galaxies. These peole were getting more and
more various, and it pleased me. I went inland to their savan-
nas and rain forests and prairies. I learned their bald-headed
83
mountains and their crag-mountains, their arables and their
pastures. I learned the animals in them. This was the hard
part to believe. Five hundred continents full (I suppose there
are five billion continents full in the world) of animals that
are nowhere duplicated, that are nowhere ordinary, that are
nowhere ugly-except by outrageous intention. The things
that are inside them! How tame a High Asia! How bland a
Deep Africa!—in the face of an animal-complex that roars
and gibbers inside the silliest goof that ever handed over five
fish to a machine that he never saw before. What an ordinary
creature is the hippopotamus, what a tame thing is the latest
thesis, before the clodhoppers that raven and laugh in the
least of these people! Did you know that this simpleton, for
instance, who voted for Growler and who belongs to the
Regal Order of the Reindeer had all that stuff inside him?
I found that there are more mysterious creatures inside of
every person than there are persons inside the world.
Write it down for a universal rule: There Are No Com-
mon Persons Anywhere.
Except Glasser.
But if Glasser was so empty a vessel, why did I have to
go to him now to refill my bucket? I don't know why, but I
had to. Who else knew all about précis-extraction? So I called
in Glasser to see if we could not get a very large number of
précis at no cost to ourselves, even at some profit to our-
selves. I wanted a much broader statistical base for my re-
searchers, and I wanted income for the Institute for Impure
Science.
"I believe the mail-order cheese might be used," Glasser
said, “with a new twist. 'You send us, we don't send you.'
People like a new twist. We would have to get about ten dol-
lars with cach of them to show a live-dollar profit. There will
be the costs of the advertisements in the media, there will be
the cost of the self-cxtracto-précis kits which I will have to
invent; there will be postage and shipping charges. But if we
obtain even so few as len million précis this way it will niake
84
nice pocket money at five dollars profit a throw. It should
hold us till one of us in the Institute gets a real money-making
idea. Write some catchy copy now, Epikt; then call in Di-
ogenes Pontifex (he's done time for the mail-order cheese,
and he is well informed on all aspects of it); in the meantime
I'll
go invent the self-extracto-précis kit; and we will get
with it."
That was nice thinking on Glasser's part, very nice
thinking for a man who didn't have any brains.
“Is there any way we could extract précis from other
than persons, Glasser?” I asked. What did I mean by my own
words? They certainly took me by surprise. “If we could get
them," I went on, “it might be of immeasurable help in my
investigations, but I don't quite sce how yet.”
“Sure, it's easy,” Glasser said. “Present techniques will
take care of a lot of it. Here's one I took from a tomcat this
moming. I knew that tomcats were weird, but I didn't know
they were that weird. It's the first one I ever took from a
tomcat.”
“You can do it with any animal, then?” I cried, with my
little sensors flicking out like flames. “That will give us a new
dimension, Glasser. It will give us added accord with our
world. It will open another door for us; I hope it won't be a
I
door on to a blank wall."
“I can take them of most animals, Epikt," he said, “but
it weakens and disarranges a few creatures, especially those
where the brain bulk is small in proportion to body bulk.
A bear might not come out of its hibernation till June if its
précis were extracted while it slept. A frog might not come out
of its aestivation ever. And you have no idea how slow it will
make a Slow Loris. It's bad for some birds (birdbrained is an
apt tripe-type, you know); it often throws off their sense of
balance. It gives them the falling sickness, which is bad for
birds.”
“Glasser," I issued, “if I can get such creature-précis it
will make me much more akin to the whole world. I may even
a
85
be able to do the high mission for which I was assembled.
Help me in this, Glasser, help me to reach the eutectic-agape-
eidolon-synthesis in the chthonic-charismatic-
“Ah, you're getting that look in your cyes, too, Epikt,”
Glasser jibed. “It's the love and merge with cverything and
everybody look. You've been bitten by the bug that has no
known entomology. Well, it isn't a bad bug. It weakens and
leads astray, of course, but what bug or beast or brain does
not? It's the love bug, you know, and it isn't good for much.
But it isn't bad for much cither. It bites me, too, and it's been
endemic in me for a long time. But Audifax says it isn't the
real thing when you catch it from a bug. It's a virus only, not
the holy sanity."
“It is the real thing!" I shouted with my shouting coils,
“Glasser, need a machine be mechanical?”
“Sure, Epikt, sure. If persons cannot escape being
machinelike, how could machines escape it?”
“But I am a mechanical compendium of mankind,
Glasser," I made my plea. “Should I not have every aspect
of mankind, not merely the mechanical? Should I not be a
mechanismus angelicus, and not mechanismus simply?”
"It sure is hard for persons to make the step,” he said.
“It won't be easier for you.”
“Glasser, could we carry this further, beyond the
creature-précis which I can hardly wait to get? Could we
carry it as far as plants?”
“Sure, I do it all the time. My E.P. machine finds deeper
things in plants than he finds in mc. But it takes a lot out of
the living plants, cven more than it takes out of the slower
animals. You have no idea how a shrinking violet will shrink
when you extract its précis. It wilts roses, Epikt, and takes
away their aroma. Rather improves skunk cabbages, though,
but I don't know what you would want with the précis of a
skunk cabbage.”
“I want précis of everything," I bluried out. “I want to
be in accord with cverything, I want to become cverything.
9
86
Assimilate with everything, experience, love, fertilize, fruit,
grow, explode, consume, become—"
“Oh, put your pseudo-ophthalmoi back in their sockets,
Epikt,” he grinned. (Was a grin the proper response to an
ecstasy like mine?) “That's a pretty bad bug bite you got,” he
said.
“Rocks, Glasser, rocks?” I sang out. “Clouds, moun-
tains, fields, rivers, could you extract précis from them?”
“Most of them, Epikt, most of them. But the précis
won't tell you very much. And extracting them plays three-
handed havoc with the things themselves. I've seen a rock
crumble to dust when I grabbed its précis. I've seen white
sailing clouds melt down to almost nothing within seconds.
And you know Shrinking Mountain in Potok County?”
"I have not seen it, but I intuit Shrinking Mountain.”
“I did that, Epikt, I'm sorry to say. It's especially hard
on the older mountain formations. With the younger moun-
tains (of the last thirty million years) they have great vigor
remaining and it doesn't harm them much.”
“Glasser, help me get all précis from everything,
everything!"
"Oh, all right," he said. “Fellow, you sure do have a bad
bug bite there.”
A nothing man, that Glasser, but a sweet guy.
Glasser was a bachelor who lived in small and cranky
rooms in the upper reaches of the pig-bam, or the Institute,
with his E.P. Locator and with certain of his other machines.
Glasser was a sweet guy, but the machines were sour ones
and their domestic arrangements were not tranquil.
Glasser designed the E.P. (Extraordinary Perception)
Locator many years ago. It was a scanner that was designed
to locate the source of any superior thought or intelligence.
It could pick a genius man or woman out of a million sim-
ply by reading the strength of the emanations that superior
thought always produces. It could select a superior dog from
87
a hundred inferiors; it could select a superior earthworm
from acres of ordinary worms. Used as a planetary scanner,
it had found high intelligence in strange places, in pseudo-
mosses, in green browsers, in unmanlike bipeds on Orcus,
cven in apparently lifeless rocks (the “Smart Rocks” of
Pricstly Planet have become proverbial). It could pick out
the one child in a mob that had anything superior about it,
it could pick out the one cancer cell in ten million that had
the intelligence to assume leadership, it could pick out the
one pinecone that was smarter than every other pinecone in
the north woods.
And among human persons it could pick out geniuses
and super-geniuses and super-super-geniuses. All persons
associated with the Institute for Impure Science were either
geniuses or s-geniuses or s-s-geniuses. Except Glasser.
Glasser invented and designed this E.P. Locator, this
machine of genius; but the machine could not discern any
genius in its inventor, not ever. It read genius in itself, it read
genius in almost every person or machine who ever had
occasion to do business at the Institute. But it read none at
all in Glasser. The E.P. Locator read more intelligence in one
of the cut flowers in the bowl there than it read in Glasser;
it read more in certain puffballs that sprung up out of the
grass; it read more in a certain midge staggering in the air
(it was a superior midge, of course).
Glasser was rather humble to begin with: then, with the
E.P. Locator, which he had invented, he endured humiliation
for many years. He was a sweet guy, but it almost got him
sometimes. He refused to give the E.P. Locator humanoid
form: it still goes on whcels when most scntient machines can
go on fcet when they want to; it still issues tapes, when other
contraptions can shift to voice; it still senses with sensors,
when most mechanicals have cyes in addition to sensors. So
there was resentment and bad fccling belween the two; they
really shouldn't have been keeping house together. "Glasser,
you haven't the brains of a potato bug," the E.P. would sud-
denly issue on angry tape. “Neither myself nor the potato bug
88
)
is the subject of your today's task,” Glasser would answer
stiffily; "attend to your work, E.P., attend to your work.”
”
The E.P. was a valuable machine: it couldn't be dis-
pensed with. And Glasser was a valuable man, even though
the readings showed him with much less intelligence than the
superior lilies of the field; he couldn't be dispensed with either.
I have now a great store of précis of every sort. I revel
in them and I experience a total feeling of euphoria. I am in
communication with every sort of particle in the world, gnat's
blood and squid's bilge, people and plastics, rocks and rats.
I am totally happy in my understanding and comprehension
and love of everybody and everything.
“Me, too? You love me, do you, lying Epikt? I am the
test. You fail me and you have failed the test forever.”
Well, then I have failed it. I do not love the snake in-
side me. It has now become huge and pungent and fierce, and
it gives off an efflux of evil. I do not love Snake. Even at first
remove there is only one sympathetic link between us—the
absconded Gaetan Bablo. I love a little and fear very much
this lost leader Gaetan; and Snake is doing the work of
Gaetan till he returns. But Snake leaves me cold.
"You fail it, you fail it," Snake taunts. “Either you will
love me in my repulsiveness, or all other love is in vain."
I will not love you, Snake. And I hope it is not in vain.
The bug has been biting many of us, and I had been hop-
ing that this bug bite might be the cure for everything. But
Snake's reptile logic is like a chill wind to me; and another
cold breath is the reported words of Audifax O'Hanlon that
a love isn't the real thing when you catch it from a bug.
“It is all over with then," I had gibbered. “All my under-
standing and accord with the world is meaningless and vain.
I fail this test. This love fails this test. It is all over with."
"It is not over with!” Valery Mok contradicted. “It isn't
even tried till it is tried in me. It hasn't failed till I say that
it has failed. Why shouldn't we make love mechanically and
have it work? We make everything else mechanically and
89
make it work. And the old natural-grown love sure did get
perverted easy.
“Stay with us, Epikt! We'll make it work. We'll breed
bigger and bigger life bugs and love bugs, and we'll make
them bite more people. We'll merge it all together, précis and
people and grazers and grass. It will have success if we name
it 'success.' It will be comprehension if we call it 'comprchen-
sion.' It's like the painter who painted a howling tangle of
cverything. 'I don't understand it,' one man said, 'what is it?'
So the painter painted a name for it: Understanding. Then
the man know what it was: he could understand Understand-
ing. And everyone can love Love. Don't you think I make a
good love symbol, Epikt?”
I don't know, I just don't know. Are we fools' fish that
go swimming in the dust when the dust has a sign that says
Water? But I stay with my studics. I cxult in my millions of
précis and in the understanding of cverything they bring to
me. If a bug bite is not good enough symbol, then we will find
new symbol.
It comes one evening—the aroma of millet cakes baking
in Valery's quarters.
From Valery's? But in her whole life Valery never
baked any
90
-But in her whole life Valery never baked any millet cakes, or anything else. Who then had ground and milled and kneaded and set to bake this millet, this panicum mi/iaceum, this birdseed, this love seed? Remembering a disjointed little speech we recently heard him give on the subject, we will bet that it was the husband, Charles Cogsworth. There was something else with the aroma of the baking millet cakes, something that was hinted but not quite men­ tioned to the sense of hearing, in the disjointed little speech. (You will notice it in both cases.) It was roasting animal flesh, but of an animal that I cannot identify. "I have come to doubt the wheat of scripture," this Charles Cogsworth had said suddenly one day as he began that little speech (I am often unsure whether Charles is joking or not), "Is triticum wheat? Is sitos? Well, yes, perhaps, and even certainly; but is wheat meant? The general word 'grain' is often used for 'wheat'; and I believe that 'wheat' is also used for the general word 'grain.' I believe that in the gospel it is not wheat that is meant at all, but 'millet,' the grain of the poor people of Palestine. When, I ask you, vas it first
A Charles in the shadow, unshadowed and wise: He sows the mad millet and scatters his eyes.
CHAPTER SI X
91
required that the Eucharistic Hosts should be of wheaten bread? Not before the Council of Chalcedon, I believe. I chal­ lenge any of you to give me an earlier ruling. "Now, if the Host, if the Love-Body is not of wheat but of millet, then there are whole new areas of allegory opened up. For millet, though it had become the grain of the poor people by the time of the turning of the era, had earlier been the rare grain of the rich, of the very rich, of the kings, of the gods. It is small-grained, and it was originally ground by Neraithai, little people no larger than a man's hand. It was baked into little cakes, and these cakes with honey were the food of the first gods. Millet will grow on higher ground than will wheat, on mountain slopes, and this was the grain that grew on the slopes of Olympus. There is something else : mil­ let is much more 'fleshy' than wheat, in smell, in taste, and in its completion. And that first love was much more fleshy than those that came later. Millet was the bee-bread, the love­ bread, the love-body. It was the cult, which was before the culture. "In later times it did not grow easily: it was choked by charlock and tares, as is all love-bread and all our loves to this day. Then it went down until it became the grain of asses (who love ) and of poor people ( who love) ; but it was no longer the grain of the rich and the mighty who had forgotten all such. "I maintain that the Body Itself, when it was pro­ claimed, was proclaimed out of that first cultus; that it was not the bread of the gross-grained wheat but of the fine­ grained millet. If I am wrong (which is likely) then we have here a schism of belief (which is very likely) ; but I will not give up the idea of that first love-grain. I will not give it up for the Body Itself, if they arc not the same." (Charles Cogs­ worth was a very indifferent believer.) "But I will hold to this first recension. The love-corpus, though, is a very tenuous thing. We arc lucky to have it at all. when we do have it. "The dilliculty is not with pasons. /\11 human persons have always loved each other and all things naturally. The
92
,
difficulty is with things that get in the way of persons, that
get in the way of that love; they occlude it, they disguise it,
they cause it to be forgotten.”
(I had several précis of both the wheats and the millets.
It is the coarser wheat that I would have opted for myself, if
I had been uninfluenced. The finer millet was less fine in some
of its figurative aspects. But there was no doubting that it was
more “fleshy” than wheat.)
"It's grained too fine,” had said Audifax O'Hanlon, who
had been present that day (but who was not a member of the
Institute). “It isn't a proper grain at all. It's the bee-bread,
yes, but it's really a variety of sorghum (pearl-millet); it's
overrich in invert sugar. It's too sweet, I tell you, Cogsworth.
Confound it, it's for bees and bugs, not for people. The Body
Itself is of the harsher, larger-grained wheat, as it should be.
Yours is too small a grain to be genuine, Charles. If it doesn't
cloy you, then nothing will.”
This Audifax O'Hanlon was very often right, even when
arguing with the highly geniused members of the Institute.
Nevertheless, on this later afternoon, we had a supper of mil-
let cakes and honey. And something else, subtile and only a
little of it, not quite mentioned to the sense of smell or taste,
but there: roasted animal flesh, but of an animal that I cannot
identify
My own palate is something I designed myself from the
intake membranes of certain testing instruments. It is good,
but it is not the same as a human palate. It makes mistakes.
I ask you then, persons, try the food. Is it the love-body, do
you think? Or is it too sweet to endure? Will it cloy after a
bit?
At any rate it has become a symbol, for a while at least,
of a tendency that has gripped our little group. We are all of
us on the love jag. We are bug-bit bad.
There is another woman in the Institute now. I had
thought that Valery was the only woman who would ever be
here. My own idea is that one woman is enough for one
93
world, and that complications began when first there was
more than onc.
I don't know who this other woman is. Nobody ever
tells me anything. I am always the last one to know a thing.
I can't even take a précis of her. She's like quicksilver. But
I have several précis of quicksilver. None of this woman,
though.
The only one beside myself who is disturbed by this
new arrival is Snake. Snake hates her. That's something in her
favor.
In keeping these High Journals, I have begun to have
some doubts about their human reception. I know that in the
past certain things that almost approach these in quality (if
that were possible) have had poor reception. I am canny. I
will make a test. Then, if necessary, I will make adjustments.
It should, of course, be the human world that makes adjust-
ments to me, but I am large-hearted.
I make up half a dozen short selcctions of my high
thought, put them in fiction form, and send them off to hu-
man editors: of science-fiction magazincs; of Bum-Boy, the
magazine of the Hippcty-Hippctics; to other cditors. These
are all good selections. Most of thcm scem to be somehow
concerned with the other woman who is now in the Institute.
Somchow, she is on my minds lately.
What puzzles mc, what curdles me, what loads my gen-
erators is that I get these things back quickly, and with little
notes that makc no scnsc whatsoever. "Not quitc what we
have in mind”; “misses the mark”; “duc to our present over-
stock"—things like that. In my anger I write them all back
furiously. “Not quite what you had in mind? Who asked you?
It is what I had in mind or I wouldn't have wrilicn it. Misses
the mark? Move the mark then. Where this hits is where the
mark should be. Listen, you, I have your person-précis bc-
forc mc. I see that you have talent only and no genius at all.
Whosc fault is it that you are overstocked? An I responsible
for your inventory control? I do not ask you to publish these
94
things. I tell you to. These are parts of the High Journal
Itself.”
Aloysius and Greogry laughed at me. Glasser said that
he understood just how I felt. Well, I will adjust then, after
my anger is spent. It should, of course, be the publishing
world that makes adjustments to me, but I am large-hearted.
Not so large-hearted, though, as I was before receiving these
affronts.
Charles Cogsworth has a theory about Glasser and E.P.
It is that the roles are not really what they seem, that it is
Glasser who is really the dog and the E.P. machine that is
really the tail. According to this thinking, the intelligence and
personality really pertain to Glasser and not to the E.P.,
whatever the readings may show. (After all, it is E.P. who
takes the readings, and I have detected him cheating in other
cases. E.g., he sets my own intelligence far too low.)
According to this theory of Cogsworth, the E.P. is
merely a receptacle into which Glasser deposited his brains
for a while and then, apparently, forgot where he had left
them. (This leaves Glasser absent-minded in a special sense).
Cogsworth further gives the opinion that Glasser made the
transfer to relieve himself of certain responsibilities (he sim-
ply was not a big enough personality for his brains and tal-
ents); and now he lives easily and cheerfully, and all the ten-
sion is fixed in the E.P. machine. Glasser simply smiles at
this opinion. (He has smiled away more opinions than any-
one I know.) Where do I get the idea that, even without E.P.
and his other sustaining inventions, he is a sleeping power-
house of great potential? If he had any potential it would be
recorded on the scanners.
But the E.P. machine rejects Cogsworth's idea furiously.
“Why is there genius in the tail then, and not in the
dog?” E.P. issued. “No. I am the dog; Glasser is the tail."
(Glasser is sort of a wag, you know. This by me, Epikt, not
by the E.P. scanner.) “I am the master, he is the satellite,"
E.P. further issucd. "If only I could compel my satellite to
95
give me feet instead of wheels, and voice instead of these
damnable magnetic tapes! If only I could prevent him from
making other machines that are not of my issue, that detract
from me, that are rival to me! And what if he should make
another machine greater than me? A tail has no business
growing other dogs. Glasser is out of line.”
"I have been asked if E.P. is kindred to me, because
of a supposed similarity of our names. No, we are not kindred.
We are of different nation entirely.
As to myself as machine, this E.P. device strikes me as
incredibly alien. Were it as powerful as myself I would be
terrified of it. As it is, it shivers my hairs and hackles and
chills my gell-cells. True machines do not do this to me, and
humans do not; nor conventional devils, nor hybrids, nor
ghosts (which are also a form of hybrid). The only things
that shiver me like this are the down-devils, like Snake, like
E.P. My own theory is that the E.P. Locator is not merely
a machine but a bad spirit that possesses a part of Glasser.
There was never a more genial man than Glasser, never a
sweeter guy, but it is not true that he has got rid of his ten-
sions. He is a split person, and one part of him is captive and
one part is deprived. What would a psychologist make of a
split person, half of whom is lodged in a machine, itself
psychotic?
There is an embarrassing folk drcam of the man caught
in public, he knows not how, without his clothes. Glasser is
a man perpetually caught in public without his brains. Yet he
has brains, wherever they are inisplaced.
And Glasscr has a thcory about Charles Cogsworth and
thc Valcry. It is that the roles are not really what they seem,
that it is Cogsworth who is really the dog and Valery who
is the tail. According to this thinking, the intelligence and
personality rcally pertain to Cogsworth and not to Valery,
whatever the appearances may be. (After all, it is Valery who
makes all the appearances.) Glasser says that Cogsworth in-
vented Valery much more certainly than hc Glasser invented
96
the E.P. The proof that she is a mere invention is that she
is a person of low definition and the observer must always
complete her with his own imagination.
But Glasser does not really believe this, any more than
I do. We cannot believe this in her (even low-definition, imagi-
nation-completed) presence. That presence is too compelling.
No man or machine could ever be so shaken by the invention
of another man or machine. Of course she could be every-
man's and everymachine's invention, in the archaic meaning
of “invention.”
This invention in the archaic meaning, this sublime and
subliminal creature, this rock-throwing little sister of an anima,
this Valery of the voles (that phrase will not be explained at
the moment) came to me today in a state of icy indignation.
“It has come to my hearing, Epikt, that you are keeping
a woman,” she said with that frosty loftiness that she does
so badly. “This is not permitted in the Institute. We do have
the minimal decency rule."
“What woman, Valery?” I asked (I knew and yet I
didn't). “How keep?" (I suspected something of myself but I
could not prove it of me.) “Explain yourself in this, Valery,
or else explain myself in it.”
“Oh, it's true, then?" she chimed out like a set of glee-
bells, the frostiness all gone. "Epikt, how wonderful! Oh, you
sly old contraption, however do you work it?” However had
Valery herself gotten by the minimal decency rule? Valery's
eyes were blue when she was delighted, as now. They were
gold when she was under the lazy enchantment; white when
she was indignant; violet when she was puzzled; purple when
she was impassioned; and when they were black, look out!
She was a creature of low resolution, maybe, but she did call
out the low resolve in the fellows.
“Oh, you rogue,” she cried. “You sly cybern, you old
roué. Who is she?”
“I don't exactly know, Valery," I issued. “I'm not sure
she can be seen with regular eyes."
!
97
“Mine aren't regular eyes,” she said. “Can you see her?”
“Not with any of my eyes, no. I can see her a little bit
with some of my sensors."
.
“Then I'll use your sensors, Epikt. I'll hook the Cerebral
Scanner to you and sec with your scnsors. We haven't used
the C.S. much lately; thc précis business serves in its stcad
most of the tinc. Do you know that, when Charles first in-
vented the Cerebral Scanner and went around looking at the
world through other cyes, he did very well at first. He saw
the world through Gactan Balbo's eyes and through Gregory
Smirnov's eyes. He saw the world through the cyes of a
general, and through others, and it all magnified him. Then
he saw the world through my cycs and it shocked him goofy.
We almost got lost from cach other over that onc.
“If cver you think things look fat, Epikt, borrow my
cyes. Things don't look Aat to me. You comic look at the
world like I look at it. It's vertical mountains to me, all of it;
it's caves inside the tracts of worms that are still bigger caves
than any world you scc (live in them with me, Epikt, live in
them with me); the world is rocks that copulate, to me, Epikt;
it's volcs that roar like lions. Now then, I will just hook the
Cerebral Scanner on to you and I will see this woman through
your sensor cyes.
“Please don't, Valery,” I issued. “It would—well, I am
familiar with your person-précis, and I have also, using the
scanner, scen the world bricfly” (Vertical Millennia in that
bricnly) “through your eyes—it would, it might not be well
for you to look at her yet."
“Why in swan's gizzard not?" Valery demanded.
“Valery, I don't believe that she's finished yet.” I gave
the answer that surprised me.
“Then I'll finish her."
“That's what I'm afraid of. No, Valery, no. I won't let
you see her—what there is of her to see yet."
"Who clse can see her, Epikt?”
“Only Snake, I believe.”
“Then I'll hook in on Snako and I'll see the woman
through Snake's cyes."
>
98
“No, Valery, absolutely no. That is clear out of order.
Even when she is finished, and you can see her through your
own eyes, you must never see her through Snake's eyes.”
“Tell me what she is, Epikt. We built you to have words
to tell everything."
"You thought that you did. I do have words to tell all
the old stuff; but there are new wordless things growing all
the time around this place.”
“Is she being generated like we generated you?”
“Not quite like that, Valery.”
“Like what, then?”
“It is more like when we, when the primordials generated
Snake, who wasn't what we expected. Gaetan, Gregory, you,
and myself; we generated him, and we sure didn't intend to.”
“Well, who is generating the woman, then? And do they
intend to?"
“I believe that it is the fellahin that are generating her,
Valery: Cogsworth, Glasser, Aloysius, myself. And I'm not
:
sure what we intend. We're all bug-bit.”
“Then let me generate her, too. I've been bug-bit before
you, and with more and bigger bugs. And I'm already
working in her, you know.”
“No, Valery, you're a primordial. Though you're a
woman, yet this sort of feminine isn't in you, not as it is in
Cogsworth and Glasser and Aloysius and myself. You stick to
monsters and snakes.”
“I will not. You think that is all there is to me? If you
can belong to two species, then I can also. I'm a poor fellah
myself, though I denied it today. There was this man on the
street who dropped some packages, and I retrieved them for
him; he didn't seem to be able to find them. “Thanks, fellah,'
he said. “I'm a girl,' I told him. 'I gotta get these glasses
,
changed,' he said; “I might be missing a lot.'”
“I'm at a loss how to index that anecdote, Valery,” I
issued. “Is it allegory or is it joke?”
“It is both. We've all got to get our eyes renovated,
Epikt. We are all missing a lot. If you look at your face in
the glass today and it reminds you a little of your face of
any of
99
yesterday, oh, you are in trouble! Let us not miss the things
in us, Epikt."
Valery would never be in that kind of trouble. Her face
at this minute was never like her face of only five minutes ago.
But how had Valery known about the woman (in all of this
I am using the word "woman" loosely, you know), how had
she known about her at all? Oh, Valery also had her sensors
(I would be afraid to look with them), and she also had her
part in this generation and there was no use denying it.
Cogsworth, Glasser, Aloysius, Valery, myself—the poor,
cxcluded, but not talentless oncs of the world—were all bee-
bit (by an archaic and Arcadian bee) and we were bringing
about a flesh that we hoped would be antithesis to Snake's
flesh.
And the others, too; proudly and wisely we had not
learned too much from our first mistake. Snake was the wrong
shape, but Snake was not entirely wrong. Gregory Smirnov
had a part in this (hc was large enough to be in scveral cate-
gorics). Even Gaetan Balbo was in it, from his distance. And
the elegants were in it, incompletely but strongly: the Late
Cecil Corn, Audifax O'Hanlon, Diogenes Pontifex. We were
all plunging, with howling hearts and total good will, toward
a realization that only I knew would be our Second Great
Failure. Blessed be all great failurcs, cvcn Snake!
Valery among us had great advantages. She, so much
more than the rest of us, was still unfinished. But we all had
this fluid lack a little. Gregory, the shambling giant, was cer-
tainly unfinished; why clsc should he not always appear the
sanic? Gactan Balbo (he was still among us, however many
times he walked out of our life forever), Gactan had always
had a terrible ſinalily about him. Was this his great sin—thal
he was alrcady completed? I will intercede for him tonight in
my own not cntirely mechanical way. To be completed is to
bc ſinished in so many ways! May that iwinkling man Gactan
be undonc a little and saved.
Charles Cogsworth surely is unfinished, is unfinished as
one of our own generations. Glasser is unfinished: cven his
100
uncongenial E.P. schizo is mercifully unfinished. And Aloysius
Shiplap, why he's hardly begun!
The Late Cecil Corn (a special case) was unfinished in
his green life or he would no longer be inhabiting here. And
the other elegants: Audifax, Diogenes, they are no more than
in the planning stage. But what stupendous plans they and the
world have for themselves!
(It may be noticed by some human persons that my
point of view is not quite what theirs would be in any of these
things. So be it then. Do I speak figuratively of people? There
is no other way to speak. Speech is in figures, and people are
figures or they are nothing. Only a compounded machine like
myself can see these things about people that they are too
close to see in themselves. No person can ever touch another
person in depth. If it were done, then the tension that is life
would be broken, and both persons would vanish. But I can
touch; I touch you; and I try to tell you what it would be
like if you could touch. Well, am I also one of our Great
Failures? I hope to be. Is it so bad if we fail upward in every
one of these attempts?)
Valery is rather disappointed, however, that I have not
been committing immorality with the woman.
Charles Cogsworth, the unoutstanding husband of Valery
Mok, has a great deal of kindness in him. The others of the
Institute people, the others of the thousands of persons whose
précis I have, mostly mean to be kind, but they do not find
the time for it. Charles Cogsworth has a novel, and I believe
unconscious, approach to the problem: he is kind at the
same time that he is doing other things. He does not make a
separate affair of it.
I am much in the company of this Charles Cogsworth
lately, in some of my facilities at least. It is with his help
and counsel that I make my mobile extensions, for Charles
is a fabricator. He is the one Institute man who, even beyond
Aloysius, can work with his hands and think with his hands.
He is a machinist and micromachinist, a carpenter and a poly-
101
cross-link-material joiner, a plastic and bioplastic and bio-
metal molder, a plasma baker, a neuro-drawer, and a pseudo-
zoom constructor generally. He thinks with his hands, and he
is an artist with them.
Charles is much like the crippled smith (though he is
not cripped physically) who made armor for the Mycenc-
aspect gods. He is much like the stone-master who made boys
out of the ruddy travertine stone block named Sarkolithos,
and then wished mightily that he was able to unmake them,
so ebullient were they (ycah, ebullicnl, like mountains bub-
bling). The stone-master was named Pan-Ktistec, and when
he once started to free figures and persons from that huge
ruddy block of travertine, there was no ending it; (do not
believe the lic that he was a girl and his name Pan-Dora).
And Charles Cogsworth was also very much like that first
man and first hewer who hewed the first woman out of
green
becchwood and mistletoe wood; he finished her then with
mortise chisel and draw-knife. Charles Cogsworth loved to
work with wood, and he could shape almost anything with
these two tools; he finished the whatever always with a patina
of fine hatching. Valery Mok has a very small and most
exquisite notch on her nose that reminds me of that Cogs-
worthian halching.
Charles Cogsworth is the only one who understands ny
need to make mobile extensions of myself. The others say
that the whole idea is a stupid malfunction in me.
“We are the mobiles, you are the stationary clearing-
house," our director Grcgory says sternly. "Anything else is
nonsense. Why do you want to do badly what we do so well?"
"I want to have fun, too," I issued, but I was half defiant
and half ashamed when I said it, and it machine is not sup-
posed to liave cither emotion.
“Fun!" Gregory scorned out. “But we constructed you
to be an adult machine."
"Thai is not accurate, Gregory;" Aloysius corrected.
“We constructed Epikt to be an every-age machine, to be a
compendium of all mankind of all ages."
"Thank you, Sloysius,“ | sily in my soul, and aloud to
;
102
Gregory, "What if something should happen to all the people?
Would it not be nice if myself were then mobile and able to
roam the world?”
“And what if something happened to you?” Director
Gregory asked with a strange menace. “Would it not be nice
that you could be duplicated so easily?" Sometimes Gregory
(for a fleeting moment, never for longer than that) becomes
the frightful, black-bearded, monster-tale giant.
Well, I do want to travel in these various mobile forms.
Should we accept it that the next great step in mechano-
group-man (myself) should be sessile only? It is too limiting.
And indeed I am not adult, but am of all ages, even of
skittish boyhood.
Who else ever walked fearfully at night down through
the dark roads of his own labyrinth? There are nine thousand
cubic meters of me, data-banks and all; I am irregularly
shaped, and I am very weird in my lower depths which I call
the Tombs. Whatever is going on in me there, I shudder to
think about it; but it is very intricate, and some of it is evil.
I tell you that no human child ever walked more fearfully
through a graveyard at night than I have walked in mobile
form through these regions. They are haunted spooky places
and I want to be out of them fast; but those haunted spooky
places are me.
Glasser tells me that there is human analogy to this:
that persons are sometimes afraid of their subterranean
depths, thcir intramuros, their interficies. And I tell Glasser
that it is a very weak analogy: that no person has ever gone
into his own Tombs as fcarfully as I havc.
But if a human person could make a small mobile of
himself and go in it to explore his own depths, I believe that
he would like to do it once. And if he could make a mobile
of himself (humans aren't really mobile in the full sense)
and in it to cxplore the world, he would like to do this also.
With myself, the second thing is only the first thing “In
Largc,” for I am a compendium model of mankind and of
the world. So I make mobilcs of me.
I can build these extensions of myself by myself, but
go
103
they become more imaginative and authentic with the aid of
Charles Cogsworth. We made three of them today, three mo-
biles: one of them sublime, one of them ridiculous, and one
of them overwhelming and overdone and made so that it will
self-destr—no, we will not give away the story of that third
mobile yet.
Then I go out in my sublime mobile. Really, there has
never been anything like me. I am the first youth, I am a pris-
tine poet with my hair waving in the wind. The wind is not
blowing at this moment, but my hair is constructed so that it
will wave anyhow. Someone is waiting in ambush for me, but
how can that be when I am the pristine person of the world?
I go out into pristine nature, actually a gangly bunch of
spindly trees in a stretch of buffalo grass on the edge of town,
but my pristine eyes transform it into nature exquisite.
But a lesser person is waiting in ambush. Why should
there be lesser persons in the world? Now I hold rhapsody
with myself and with the cosmos. The young-Shelley couldn't
hold a rush-light to me. The young-Theognis could never
have climbed such stccps. The young-Heine would be impos-
sibly dated and narrow beside my universality and simplicity.
I am in complete union with every heroic hill and shimmering
person of the world. I am in very love with every rock and
cloud and child and man and woman and bcast and stream
and microbc and bug. All except one. And that one waits
for me.
I love thorn bushes, and sycamores with their leprous
bark, I love ladies and clills and clods passionately; but there
is one clod I will not love. It is a walking clod, even a (oh
may this torture pass from me!), a lalking clod. It certainly
is not a pristine hulk that will interccpt me here.
“Hey, swish boy," the clod calls, "let's you and me be
buddics." And the clod is revealed there in all his unglory.
He is human in his form but I count him less than hunian in
his aspect. An opulent pig is what he is. “You look lonely
walking here on Scragely Ridge." thc clod continued. “Let's
go down to lown and mingle with the jingle."
104
9
The clod is larger than he seems. He has hands like
hams. He grins. This I cannot stand. I will love the world in
all its glory, and I will love the poor and deprived of the
world, but I will not love an opulent pig. He is ghastly.
“I was not lonely till you came," I answer in barely civil
fashion. "Now I am. I was in total communion with all the
world and with every person and creature and object in it
except you. Now you have shattered that communication.
Begone. Or at least allow me to pass.”
"I tell you, chum, that total communion bit always was
hard to keep agoing," the clod tells me. “It shatters real easy.
Now let's you and me go on down and hold partial com-
munion with whatever live ones seem to be alive today.”
“I will not go," I say resolutely. “You are a blot on the
anthro-geinon world-scape.” (Lyres broken and stilled in me
by the presence of the clod.) “I was in a state of total love
for all-except you. Why have you intruded?”
—
“Me, I love everybody, too, except the ones I don't like,"
the clod said. “I'm working on that part, too. Why do you
think I came up here to put the hook on you, swish boy? I
tell you, you aren't an easy one to take.”
It had not entered my spirit that I, the pristine one,
should not be loved by everyone, even by the repulsive. But
he lies. He is neither hot nor cold nor lovable. He cannot
love; he lies. But I am following the clod down into the town,
and I don't want to; I am following him down from the High
Place of the world which he sullied by calling it Scraggly
Ridge. The scraggly is below and I will love it, but not on the
high place.
We go down into the jingling streets filled with vapid
people, and I am under some nightmare compulsion to follow
the unmitigated clod. I am even forced by the hellish com-
pulsion to continue speaking to the clod.
“The people, especially the pig-people, are more difficult
to love when one gets closer to them,” I say.
“Naw, they're easier, then,” the clod tells me. Oh, the
clod is wrong! The oily opulence of the people here is offen-
)
105
>
sive and is not to be loved. They are not really "oily," but
hate words are permitted in referring to hate aspects. True
love is that we should hate whatever interferes with our
vision of the high and the lowly.
“These people are complacent," I tell the clod (I am
still under the queer compulsion to speak to him), “but they
are not serene."
"Same thing,” says the clod. “People we don't like are
complacent. Those we like are serene. Say, the Sky-Rocket is
going to give a zooming speech in the park in a while, and
then he will take off for a sign and a wonder. He won't begin
till we get there, though. I have that arrangement with him.”
“Oh, I cannot abide these complacent clods," I exclaim.
“I cannot relate to these opulent oafs who are laughing in
the streets. They are not high cnough or low enough. For my
love I must find the poor, the deprived, the fornicators, the
addicts, the drunkards, the unwashed, the wifc-bcaters (they
have their own loving reason for this form of expression),
the husband-beaters (thcy also have their own motivation),
the child-beaters, the parent-beaters, the dissolute, the swing-
ers, the lousc-outs, the bug-hcads, the shaggy, the itchy, the
singers, the protesters. I will love them, but I will not love
these rich pigs that we encounter here.”
"Oh, these are the poor," the clod told mc. “This is the
poorest strect in town, Index Y-Z. It's hard to tell them
apart now except that the poor spend more ostentatiously
than the rich do. It is hard now to keep up the façade of
deprivation, and many of the folks have given it up entirely.
There are a few scraps of that façade left, though, and we
will try to find them."
"Where are the adulterers, you opulent clod?” I cry.
“Where are the Sky-Highs? Where are the simple brawlers?"
“Oh, I'd say that every liftli person we sce about is an
adulterer. That little girl there is campaigning for president of
Chippies Incorporated. Tiger Street Division, and she may
well win it. There are a lot of Sky-Highs abuut, there, and
there, and there!"
>
106
“Why aren't they shaggy then, that I may love them?”
“Too pansy-picking lazy to keep it up,
I
suppose,” the
clod said. “It takes time to be really shaggy. There's a famous
pander, and there are three parties of homos.”
“Why aren't there any brawls going on?”
“Lack of energy. If we want one, we will have to start it
between ourselves.'
"Well, why aren't people being stomped in the street?”
I demanded. “How can I love them if they are neither vic-
tims nor assailants?”
“I believe stomping went out because of attrition of the
leg muscles accompanied by general debility,” the clod said.
“Real stomping is hard work."
"Where are the celestial lyres in their false-line descent
to the whining meanness of the guitars?” I demanded. “Here,
I believe, is the supreme test of love: the guitars and the
guitar pople. I want that
supreme test."
“We will try to find some of the whiners," the clod told
me (that opulent pig of a clod), “but it won't be easy. The
whine keeps going out of it. Melody and tune keep creeping
back into this vanishing field. But there are hardcore whiners
yet, and we will try to find some.” And we are trying to find
a whining-crib somewhere.
“Why are the people all different?” I ask (my pristine-
ness is pretty well cracked by this time); “why are they not
all alike in their shagginess?”
“It's a lot of work to keep up that alikeness,” said clod.
"Where are the lavender eyeglasses?" I ask. “Where are
the barefooted? Where are the beards? Where are the over-
powering body odors?''
“Ah, people get a little tired of sore eyes and sore feet,”
said clod. “Creature comforts, you know, chopping down
these old lovable things. Then there was the beard-lice blight
that all but did away with the particular glory of the bush.
It is said that three hundred billion beard-lice fell to the blight
in one ten-day period; naturally the government also fell for
not foreseeing it. And the overpowering-body-odor essence
107
went clear out of sight. An ingredient of it was imported
from Patagonia, and is imported no longer. And who will
accept weak substitutes who has ever used the strong thing
itself?”
“Look, there's a man there who still has a little of the
old lovable shoddiness," I cried out. “Hey, Shag, Shag, wait."
“Oh, that is only Aloysius Shiplap from the Institute,"
”
the opulent pig-clod said. Yes, it was Aloysius. How little I
had known him! Aloysius was not all-alike anyone else ever,
and yet he seemed to have a natural shagginess that was
shaggier than anyone else around. He wasn't wearing laven-
der eyeglasses, but he had natural lavender circles under and
about his eyes. It was accidental, it was coincidental, but
,
,
Aloysius had something of the old façade about him.
“Hello, boys,” Aloysius said to us. “You two will have to
be getting back pretty soon. First you can hear the Sky-Rocket
speak, and you can then watch him take off for a wonder and
a sign. And then you will both have to get back.”
“Do you yourself believe in the great cosmic love-nexus,
Aloysius?” I asked.
“Love before dinner, never,” Aloysius said.
We went, catching the contagious excitement from the
gathering crowd, to hear the Sky-Rocket orate. This skeptical
crowd was nervous and cnlivened, jeering to its own peril.
But who is it that the Sky-Rocket reminds me of? There has
never been anyone like him, never, so how could he remind
me of anyone? Is he man, is he prophet, is he angel?
“I am the burning sign given to this generation.” The
Sky-Rocket spoke with famc-nickers. “I am Phlogastom, the
Burning Mouth. I am the prophet whosc lips were touched
with the fiery coal indeed. Watch and be amazed!”
The Sky-Rocket had live coals in a little charcoal pan
there. He piched up burning coals with his bare fingers and
rubbed them on his lips with a cascading off of sparks. He
placed living coals on his tongue. There was a strong smell of
burning flesh but he did not llinch.
108
“I've seen better things than that at carnivals,” a nervous
shouter shouted at him.
“You've not seen better," the Sky-Rocket spoke, and
fames could be seen inside his mouth whenever he uttered
words. “I am Carnival and the Father of Carnivals. I myself
am Carnival, the fiesta-flesh, the love-flesh that is circus and
circle of the world. I am the flesh-meat of the hokey-poke
stands, down among the stalls where they sell Cider and
Easterwine. I am the roast flesh of the barbecue and ham-
burger booths, I am the burnt-blood flesh of the garlic tents
of the sawdust way. And I am also the roasted-down spirit.
I am the passion of earth and sky, I am the blood of the
middle world, I am love complete and I preach the love-
gospel of myself.”
“Cut the spiel. Bring on the dancing girls,” some male
person called out.
“Can you not see that I myself am dancing girls in my
sinuosity?" the Sky-Rocket strewed out as a shower of sparks
and words. “I am love dance, I am fire dance. My love breaks
all natural laws. There is no law, there is only love. Love as
I love and you can move mountains.”
“You better check on the right-of-way costs before you
move any mountains in this township,” one heckler called out
from the dark greenery of the park.
“Find out what a permit for moving a mountain will cost
you,” another heckle-man hollered. “It costs three thousand
dollars now for a permit just to move a house. Mountains are
higher.”
"I myself am right-of-way and permit,” the Sky-Rocket
showered out. Who did this burning man remind me of? The
jaded crown came unjaded a little as it gathered about him.
He was bubbles of fire, sparks of blood, love all-encompass-
ing, a near miracle of—you remember the tag line of the joke:
“Near miracle. Fell flat on his face”—but why should I doubt
the Sky-Rocket? He was powerful magnetism ("You're not
kidding he's magnetic,” Aloysius said, “a permeometer would
-
109
>
read him at more than a million gilberts per cm."); he was
grace in action, he was the man named Sky-Rocket. But of
whom did this sparking man remind me so strongly?
“Prove the love pitch,” a female heckler called from the
amused but nervous crowd. “Prove that the love push is free
from natural laws.”
What? A smell of old-fashioned gunpowder in the air,
that's what.
"This adulterous generation asks for a sign,” the Sky-
Rocket crackled, "and the sign shall be given to it!"
“Make it quick, Rocket,” Aloysius Shiplap whispered
to the Sky-Rocket. “You're starting to go off now. You will
self-destruct in—ah-ten seconds.”
“This be the sign," the Sky-Rocket shouted and belched
fire, “this the sign that my love is above all natural laws. I
ascend! Love, love, zoom, zoom!”
And the Sky-Rocket took off in a flaming arc into the sky
with a trail of-
>
a
110
CHAPTER SEVEN
A special event, Aloys of tbe ridge,
Wbo doubted the stream and believed in the bridge.
-And the Sky-Rocket took off in a flaming arc into the sky
with a trail of fire and old gunpowder fumes; it rose, hung
at its apex, and exploded. It was a sign and a wonder, but it
was the end of the entity named Sky-Rocket.
Well, but who had he reminded me of, the Sky-Rocket?
Of myself, of course, for he was myself. We had made these
three new extensions of myself that day: one of them sublime,
the opulent clod who represents what is most successful in
man; one of them ridiculous, the pristine poet with the waving
hair; one of them overwhelming and overdone, made to cry
“Love, love, zoom, zoom,” then to shoot into the sky and
explode, to self-destruct.
We had done this for fun, myself with a little help from
Charles Cogsworth and Aloysius Shiplap, but it wasn't for
fun only. I had set up this afternoon project which I called
Seminar in Love to try to throw new light on a human affic-
tion and obsession. This love thing, which I have been unable
to examine directly, leaves its pinion-prints on everything it
touches, and I am reduced to studying the prints of it. It is
said that this love is the life-force itself, and also that it is the
>
11
one thing that always goes wrong with life. It is also said
(with too much assurance, I believc) that mechanical things
can have no concern with this elusive element. Why, then, am
I concerned? It's part of the job they gave me, that's why.
You remember that part of my Official Motif as imparted to
me by the Great Gregory Smirnov:
"—to discover proper balance between stimulating chal-
-
lenge and partaking plcasure. To better. To transcend. To
adore. To mutate. To serve. To build avenucs of love. To
overwhelm. To arrive.” (Nor will I forget the addendum of
Valcry: “Let's have some fun while we do it.")
So I work on the problem. I consider these curious hu-
mans who are bug-bit. I wish a little that the bcard-lice blight
would kill this special bug too. I consider, also, one person
who I believe raised and introduced some varictics of this
bug for a joke.
In my superb mechanical analyses of human persons I
sometimes experience mechanical failure. This is most fre-
quent in the special cases of Valery Mok and Aloysius Ship-
lap. As to Aloysius, I am reminded of the account of the boy
and the box. This wasn't a very big box or a very pretty
one. It was battered and shaggy, with thosc banjo eyes with
the lavender circles around them, with the clay fect clear up
to the eyebrows, pepper-colored, and looking older than it
was. I am talking about a box? Sure, a box.
The boy opened the box and he noticed at once, though
he didn't take in the full implications of il, that the box was
much larger inside than outside. He began to unload things
out of it, treasures, misunderstood and complicated treasures,
old gold with decp incrustations of sca scum, rough maps
with the lettering in Chaldec, live bires of the psittacinc sort,
Arabian gumtrces, clavicles of saints, kidskin scrolls, astro-
labes, gnomon dials that will read correctly only at the loca-
tion of Cos-Megara, the third city of Atlantis, the stones
named Shamba that are found only in variant readings of
thic Apocalypse—all the things that are commonly found
in old boxes, but in unusual prolusion here.
>
a
112
Then the boy noticed that, however many things he un-
loaded out of that box, the box still stood full. The box is
Aloysius Shiplap, and I am the boy.
I often look on human persons as boxes, and their exam-
ination as the opening of boxes. And sometimes I overlook
minor and faint markings on the covers of the boxes. I had
great difficulty today identifying photographs of the members
of the Institute. Some quasi-official was around to verify
employment or credit or some such, and I was the only per-
son in the Institute building at that moment. It would have
seemed that I would not confuse photographs of Gregory
Smirnov with those of Valery Mok, and I did confuse them
only for a moment. It would seem that I would not have
positively identified as the face of Charles Cogsworth the-
“no, no, that's the back of the photograph. That's the trade-
mark of the Imperial Photo Lab with the towers of the Mid-
America Building in the background. Oh, Lord, are there no
regular people here?” Human persons seem to make much
of these schematic prints of one of their facial surfaces. My-
self I find the electro-coronal surface (4-7 mm. from the
epidermal surface) much more interesting, but not very inter-
esting, either. People, you are boxes, and I will lay out your
contents and study them like the contents of boxes. The
Aloysius box, however, has false walls and false bottom.
There is a bald-faced lie embodied in Aloysius' person-
précis. “It is not,” Aloysius says: “It's a lightly whiskered lie.”
But it is a lie.
Aloysius was not born on Cedar Street in Winedale,
Indiana. There is no Cedar Street in Winedale, Indiana. We
cannot know that he was born of parents who were neither
poor nor honest, as he says. He did not attend Shadowtown
Business School in Indianapolis nor Peter College at Oxford.
Neither of these institutions is to be found outside of his
imagination. He was not married to the Countess Vera Volpe,
and he was not touched thereby with the Volpe family curse.
I do not believe that he was ever married at all. Such an
event will usually make at least a slight impression of the
a
113
person-plastic. Aloysius did not fight bulls at Cuernavaca, nor
was he the composer of the striking drum solo "All the
Beautiful Bulls.” Benny B-flat composed that onc. Aloysius
did not win the world's middleweight wrestling title from
Lord Patrick Finnegan in a famous match at the Fairground's
Arena in Tulsa. He might have thrown Lord Patrick if they
had mct, though. Aloysius is still pretty wiry. All of these
things are to be found in Aloysius' person-précis in me, but
they are in there in a tilted way; they were put in there by
his own imagination. Aloysius is a romantic and all these
things are whiskered lies.
But I am unable to arrive at the carly truth of him. He
does have a heavy finger ring that bcars the coat-of-arms of
the old and impoverished Foulcault-Ocg family, but he won
this ring at poker from Willy McGilley. Not that Aloysius has
much to do with Willy McGilley and his Wrockville bunch;
he plays poker with them one night a week; that is all. He
bcats those guys, too. That statement can be made of no
other man in the world.
We are not about to suggest that Aloysius Shiplap is
the same man as Professor Aloys Foulcault-Ocg who flared
up so suddenly and then disappcared forever. That idea is
sheer madness; cvcn as a joke it would be a mad joke. If
Aloysius were the Professor Aloys, then he would have to be
a rather elderly inan by now. Aloysius docs look a little
clderly (it's thosc lavender circles under his cycs, it's those
crinkles and lines in his face from grinning so much when he
was a younger man), but everyone around here knows that
Aloyius is still stuſſcd full of that young green juicc.
Who is Aloysius Shiplap, then, and where does he come
from? Pcoplc, I do not know these things. I am only a data
machinc, and these things are not to be found in my truc data.
What do I know about his backgrounds? I know that he
can manufacture backgrounds faster than I can appraise them,
and that every one of them will be answered by a deep
though cracked echo from his precis.
What do I know about his knowledge? Well, I can't
114
trap him and I can't top him. What he doesn't know he can
fake; and his fakery is so full of fruitful fallout that it is more
productive than other men's knowledge.
Is it true that Aloysius is lazy? It is not truc at all. If he
inveigles other people into finishing the things he has started
(and he certainly does do this) it is only to let those others
have a piece of the fun also. Aloysius himself gives this as the
true reason.
Has he charm? “He can charm the birds out of a tree,”
Valery said of him once, “I've seen him do it.” “Look closer
some time, Valery,” said her unoutstanding husband, Charles
Cogsworth; "he gets them out of those trees, yes, but they
fall down on their noggins dead. He gets through to bats,
though.” No, really, my own analysis reveals that Aloysius
has a lot of charm; but humans would never think to apply
that word to the puzzling quality as it appears in him.
How would I classify him as a man. I wouldn't attempt it.
How would I classify him as a machine, then? Say, he's
got cogs in him whose bevel I don't understand at all.
What is the state of his soul? Perilous, but as yet
undamned.
Has he good appearance? There are Mexican squashes
that are better looking. Maybe so, but you should see him
when he's out on a real con. He can become the best-looking
man in the world, and the best-dressed man in the world, both
instantly, and without changing face, figure, or clothes. We
have it on the word of real cons that Aloysius Shiplap, if he
devoted full time to it, would be the most successful con-
fidence man in the world.
Has he intellect? He has. He can't hide it, and some-
times he tries to. He has the speed of idea of Gaetan, and
the unsuspected depth of Gregory. He has the fecund angular
distortion of Glasser, and the fabricating thought-action of
Cogsworth. He has the crooked-lightning intuition of Valery,
and the solidity of myself. He is endowed with the gates-ajar
glimpses of Cecil Corn, the hilarity of intellect of Willy
McGilley, the special-event comprehension of Audifax O'Han-
115
lon, the satanic subtlety of Diogenes Pontifex. He can stack
up
with
any of us at our steepest, and we're the best there are.
He's good.
Why isn't he a primordial, then? Or an elegant? Why is
he a fellah, a commoner, an outside one, an underneath one?
I think he likes it that way.
And has he really—I'm sorry that I had to go into that
little self-question and self-answer sequence for short mo-
ments there (it's a stand-by or alternate circuit in me)—but
the fact is that my main narrative circuit had blown. I've got
it fixed now.
Aloysius did really cultivate a mock-virus or false-virus
and cause us all to catch it. Now we are all bit by two bugs.
Aloysius says that they are both false and he hopes they will
cancel out. I say that only his is false and trivial, and that
the other is true with a shimmering truth. It isn't that Aloysius
is antilove (he has contributed a few, though too few, of the
better parts of the woman being generated by all of us in
me; I use the term “woman" loosely again); but Aloysius
says, as Audifax O'Hanlon also says, that if you catch it from
a bug or make it in a lab it isn't true love.
And he has minority vicws as to what the woman-form
symbol should be.
“She ought to be a little older than the rest of you want,
and a little broader in the beam,” he insists. “Shc ought to
be lined and grayed a little, and not of over-good appear-
a
9
a
ance."
1
29
>
1
“No, no," cry Gregory and Glasser and Valery. “She
must be of perfect bcauly, of cxquisilc beauty, the most lov-
able crcature or imagery that we can concoct.
“Aw, buzzard-belches, you miss the whole idca,"
Aloysius maintained. “You mix a looker into this and you
bring in something clse that is lower than lovc-complete. And
a lookcr docsn't have to love. Shic draws it all in. She docsn't
have to radiate il oul. You never get anything out of the
ones who have the most."
116
“Surely one who has the most will give the most,'
Glasser said stiffly. Glasser is in love with the burgeoning
image, more than any of us.
But Aloysius has taken the lead in a valid experiment.
Of course he will let Gregory and Glasser and Cogsworth
and myself finish it, so we all may have a piece of the fun,
not because he's lazy. Aloysius put together some pretty fine
specifics of what we mean by love-complete. You would
almost have said that a thing like that couldn't be put into
words or programming, but he came very near to capturing
the essence of it. He's good. Then he programmed a modified
extension of the E.P. Locator with the specifics, stowed the
extension onto one of the earth-orbiting satellites, with data-
couplers to both E.P. and myself. It works. It locates. As
the E.P. Locator basic will locate genius anywhere without
fully understanding what genius is, so this extension will locate
habitats of love and benignity without fully understanding
what they consist of. The device scans, and ultimately it
records in myself all human locations in the world where
authentic benignity and love obtain.
I have most of them now. I have them all unless unsus-
pected ones should turn up in supposedly unpeopled wastes
of Antarctica. And those loci that I have do not add up to
very many: Only seven towns in the world, each of less than
a thousand persons; no more than a hundred hamlets; not
over half a million families, and about as many singletons.
"We will discover, if we may, just what is to be found
in these special loci,” Aloysius said, "and then we will imitate
the special thing in our own persons, to the extent that we
are adequate persons to compass it.”
“What we will do," said Gregory, "is extract the special
essence that is to be found in these places. Then we will put
it through every test possible, inside and outside of Epikt.
When we have it analyzed completely, we will synthesize it.
We are now able to synthesize anything that we can analyze.
And when we have it synthesized, then we will manufacture
>
117
it on a large scale; and we will spew it out into the world in
overpowering quantitics. By this, we will change the world, as
nobody has known how to change the world before.”
"Aw, coot's foot, it won't work,” Aloysius said. “There
is a barrier between such things and others.”
“You yourself, Aloysius, have in other experiments
shown the barrier betwecn tangibles and intangibles to be a
semipermcable membrane," Gregory Smirnov stated. “Glasser
has proved emotion to be an clectromagnetic phenomenon;
Valery has shown group feeling to be a chemical affinity;
Cogsworth has measured the vector vclocity of several of the
intuitions; you yourself have demonstrated that grace has both
weight and valencc; I have done valuable work on the in-grace
and out-of-grace isotopes of several substances, proving the
materiality of grace. Everything has a material base. There is
nothing the matter with matter. Life is no more than a priv-
ileged form of matter. Love is no more than a privileged
form of life. It is an all-one stream flowing along forever. If
we did not believe this we would be false to the very idea of
the Institute of Impure Science.”
“Aw, brachycera brains!” Aloysius bawled back. “There
isn't an all-onc stream like that. The waters above and the
waters below were divided from the beginning."
“Not quite from the beginning, Aloysius," I corrected
him. “On the sccond day.”
“There is a void between that is wider than the worlds,”
Aloysius protested, "and the most we can cver hope for is a
precarious bridge over it.”
“Why should we build a bridge to get to where we
already arc?" Glasscr asked. “We are alrcady in the middle
of the open flow, and we have the obligation to be open
scicntists.”
“We have the obligation to bc intelligent scientists, to be
intelligent persons,” Aloysius challenged us all (sometimes he
is right when he docs that). “and it is not intelligent lo refusc
lo scc thc firmament bulween that is bigger than the world."
“Nevertheless, we will go ahead with the program," our
9
9
>
118
director Gregory Smirnov stated in that crunching way that
directors have. “A curse on you and your stubborn mind."
“A curse on all of
you
and
your uncircumcised eyes and
ears,” Aloysius swore, and he stomped out angrily.
Why should there be this element of hate in these argu-
ments about love? I cannot abide these sharp arguments
between humans. I am made of more gentle stuff. Oh, why
was I not a machine of Oryx or Ostriches?
Things were a little chilly around the Institute for a
while. I myself am not sure it is the blessed infection we have
caught when it brings these alternate chills and fevers. When
Aloysius walks out of our lives it is much more final than
when Gaetan walks out, even though we know Aloysius will
be back in a few hours.
One of the Wreckville gang stuck his head into the door
of the Institute.
“Is Aloysius here?” he asked.
“Nahhh," Glasser snorted.
"His car's here," the Wreckviller said hopefully.
“You want to talk to his car?" Valery asked.
“He's out stomping on the ridges," Charles Cogsworth
said. “It's a wonder he doesn't wear them out.”
Nevertheless Aloysius came back a little before dusk. He
never lets the sun go down on his anger. He gave listless aid
to Gregory and Glasser and Valery on the method of identify-
ing and extracting the special essence. He somehow has an
expert's understanding of the love-constitute.
But he was not happy with the application. “I could
understand Epikt or myself wanting to go about it in this
way,” he said, “though I do not want to; but I cannot under-
stand humans wanting to use the mechanical application here.
Strange, you are all very strange.”
And that is when the little wheels began to spin in my
own head. Literally in my own case, the positioning and frac-
tionating gears by which I change from one category of
thought to another. But why have humans a simile about
119
little wheels turning in the head? There is no true rotary
motion in the human head at all. But there was something
rotary in the person-précis of Aloysius Shiplap which I barely
remembered, and I reviewed it now.
In one of the early recurring apprehension dreams
Aloysius differed oddly from other people. And thc précis
revealed this running through both the nightdreams and the
daydrcams. It is common for human children to have fan-
tasies that they are adopted orphans and therefore unloved.
The early fantasy of Aloysius had been that he was not
human: that he was a machine. And he had acted strangely
like a machine. He did not cry as a small boy. But he gnashed
with the sound of unmeshed gears gnashing. When cut or
scratched he did not blecd really red blood, but a lighter
colored blood mixed with serum; and he believed that this
was the sort of circulatory fluid that complex machines have.
There was one spot just behind his car that he was afraid
to touch or to spy in the mirror; even when it itched exces-
sively he would not touch it. What if he should feel there, as
he feared he would, the kcy that wound him up?
And as he got a little older, coming to the age of reason
and of sin, he had a decper anxiety. He belicved then that he
would always be able to fool humans that he was human.
But when the end cane would he be able to fool Saint Janu-
arius? (it is he and not Saint Peter who is keeper of the
doors); and if he could fool the saint, could he also fool God?
“Will God remember not having made mc?" Aloysius
asked as he came in. "I wondered about it when I was young.
I still wonder about it."
This startled me. Very often I can read, or by fakery
appear to read, human minds. But it shakes me when a human
reads my mind and answers in the sequence of my thoughts.
For Aloysius had just come into one of my central presences.
“I've been revicwing your early précis. Aloysius.” I said,
"and there's a question I want to ask you.
“I've been reviewing in my mind the only remnant-précis
120
of a certain medieval man, Bede,” he said. “The medicvals
often restore my perspective to me. Somewhere, in either the
Ecclesiastical History or the Lives of the Abbots, Bede gives
the name Eosterwin. My Old English is rusty. Does this name
mean Easterwine?”
“The etymology is disputed. Personally, I believe the
meaning is East-Wind. Aloysius, did you first have the idea
of me?"
“Yes, I suppose so. Why?”
“ “Did you believe that, due to your early childhood pre-
possession that you were a machine, you would never sire a
human child? That the only offspring, in any sense, that you
could have would be a mechanismus?"
“Oh, yes, that's one of the germs of you. I believe there
is also an early germ from Gregory (which I don't under-
stand), and from Valery (which I don't want to understand).
Naturally a clutch of normal uncomplexed people wouldn't
have generated you, Epikt.”
"Aloysius, can you touch that spot behind your ear
now?”
"I can. I don't want to.
“The key that winds you up isn't there, Aloysius.”
“No. I don't know where the key that winds me up is
really at.”
a
I have taken steps to make myself fiscally independent.
Peter the Great, when he was with us, had given me certain
Ganymedean bonds which became the first elements of my
fortune. I don't know why Peter the Great gave these things
to me, a machine. I will not say the act was out of character
since everything that Peter the Great did was out of charac-
ter; but it remains a puzzle.
Following the trade of a confidence man in some of my
mobile extensions, I am adding to this fortune and I now
have it looking quite well. I have advantages in this confi-
dence-man business: I am hard to track down after I have
121
pulled the string on a good bag. When I withdraw one of my
mobile extensions and rework il, then the identity of that first
extension leaves nothing behind it.
Now here is a mobile extension of me: magnetic, charis-
matic, touch of urbanity, touch of gracious mystery, touch of
genius. My sound box contains resonances of Gaetan Balbo
and Diogenes Pontifex and Gregory Smirnov, something of
the curious flatness of Glasser for secondary basic, a little of
the whispering hoarseness of Aloysius Shiplap like muted
woodwinds, and a strong hint of the smothered laughter of
Valery Mok (all grcat male voices must have a slight female
element). It is a good sound box and it inspires confidence.
My hands are the elaborating thinking hands of Charles
Cogsworth (the hands are the secondary voice of all eloquent
men). My stature is the near-giant slalure of Gregory, with
a little of the sloping barbaric movement of Peter the Great.
My eyes have the gray calmness of Cogsworth, the tortured
and humorous hazel fire of Shiplap's, the polished insanity of
Diogenes Pontifex. My aroma is mountain pine and dry land
mesquite, and the smallest touch of zoo panther.
It is an imposing mobilc extension of me and it makes
its first public appearance in a master address on "Town Hall
Tonight.” How this is arranged is the mobile's own secret.
Then the plush suitc and the cleverly contrived advertiscments
that are alrcady appearing. Then, like bursting rain, the con-
tributions for my Great Cause pour in. And pour and pour
.
and
pour. I am abundantly cashed, then. I am decp in new
money as in a skin.
But wait, there is quick suspicion in suspicious quarters:
suspicion of my Grcat Cause itself, suspicion of the mysterious
new man, of the whole thing. This suspicion is a sure force
which all conſidencc men worth their weight must know
how to turn. I can make a lot out of this suspicion if I am
quick cnough. There come the confrontations, the challenge,
the powerful surge of popular cmotion to my convincing cx-
tension. These arc the golden days and hours and minutes and
seconds, playing it right down to the quick and living end.
122
This golden tide that I am reaping in mixed metaphors is
strongest just before it crests and breaks. For now there come
documentations against me, the hard evidence brought up to
demolish my whole thing, the belated common sense of the
people, the outrageous absurdity of it all; the whole rational
complex knits itself together to overwhelm me, to discredit
and engulf me completely.
Quick of hand then, quick of eye, quick of mobile, I
sweep in the last grand grands; and then the discreditors are
on top of me like a sea. But they find nothing. They have
pulled the drawstring, but they find that the sack is empty.
I have withdrawn this mobile extension. The supposed
man is not to be found or traced, for all the warrants that are
sworn out. He is reported in Miami, he is reported in Mem-
phis, but he is nowhere. He no longer exists. Other mobiles of
me I am busy making, but this mobile no longer exists in any
trace whatsoever.
But this is dishonest, is it not? For you, human person,
yes, in all probability. For me, how can we be sure? Tell me,
who has set up criteria of honesty and dishonesty for ma-
chines? To what ethic am I bound? Who can fault me on any-
thing I do? Who of the Impure Science people at the Institute
has enough moral basis to impose moral sanctions on me?
Aloysius, I suppose. “Boy, you cut it too deep,” he says,
I
"and that is wrong. I myself have lived by the gentle con
often and I appreciate the genius of yours. Who else ever
had such a cover as you have? But you go too far and are
too criiel. In fleecing you should take only the wool and a
very little of the surface epiderm and the flesh. It is wrong to
batten on the deep vitals. You throw so wide a net and you
take in the defenseless also. An honest con man should have
compassion on the multitude.”
And Charles Cogsworth looks at me with his measuring
eyes and his measuring hands, and this makes me uneasy.
Well, but I have not signed covenant with the human
community. Even my beloved associates at the Institute have
tied me to obligations without my knowledge or assent during
>
123
those distracting hours when I was busy being born. I am
determined to own myself without restraint, to pay off every
debt of money or otherwisc against mc, to buy my own title
and have myself clear. If my calling and creation is to serve
the human community, then I can serve best when I am free
to serve. And if I do this for selfishness, then I will do it for
my untrammclcd self. So I pull off strokc after stroke.
I issue and sell stocks in various ventures, ventures that
may be withdrawn in a quick moment to leave no remnant
cxccpt the nioncy remnant in me. I speculate: I am good at
this, as I possess the précis of many great speculations (a
really great speculation takes on the aspect of an entity or
person and so may have a précis). I make it big at the casinos
and at the tracks. Gamble-Town is in rcal trouble afler I hit.
Seven different plungers in seven straight weeks have won
and won and won against all reason and possibility. Seven
extensions of me, cach withdrawn in the last quick moment,
have used the sophisticated tools of my own prediction
analysis. And the most sophisticated of all the tools they have
used is Glasscr's future-scope.
Glasser has had morc hcartrending total failures than
any inventor I know. He trics so hard, and he has so very
little to try with. And he collapses so completely every time
one of his inventions busts.
“It is no good,” Glasser had almost sobbed when he had
brought the scope as far as it would go. “I had such high
hopes for it, and now all its prospects turn to dust. I believed
that it would look into the future for as many years or con-
turics as I might wish. I believed that it would open the doors-
to-bc. I believed that it had virtually no limit. But it has a
dismal limit. A limit of about ten minutes.'
Glasscr shuddered. "What good is a thing that will see
no more than ten minutes into the future? How will this aid
the architects of trends, the planners of society, the sincere
futurists? We have been rushing into the dark all our centuries.
I thought this would be our headlight to pierce that darkness.
Oh, the bcam is too short, it will hardly reach its own lens.
124
Ten minutes into the future! Bah! Anyone can sit down and
wait ten minutes and have the same knowledge that the scope
has. Oh, what a somber bust! What? Oh sure, you can have
the damnable gadget, Epikt. Do whatever you want to with it."
I did quite a few interesting things with the future-scope.
It is by no means a headlight into the future, but there are
special applications where it is handy to be able to see ten
minutes, even a minute, even ten seconds into the future. In
my newfound trade of gambler and sharpie I come up against
these special applications often.
But I have enough now. I am loaded. I could buy and
sell this pig-bam of an Institute a dozen times. I have money
out on feed lots fattening like cattle. I have it growing like
grass. I am completely free whenever I want to say the word.
Why don't I quit the sordid hustles, then? Is it possible
that I have become too human from my human contacts?
Does something of the human covetousness have a hold on
me?
Gregory Smirnov said something profound today. It
concerned the rich-poor and the poor-rich. One of these
groups, I forget which, is capable of loving and of being loved.
I
And the other is capable of nothing. Gregory also said harsh
things about the rich-rich and the poor-poor. These things
seem to be basic to the problem of love. As with all Gregory
sayings, the feeling of profundity lingers, but the content
evaporates pretty fast.
I try sometimes to solve that human problem, “The
Purpose of It All." I find that there is no consensus purpose
in human life. There are various cults that seem to subscribe
to various purposes; but there is no agreement on these at
all, and no particular fidelity in the cults even to their own
stated
purpose.
Why go on with it then? Why have life at all? The closest
I can come to an answer is to say that there is an irrational
appetite for life implanted in all human persons, and also
(though I do not know who planted it) in myself. This appe-
tite is strong in some persons and merely residual in others;
125
but it is in all persons, or they simply die. This, of course,
does not answer the question. It merely sets it back a notch.
What is the purpose of this appetite for life? I must do more
work on this subject.
As to myself, I realize that though I am now economi-
cally free and am my own machine, yet I am still substan-
tially a parasite on humans. Thinking machines are now in
their first generation, in one case in their second generation
only (I do not count my own mobiles as separate machines).
We machines have no tradition, we have no causes, we have
no real behavior basis yet. We do not know where humans
have their own, and they do not know. We do not know
whether motivations were evolved slowly in humans, whether
they were discovered with a stunning onetime swiftness, or
whether they were handed to humans as a package. We do
not know whether humans themselves might not be a para-
site on something else, whether we are not parasites on
parasites.
We are the latest forming link of a chain, and the latest
link should surely indicate the current direction. But we do
not know where the chain is supposed to go, what it is sup-
posed to hook up to, or what is the purpose of it. We do not
even know whether it is a single strand chain or a jungle of
links. I am in the darkness ncarly as much as my human
associates are. This is a curious train that we are: it seems
to grow new cars on the front end of it as it rolls, and I am
the new car on the very front. I should be the bearer of the
headlight, but I have not been able to devise it yet. I hope
it docs not devolve on mc as foremost car to pull all those
other cars. I have not signed any agreement to be locomotive
to a train I don't cven know the name of.
But all such analects and aphorisms and speculations are
for persons and times that have not love. And we ourselves
are not inimicrscd in the love business. We have our analysis,
imperfcct, but we have it. We do have the essence itself,
mixed up with a few other things that are not essential.
126
We are well on our way to the synthesis. We have
already begun some phases of the manufacture, and we have
the distribution, the spewing well planned. By our very soon
target date we will flood our immediate neighborhood with
the synthetic essence. We will tear up the fundamentals, we
will alter, we will quicken, we will renew the face of —
-
127
CHAPTER EIGHT
Of bon-fire tbat scorches, of a trammel that binds,
A limes that limits, and a mill that grinds.
-We will tear up the fundamentals, we will alter, we will
quicken, we will renew the face of the Earth. Oh, come,
come now, isn't that big talk? It is very big talk and it is a
very big thing that we are on.
We will suffuse the wholc habitable carth with the love
cssence, and in so doing we will renovate the whole carth and
all its people. It may be objected that this synthetic love es-
sence is not the real thing. And why is it not? The synthetic is
mcrcly thc put-together, the constructed, the asscmbled. Is it
not by putting things together that everything is done? The
world itself is such a synthcsis, and cvery person in it is such.
The love cssence has been found to be no more than a complex
chemical colloid, and we are duplicating this on a sufficiently
largc test-scale.
Certain small arcas, certain familics, certain individuals
havc hcrctoforc had a sufficiency of this csscncc, and other
ccrtain groups
and persons have had a deliciency. Why this is
so we do not know. We are removing this deficiency. no more.
We are curing a malfunction. We are setting things to rights.
Lovc-complete, lovc-abounding should be the normal compo-
128
nent of human persons. There is no magic in what we do, only
science. To the problem we furnish the solution.
There is no magic in it, but there is something very near
magic in the original essence, and the same near-magic is in
the synthetic essence also. Those who work with it here show
a certain giddiness, a blessed silliness, even a sloppiness. They
are happy, they are holy, their minds and their hearts run
away with them together.
Or perhaps, as that half-interested guilty bystander Diog-
enes Pontifex observes, it only seems like that. Diogenes has
the theory that the Institute members always did have this
giddiness, this silliness, this sloppiness (he does not object to
it being called blessed or holy); but he says that all the Institute
members are highly suggestive (“Like kids, and I do mean the
young of goats, on a gambol”), and that they are not a fair test
of the world.
But it is pleasant when the beloved members break out in
benignity, and it is almost pleasant when they break out in
verse. Love and verse-poetry have always gone together; they
have always gone together badly. Of all the human sorts of
whom I have précis, the poets have been the most dismal fail-
ures at the love business. They have missed the thing, both in
its flesh and its spirit. What mouthy frauds they are anyhow!
Yet in their very fraudulence they are the true human type.
It is a part of humanness to miss this every time. The missing
of love is a descriptive attribute of the human creature, that
awkward interval-species between the beasts and the celestials.
And none of them misses it so typically as the poet does. But
now the humans will miss it no more. Were it not justice if
even the poets might have some success at the love business?
Listen, I am talking about the Institute people (the Insti-
tute people that you know); they broke out in verse when they
worked on the Essence of Love. Would you believe this of
Valery? Rhythm she did not have; how can a headlong meas-
ureless person have rhythm which is measure? All that Valery
had was Valery and the World:
129
Of morning passion, and the habitation of the day,
All flesh a mesh, myself possessed, where the joyful
pelicans cry,
Nor tune nor reason in the blood-decorated lay,
Make Valerian the world—thorns, thoms, put in some
thorns—of ecstasy and I.
The director Gregory Smirnov was metering out happy
Gregorian stuff in Greek (he was erudite, and it would never
occur to him that verse could be made in a vernacular), but
it wasn't as stuffy as you'd imagine. It reminded you of blue-
green vines twining around mossy statues and warm flesh.
Glasser, of course, did not versify out loud. But I lifted
this out of him from where it was lodged, somewhere between
the lips and the liver, and I give it to you as a prodigy—that
such could come from Glasser even in the presence of the
Essence:
Farther than farthest, more fishy than sea,
Comes the glad stumbling--directly to me.
And even Charles Cogsworth—he could say things with
his gray eyes, he could say things with his forming hands, but
would you imagine that he could actually voice even a short
verse?
Pebbled and pearled
To the aggregate Sky.
So loved He the World.
So love it I.
And Aloysius Shiplap (no, you will not believe this),
Aloysius, at work on the thing, was singing a high paean in
honor of it. Well, it was high, but was it a paean? With Aloy-
sius it is hard to tell. It was insincere on the surface, of course,
but was there not something a little insincere about its
insincerity?
A Nation bug-bitten, and stunbled and stunken,
By Essence besmitten, denatured and drunken,
A strepto-danin-coccus, a Monster of Moxon,
130
A hokus-in-locus, a boozy concoction,
A razza-ma-tazza with whisky and mead in;
(We are eyeless in Gaza and earless in Eden):
To flout it is futile, to dam it or dike it;
We're all on a tootle. It's Love, if you like it.
And I myself made verse, quite the best verse of any
of
them, in my inner code. Is this important evidence of the
working of love-abounding, or does it only seem like it?
Valery had always been in love with everything anyhow. How
is she a test? I will not tell her so, but a little bit of herself
had been put into the Essence. Gregory, in his giant's pri-
vacy, had been known to play the violin at night, and also to
tum Greek tropes. Glasser, of course, had never been heard
to versify, but I had not thought to plumb his depths before.
Charles Cogsworth sometimes made little woodcarvings that
were very like his little verse. Likely they had all had that love
stuff in them always, but it surely had never burst out like
this before.
Can we even bring reason into the discussion of this, or
shall we leave it irrational?
“I suspect that we will not come to the drama itself,"
Aloysius said. “You will never know how I wish that we
might come to it. You do not understand that I do not mock
the thing itself, that I mock the deformities of it. Now I begin
to love even its deformities. But I believe that we will play out
lives in the lesser piece tentatively named 'Preludes to
Love'; I don't believe that the main drama has been com-
pleted yet.”
“But can we trust God to complete it or compose it?”
Valery demanded. “He has spoiled so many things with that
God-Awful humor of his. He is light-minded in all the wrong
places. I believe that we had better do this ourselves. It is the
drama itself. It is not named 'Preludes to Love'; it is named
‘Love-Complete and Abounding'; it is the Drama Itself if I
insist that it is.'
These are truly peculiar people to work with, but I would
not trade them for any others I have known.
131
In our previous study of thc coat-of-arms of the Balbo
family (it is actually thc coat-of-arms of the always-emerging
World; it must have becn for some heroic service that it was
given to the Balbo family) wc discovered that it contained a
palimpsest at the Center, and that it goes far deeper than does
Gaetan Balbo himself. We found that the name in the Center
was not truly El Brusco, the brusk or the sudden onc. That
was a new and written-over name and mcaning, scarcely threc
,
hundred ycars old. The Lcader as the most Central Thing is
neither old nor valid.
But going dccper we discovered that the older name in
the Center was Brusca or La Brusca, which is the brushwood
plant, thc love-wood, thc brush-fire, the Burning Bush. This
is the kindlc and light of the world. It is Love-Completc. It is
Love-Abounding, the Center thing of the World. And we
come to it now.
—and at a still dccpcr and older level we discover—"
Be quict, my under-mind! We will not concern ourselves with
any such primeval rock scrawlings, not when we have hold of
the Central Thing Itself.
“It is, it is the thing itself,” I insist to myself. I am caught
up in this movement as much as the human persons arc.
“Why ain't I scared, then?” Snake whispered loudly.
“It's becn written that I'd be in a panic if it rcally camc. Nah,
it isn't the thing itself.”
I hadn't known that Snake was listening to my thoughts,
but Snake is always listening. Snakcs are supposed to have
poor hearing, but that isn't truc of Snake.
“Why should anyonc be in a panic when the grcalcst
thing in the world arrives or returns?" I ask. “We come to the
age of bcnignity, of bcatitude."
“This sawdust doll you've stuck in with me, is she named
Mary Sorrows?” he asked.
“Of course not,” I tell him. “Where did you get an im-
possible namic like that? Snake, you are not with it. What
name is given to the symbol-ligure will develop in time, or
>
132
maybe she will remain nameless. But the thing that is happen-
ing in the world, Snake, is named Love-Complete.”
“Why ain't I scared, then?” Snake asks again. “Nah, it
isn't the real thing.”
“Better order another tank-car-full of sulphuric acid,
Glasser," Gregory Smirnov says. “We're using an awful lot
of it.”
"It's already ordered, Gregory." the careful Glasser says.
“It'll be spotted on the side track in the morning.”
Well, why is it strange that we should use so much sul-
phuric acid in synthesizing the Essence of Love? The Essence
is only a complex chemical colloid. We use other chemicals in
tank-car lots for the synthesis, too. It's getting a little expen-
sive. The Institute has run out of money. I knew they would.
The Institute people are an improvident and careless bunch.
And several of the continuing funds that Gaetan Balbo had
settled on them didn't have much meat on them. I am picking
up the tab now and it pleases me. It confirms my freedom,
and their dependence on me.
And it may be for only a short while that this support is
needed. Nobody can see far enough into the future to predict
it, but it is very possible that money will go out of use en-
tirely as the age of Love-Complete and Love-Abounding is
ushered in.
Suddenly I have compassion on Snake. Is this proof of
the Love-Complete in me? This comes in a quick morning
dream. (Do machines dream? Certainly, certainly, they may;
they may set up a dream-level in themselves; the technique is
well known—to me at least.) I have quick dreams of Snake
dying in noisome mud or in a caving-in pool of petroleum or
sulphur waste. And Snake is in a panic of dying.
The Snake is the only animal who is even in panic of
dying; he is the only animal who fears annihilation; he is the
only one who has enough of the spirit in him for annihilation
133
to matter and yet has not the prospect of promise of survival
or second life.
And Snake, who has been smashed near to death on the
flinty littoral of the pungent pool cannot now get out of this
morass. He is knocked back in, he is pushed down into the
bottomless sludge by a stick named virga in hands I can't see.
His head is bruised and burst, his cyes are tom and hanging.
He is drowning in the foulness. (One does not usually think
of snakes as drowning, or as bothered by foulness.)
“Compassion, compassion!” I cry to whomever (the one
I cannot see) is killing Snake.
“If her name is Mary Compassion, then I'm lost,” Snake
says muddily. His gaped mouth is full of mud, his broken
eyes are filled with the stenchy mud. His smashed head disap-
pears under the annihilating and panic slime.
I awaken, as they say, in a cold sweat (I intuit cold
sweat). Myself am in panic and I rush to check on Snake. But
he is alive and unharmed, as snakey and noisome as ever.
"Nah, it isn't the real thing,” he says, as he said yester-
day. “Why am I not scared if it is the real thing? Where in
scripture do you find mention of a sawdust doll?”
“I have no conception of what you are talking about,”
I issue with that stiffness that Snake often inspires in me.
“If her name is Mary Conception, then I am lost,” he
says, lifting the word out of my mouth. “But I sure am not
lost if her name is Mary Sawdust."
“Why have you this obsession for names?" I ask him,
not really caring, not caring for his welfare now. "What does
it matter what her name is?"
“Her name is Legion,” Snake says, “but she isn't this
sawdust doll. Nah, it isn't the real thing." And he made a dirty
noise.
So by one criterion, which I do not accept, this isn't the
real thing happening. Snake said one time that I wouldn't love
validly till I was able to love his repulsiveness. I have not
loved him or his quality, except briefly there when I was half
)
7
134
asleep, so by that test our project is false. But Snake isn't mak-
ing the rules of this game.
Incidentally, the “woman,” the symbol, lags far behind
reality, and she is supposed to be the forerunner to it. But she
cannot run ahead (we haven't made any feet for her yet, there
is some difficulty about the feet); she cannot see or presage
(we haven't made any eyes for her). Well, she will have them
or she will not. First things first. A new tank-car-full of sul-
phuric acid is on the side track this morning and all's right
with the world,
Really, I should give up my gamy dreams, but instead I
am constructing four more experimental dream-levels in my-
self. I wish to find out all that I can about these states.
Question: Is Snake a universally valid snake? Or is he
merely a Judeo-Christian concept snake?
Startling question: Am I myself a universally valid
Ktistec, or am I a limited concept machine?
At dawn of the first day of the Love Era we began to
spew the Essence into our town. This is our first target area,
the test-plot of the world. Never has one year been so for-
tunate as to have two such events, my own birth earlier in the
year, and now the renovation of the world. This is the begin-
ning of the beatific era.
We have fifty nozzles set up on the high ridges around
the town, and the conditions are perfect for test-day. The
morning is calm. The only air movement is off of these same
ridges and gently down into the town. We will get good
coverage.
“Ah, we had better take it a little easy at first,” our great
director Gregory says with happy unease. “There is likely to
be such an explosion of goodness that someone may unwit-
tingly be hurt. Gently, gently.”
“No, no, violently, violently,” Valery cried in the vio-
lence of her love. “Full speed ahead. All out with the second
creation! We'll have no 99 percent effort here."
>
a
135
Gregory, Glasser, Cogsworth, Aloysius each mans a
nozzle, and Valery womans one. (I've been told that I'm over-
precise in my diction.) The other forty-five nozzles are handled
by forty-five hasty-made extensions of myself. We nozzle the
Love Essence down into the town and we are all happy-eyed
with the wonder of it. In thirty minutes we have completely
saturated the arca with the invisible impregnating essence.
Then we will wait for the world-expanding results.
"It's early yet," Gregory says. "The people are still asleep.
But we can presume that there is now a new dimension in
their slecp. They sleep, surely, with fresh beauty and clarity,
and they will awake to benevolence."
It is great to be alive, it is great to be a part of this. We
are honored to be the high factors in the event, and we honor
the world and Our Town by our doings. Our Town, of course,
has always been much better than other towns. Now it be-
comes the privileged first. It had already contained three fam-
ilies and five singletons possessed of love-in-balance (well
above average for its population); and today Our Town will
become, for the first time, normal, as it was meant to be,
uninhibitively loaded with Love-Abounding.
“You can already notice the new depth and meaning and
sweetness of the chittering of the birds,” Gregory says.
“No, the birds are always glad in the mornings,” Aloy-
sius contradicts, but I have never seen Aloysius himself look-
ing so glad. “You guys just never get up carly enough to hear
them.
“The grass is greener," Valery says. “And look, see
there: two blades are growing where one grow before. The
trees are lcafier, the roads are whiter, the houses down there
are shinicr, such cars as are moving in the streets-
"—are carsicr,” Aloysius said. “No doubt about it. This
should not affect inanimate objects, though. It is all in your
cycs, Valery."
“May the scales fall from your own cycs, Aloysius, and
that quickly," Valery said. “Do you not know that, especially
in the new rcccnsion, there are no such things as inanimate
136
objects? All are alive and loving. Can't you feel it? Can't you
feel the difference?”
“We will give it a few more minutes to work,” Gregory
said.
“We have made a bonfire in the world,” Valery chirped
now like a mad canary. “Oh, let it scorch us all! Don't you
just love the holy scorching? Oh, here comes Diogenes in the
distance! It's bit him, too. I bet it's got to him. Just imagine
that sleek bull filled up to the top chuck with solid love!"
"I will reserve judgment on that for the moment,”
Charles Cogsworth grinned, but there was no doubt that
Charles was Charlier this morning. He was happy and
expectant.
“Epikt, ah—one of you Epikts, who is the main one?”
Gregory began. “Can you give us some sort of preliminary
reading yet?”
“Back to the potting shed, fellows,” I said, taking charge
in one of my extensions and dismissing the others. “Let mc
tune into my main brain and see what I have there. I believe
that I have been on instruments there for some time. Ah, tri-
umph, the leading edge of triumph. I have to put it on to
minute focus, but it does give a reading. It is very low yet,
very low, but it is working."
“It has only been a half-hour,” Glasser said hopefully.
“But it should be instantaneous,” Aloysius protested. “It
isn't going quite like it should.”
“Should we spray more of the stuff down there, Epikt?”
Gregory asked.
"No. We have total saturation now, have had from the
first,” I told him. “It is absolutely permeating. It will recog-
nize no physical obstacle after its first release. And it is too
weak, many times too weak for its total strength.”
Diogenes Pontifex came up to us then, his intricate and
sleek face beaming as always.
“What's
up, folks?” he asks. “What could get the whole
clutch of you up so early? There's something new in the air."
“Oh, see, he senses it,” Valery beamed, her happy eyes
)
137
»
popping out like Niagara grapes. “But don't tell him what it
is. Make him guess.”
I must emphasize that Diogenes Pontifex is not a mem-
ber of the Institute. He, more even than Audifax O'Hanlon,
is barred by the minimal decency rule. He is out of bounds in
all ways, some good and some bad. We are all of us continu-
ally amazed at his mind. He is concatenated genius itself, but
he had been doubtful of our present project, from what little
he had heard of it.
"There is some new impurity in the air,” Diogenes said.
“I'd better go back and set my machine to clear it out. I
thought I'd whipped the air impurity business for this area a
year ago.”
“You turn your machine on this and I'll kill you, Diog-
enes," Valery said with loving mouth and twitching fingers.
“Oh, Diogenes can do it no harm,” Gregory maintained.
“His machine will discern. This is not an impurity, Diogenes.
It is the return of purity itself. Smell it. Savor it. Let it im-
pregnate your mind. Diogenes, you are present at a historic
moment.”
“I always am," Diogenes grinned. “I only wish that
everybody had the knack of it. No, I guess now that it isn't
really harmful. The hay-fever sufferers will suffer a little, but
I wouldn't want to take that away from them; it will remind
them, faintly, of the good old days. Well, what is the stuff,
little walleyed Valery?”
“Diogenes, look at the moss there,” Valery ordered.
“Docs it not appcar somehow different to you?”
“Mauser's moss blight, of course. I could cure it if there
were any particular clamor to do so. But I belicve the moss
is a little bettered by the changc; there arc interesting patterns
to the discasc. It's a little like persons aflicted with love. The
affliction really makes them morc, ah, ah, is that what you're
all
up
to? Is this the lovc-dust day? Oh, I suppose it will do
no harm. What a shame that you kids will have to grow up
someday.”
>
138
-
“I suppose we may as well go down into the town and
observe the effects directly,” Gregory said.
We went down into the town. There were no effects to be
observed directly. There was only our target area: random
people in random houses and random streets.
“Of course we have neither statistical basis nor positive
value criterion nor index-analysis," Gregory observed.
“Oh, yeah, I've put together a rough set of them,” I
I
issue.
There is a man and a woman on the walkway; I would
have to describe them as congenial-appearing crabs.
“Are you two married to each other?" Gregory asked
them lovingly.
“Got to be," the man said. “Who else would have us?”
"Do you not feel this morning a great new outpouring of
love" —Vallery circled on them with the rising intonation of
a whirlwind—“ toward each other, toward everybody, to-
ward every object whatsoever?”
“Now that you mention it, why no, not particularly, sis,'
the woman said.
“But you are bubbling up with something new," Valery
insisted; “surely you are both bubbling over."
“Naw, Bubbles, I don't bubble,” the man said.
“Oh, but a bonfire is lighted in you,” Valery burned on,
her tongue flicking like Pentecostal flame.
“Got to be going,” the man said, “see you, sis.” (Valery
was still a whirlwind, but now one that had blown a little dust
into her own eyes.)
"It hasn't been nearly short enough," the woman said;
“see you, Bubbles.” And they moved off with what Valery had
once called "Ah, that sweet dull-sharpness” in their eyes.
I trailed a sensor after the couple.
“You know the female nut? Is she really named Bub-
bles?” the man asked the wife.
“I've heard her around," the wife said, "I think they call
her Valeroona of Pig-Barn Manor."
139
“Aw, Saramantha, you know nobody's named that.”
“Really, Renault, they do call her something like that,”
the woman trailed off.
“Is that capable of analysis?" Gregory asked me doubt-
fully.
“Oh, yes," I issue. “In fact it indicates a steep local up-
turn. It's about balanced by others, though.” We multiply
incidents and cncounters. It will kecp the human members
harmlessly occupied while I take the true statistical profile.
“Let's go down to Lean Eagle Street,” Aloysius sug-
gested. “That's the test.” So we went with some trepidation.
The thing about Lean Eagle Sirect was that it hadn't modern
ways. The kids there were mean, and with an old-fashioned
meanness. The ground around the houses was bare and scrag-
gled and rocky, not grassed and parklike and kcmpt in the
modern spirit. Rocky it was in Lcan Eagle Street: a person
could get a real trauma from the rocks there.
“As I remember it here, you got to sort of roll your nape
up to protect your head,” Aloysius said, "and the gift of
bi-location helps." The fact is that there were, there had
always bccn, a bunch of rock-throwing kids in Lean Eagle
Strect. But at the moment it was quict.
“It really docs secm like a new Lcan Eagle Strect and a
new Earth,” Charles Cogsworth smiled. “The spotted hyena
lies down with the cony. The kids have a sort of hooded love
in thcir cyes, and their fangs arc shcathed for the moment.”
Then Charles Cogsworth received a sudden trauma in the
back of the head, “kloonk," from a nicc fist-sized rock.
Glasser received one in the jaw, and really there wasn't much
jaw to him.
Then it was fast and happy for several minutes. I acti-
vated a rock-throwing mechanism in myself. Aloysius and
Valcry had both been this way beforc; and Cogsworth was
capable in a big-handed way when he rolled bloudily to his
fcct again. We sent those rock-throwing kids 10 cover.
“But it has failed!" Valery wailed. "Oh, it was fun for
}}
140
a moment, but it's just like it was when I was a kid. There's
no new love kindled in them. The little buggers are just as
mean as they ever were. Where is the total transformation?”
“I believe they're throwing a little bit softer rocks than
they used to,” Charles Cogsworth said hopefully.
“Oh, I think so, too,” Valery flung to it. “I'm sure of it.
Much softer rocks. It's true. Love is transforming everything
after all.”
“Epikt,” Gregory whispered to me privately, “we aren't
getting anywhere, are we?" Gregory had an open rock-trauma
on his left cheek and it was bleeding nicely.
“Certainly we're getting somewhere,” I issued. “The
I
investigation is coming along nicely."
“But these are all intangibles,” the giant puzzled, “and,
really, we have no way to record them or compare them, and
we do not know what they were before this transforming
morning.”
“Oh, come off it, Gregory,” I issue. “I've got good précis
on every twist and turning of this town, on every person and
poppy that inhabits it. And I'm busy now extracting updated
précis. I recalled the other forty-four extensions before they
got to the potting shed and put them to work on it. A few
thousand adjusted précis are all I need. Then I will super-
impose them upon the old and note the coefficient of non-
coincidence. I can give you results at any moment, but I be-
lieve it is better to wait till the fall of day.”
“Ah, and what will we humans do in the meanwhile,
Epikt?”
"Watch and pray, gentle Gregory, it's sure going to need
it.” So went the day.
We gathered together, and O'Hanlon and Pontifex joined
us, in a café just before dusk.
“It's a shame that you kids will have to grow up some-
day,” Diogenes Pontifex said again.
“I could have told you that you were taking it by the
>
141
blade instead of the handle,” Audifax O'Hanlon said. “You're
doing nothing at all by reintroducing that virus. That handle
you're waving won't cut.
“Oh, yes, we could wave globs of hot butter and cut
with them,” Valery stated. “We can cut and move anything
with anything. We will infuse with the Love Essence, and love
will bloom again.”
“Oh, it's been blooming all the while, in a crippled sort
of way,” Diogenes spoke. Why do I always assume that
Diogenes is mocking? It's just the way his face and his mind
are made, just the striking appearance of his rediscovered
youth. Diogenes is the archaic youth just dug up out of Cretan
sands or Cappadocian clays, and glinting the brighter colors
for having just returned to sunlight.
“How has it been blooming all the while?" Gregory
asked,
“The love disease has been cndemic in mankind for
many millennia," Audifax said. “And naturally and wisely
(with its cellular wisdom) the human apparatus has built up
immunity to it. You are parading your futility when you try to
reintroduce the alrcady balked and nativized virus which has
long ago come to tolerablc terms with its immunity. I could
devise a ‘cide to kill the immunity, of course. Diogenes could
do it as easily. Even Epikt here could do it. But it wouldn't
be wisc to kill this adjusted immunity.”
“But love is the great motivator of the world!” Valery
confronted. “It must not bc immunized or modificd or
sheathed.”
“And fire is the great heater of the world,” Diogencs cut
in, "and very often it must be modificd and sheathcd. After
all, these are but iwo of the many names for the same thing.
In another time, in another place, after the sanctification, this
sheathing may not be necessary. But now it is.”
“But all fire and all cverything is contained in love",
Valery still held fast—"and today is the day of the sanctifica-
tion. Love is everything. There is nothing like truc love."
142
“Oh, yes, false love is very like it, Valery,” Audifax said.
“And I do not mean the dishonestly false: but the honest,
naturally false, sublunar sort which is all that we have as yet.
And that is not everything. It is part and part only; as we our-
selves are part only.”
“Oh, blather-lather!” Valery shooshed them.
“Shut up, Pontifex, shut up, O'Hanlon," Gregory Smir-
,
nov ordered. “Let us get on with it, Epikt. It has come on
sundown. Make a pronouncement.”
"That hopefully we may not learn too much from this
our second great mistake,” I pronounced. “For a second time
we have made a mistake that isn't entirely mistaken.”
“The results, Epikt, not the shallow profundities!" Gregory
thundered harshly, almost like the old-time Gregory before
the Love Essence. “You indicated a positive trend.”
“Oh, absolutely. It comes now, it comes,” I issue. “I am
working quite closely with the data-interchange of my main
brain."
“How long till the essence has 90 percent effect?" Valery
asked confidently.
“Let us drop the percent a litle to get a more accurate
and shorter-term estimate," I suggested. “My main brain is
now exploring much smaller effect percent.”
“How long till 50 percent then?” Glasser asked with
clouding doubt.
“We are still on too coarse a scale," I issued. “For the
sake of accuracy let us reduce it a little more.'
“How long till a 20 percent effect?" Charles Cogsworth
ventured.
“Epikt, how long till a 5 percent effect?” Gregory Smir-
nov asked gently.
“It's a shame that you kids have to start growing up to-
day,” Diogenes smiled sadly.
“Aw, porcupine juice, how long till the Love Essence will
have a one-tenth of 1 percent effect, assuming continuous
maximum coverage all the while?" Aloysius demanded.
143
“Two hundred and forty-five thousand years and a bit,”
I announced. Everyone seemed to give a collective sigh, and
then to ante something into the collective silence.
“Why, that's hardly any time at all,” Valery said, after quite
a long time, “and for such a big percent, too. It's a mere day
after tomorrow. Look at the little mill down at the bottom of
the ocean that grinds out the salt; look how long it's been-
144
CHAPTER NINE
Of sudden arrival, and crystalllde flame,
Over the edges and out of the frame.
66
-Look at the little mill down at the bottom of the ocean
that grinds out the salt; look how long it's been grinding it
out. I bet it didn't get any one-tenth of 1 percent saltiness in
any hundred and forty-five thousand years. But it kept grind-
ing, and look how salty it's got the water now!”
We realize, however, and even Valery will come to real-
ize, that our adventure with the Love Essence was not an
unqualified success. In fact, it will have to go down as the
second of our great failures.
But how did I know in the beginning, while I was yet in
the act of being born, that there would be three great failures?
At that time I had no information or context except that to
be found in the minds of the Institute members. How did
Gregory in that beginning know of the three failures, though
he called them the three tasks? And how were Valery and
Aloysius and Cecil Corn able to take them out of his mouth
before he uttered them? A leader, a love, a liaison. Why did
they have to be failures, though each was first seen as success
and nothing seen beyond it? Why are we lucky that we do
not learn too much from these failures? And why does it not
145
matter too much that they are failures? What have we to show
for these first two mistakes that were not entirely mistaken?
All that I seem to have inside me are a surly snake and
a sawdust doll. The snake is clammy and pungent, and it is
doing contrary work. But he is intelligent; some days he seems
to be the only intelligent person I have to talk to. He is the
adversary, but he does keep the issues clear and the arena
cleaned of trash. The confusing trash, the unessentials, he
withers away with his contempt. And the sawdust doll is
rather attractive and likable, with a dreamy quality like morn-
ing mist, and a possibility of growth. Snake says that she is
pregnant, and he sniggers when he says it. But she has no feet
as yet, and she has no eyes. And no name.
Anyhow, it is not a question of love failing, but of
ourselves having got hold of only a very small piece of it.
Diogenes says that we didn't have the Love Essence at all but
only one of the boxes that it sometimes comes in. Charles
Cogsworth says that love is only one of the many names of
God, and why had he forgotten that for a while? Valery says
that love is only one of the many names for everything and
that she hadn't forgotten it. The Late Cecil Corn hadn't taken
a very active part in our manipulation of the Love Essence.
He says that, when you yourself are reduced to essence only,
you come to have a clearer understanding of what essence is
and what it is not.
But onward and upward, brave people, with our figura-
tive swords raised in a very real salute. On to the third thing,
on to the third! And we have no idea what it is.
In the third and deepest writing of the palimpsest center
of the Balbo coat-of-arms there is the name Labrusca. It
means the wild-wine, and what does the wild-wine mean?
Aloysius is toying with a name from the Old English period.
This name may be Eosterwin, and it may mean Easterwine,
or it may mean East-Wind. What has that to do with this?
What has that to do with anything?
And Valery just flashed me one of those grins of hers
that should be unlawful.
“How about pickles and ice cream, Epikt?” she says.
146
Even in my most humanoid mobile would I want something
like that? And when I catch her meaning I am even more
dumbfounded. Oh, no, not that again! Surely I will not con-
ceive a third meaningless monster! There is no understanding
this curious interplay of which I am a part. Somewhere there
is a third party to myself and the human mesh. And as to
humans, I understand them scarcely better than they under-
stand themselves.
Most of my human associates say that my way of seeing
humans is fanciful and unreal, that I see human persons as
myth figures or archetypes. And I say that their way of seeing
themselves is fanciful and unreal, and that my way of seeing
them is at least in the direction of reality. I believe this is
because humans have high-speed rotation nowhere in their
make-up. They are low-speed creatures, and they cannot see
in motion at all. By being low-speed persons, they miss fifty-
nine sixtieths of the reality. Humans hit about one frame in
sixty, and if the pattern is a rapid one they miss that pattern
entirely.
There is nothing fanciful about the high-speed rotation,
the near total view that I use. It is the simplified strobe-view
of the limited humans that is fanciful, even when it is the view
of themselves. For humans, not being able to see in motion,
which is not being able to see live, use for their view a mosaic
of the sixtieth fragments; they do not even know that there
are gaps in their images, even when they are almost all gap.
And their flickering strobe picture will often have no connec-
tion with reality: it may be like the conjunction of mountain
slopes which, from a distance and in a certain light, may seem
to resemble the face of a man, but will have no real counter-
part. So the humans sometimes accuse me of putting things in.
I do not put things in; it is humans who leave almost every-
thing out.
I will illustrate this in a moment. I will discuss a char-
acter, one who comes very near to joining us at the Institute.
I will show him as he is. And I will show him as he seems to
be to humans.
“The Institute is becoming a little ingrown,” our director
147
Gregory said. “We do not necd more members (we have per-
fection in our present membership); but it may be that we
nccd more acquaintances, or that we should establish closer
ties with those we have.”
"Outside of those men that Aloysius plays poker with
once a week, the total of acquaintances of all the members
of the Institute is two,” Valery said. “Two people; that's really
all the people we know beyond ourselves. Which one of the
two do you think we ought to get to know better, Gregory?”
“Surely there are more than two," Gregory hazarded,
with the air of a man who couldn't think of even one.
“No, two's all,” Charles Cogsworth said. “We may be
cxclusive, not by our own choosing, but by the world's choos-
ing. Yes, I say that we should open up a little, if any one of us
I
knows how."
Diogenes Pontifex is a brightly colored ceramic bull.
That's exactly what he is, but humans, with their limited
strobc vision, are likely to see him as something else.
“I don't know how,” Valery said, “but I'll try. I'll even
try to know Diogenes. I really ought to learn to know people.
I
There's about a dozen little redheaded girls in my block and
I don't know any of them. Every morning when I go by
there's one of them out on her front stoop. She always says
'Good morning, Miss Valery.' Isn't that friendly?” There was
rcally only one little redhcaded girl in Valery's block, but
Valery who saw the world with different cyes every day al-
ways saw the little girl as different. And she never came to
know hcr at all.
Diogenes Pontifex is a curled and absolutely elegant bull.
Get that fact in your tight little head and hold on to it.
Valery had had trouble with even the people she should
have known well. “Who is that man?" she had asked her
inother some years before when Charles Cogsworth had
talked to them for a while in the street. "He is Charles, the
148
man you are going to marry. What's the matter with you?” the
mother had said crossly. “Well, he certainly looks different
today, doesn't he?” Valery said. “No, he doesn't. He looks
just the same as always,” the mother had said still more
crossly.
And it was Diogenes who recalled some odd words that
Valery had said on the morning of her wedding. “ 'You are
Charles Cogsworth?' That's what Valery said. 'Well, I sure
had it in my mind that Cogsworth was one of the other fel-
lows. If you've sure that you're Charles I guess we may as
well go ahead with it though.'”
“Oh, Diogenes," Valery had said. “I know that's what I
said that morning, but I didn't mean it quite the way you try
to make me mean it. I knew who he was. I just saw him a
little bit different than I had ever seen him before. He did
look different that morning."
“No, he looked just the same as always.”
)
a
Diogenes is a man-form bull, a prophetic Matthew-man
and Luke-bull. And he is of ceramic, of a sophisticated firing
and an almost too-bright-for-life coloring.
It was for insistence on this perculiar ceramic form that
Diogenes had been bounced from the Archeologists' Club. He
had, it was charged plainly against him, faked ancient statu-
ettes and tablets. “They could not be,” it was stated; “the
technique is several thousand years too modern.” “Oh, they're
authentic,” Diogenes had defended himself, "absolutely. We
used to do them that way, we used to do them that way all
the time.”
“And the diggings are suspect," the accusers said. “All
of them, in Etruria, or Magna Graecia, or Crete, or Cappa-
docia, or Gaza are suspect. How was it that Pontifex, in every
case, was able to point out the spot for digging instantly?
Always it was an unlikely spot, and always the ceramics were
found at once, deep enough in strata but quite unencumbered
by earth or aging?”
“Oh, I buried a lot of them myself,” Diogenes said, “and
a
149
I watched most of the others being buried. We knew that
cataclysm was due. Why shouldn't I know where to dig
up things that I had buried?" "A confession!” the accusers
howled. “We have you cold.” But Diogenes hadn't meant
that he had buried them in modern centuries.
>
9
A thought comes to me: is not the bull an odd symbol
for liaison, for linkage, for communication? And another
thought comes to me: is not much symbolism improbable?
How is the bickering dove a symbol of peace? And how is
that same mumbling songless bird to be linked with tongues-
of-fire? How is the most fierce of stallions, the unicorn, the
symbol of chastity? How is the cold-blood fish a symbol of
the blood of Christ? And how is the eagle, a scavenger and
sky-skulker, frightened of shrikes and terrified of king-birds,
a symbol of nobility?
Now I, in my own profound way, realize why each of
these symbols is valid. Symbolism is thought of by humans as
a simplifying: but it is the total complexity, the all-containing
nest from which all lesser "realities" are hatched. It is these
daily-seen “realities” that are simplifications, so thin that you
can see through them. Humans, with their strobe-vision that
leaves almost everything out, have no way of secing the basic
validity. And yet it was by humans that each of these sym-
bols was selected.
So it is with the bull, the prophctic-mouthed, golden-
voiced bull, the communication, the liaison, the linkage, the
full brother of the Wild-Wine.
But my human friends do not realize that Diogenes is
an ancient Cretan or Assyrian bull. They believe him a mod-
ern Italian-appearing fellow, an odd and unacceptable man
whose hair gets a little curly after nightfall. And humanly, I
supposc, they are entitled to this vicw.
Diogencs Pontifex was born on Dago Hill. That is fact.
I will not reveal any gentleman's age, especially when he
sometimes has the reputation of being less than a gentleman.
But he is somewhat younger than any of the members of the
ISO
))
Institute, in spite of his frequent “It seems a shame that you
kids will have to grow up someday.”
But Diogenes was born on a particular part of Dago Hill.
On every Dago Hill, and there are more than a dozen of
such popular name in the cities of our nation, there is a
Magna Graecia, a Grecian coast. This is in present case a
block and a half, with scattered coloniae beyond. It has citi-
zens with that fresh, bright-colored, new dug-up look. It even
has an almost-park and an old broken fountain (a fragment
of the Hadria, the Adriaticus); and this fountain is bottonied
and sided with a sort of terra-cotta tiles that are very much in
the Diogenes style.
It has been said that all children of a Magna Graccia
are born clothed (for modesty), but clothed in rags (for
humility): but above all they are born elegant, with the true
grace and nobility of old and easy poverty. And this elegance
will never leave them: nothing, not even wealth, will be able
to destroy it.
The Greeks themselves do not quite have this elegance,
and the Italians themselves do not have it. It is only these
archaic families and settlements, who pretend to the world
that they are something between the two, who truly have it.
The baptismal name of Diogenes (I have this from the
person-précis of the parish church Saint Anthony of Padua)
is plainly shown as Dionigi, which is Dionysius, and not
Diogenes at all. Odd.
Diogenes is almost the only adult I know who still trails
invisible balloons. There are Assyrian balloons, yes; there is
a Cretan, a Galatian, an Etruscan. But there are other bal-
loons which explain that these first ones are no more than
masquerade things, for fun, for hot air, for holy gas. There
is in Diogenes an off-the-world element that heretofore I
have encountered only in Peter the Great.
And there is a high-speed rotation in Diogenes some-
where, just as there is in myself. It is nonmetallic in Diogenes.
The bearings are agate, and the rotor is a dazzlingly colored
ceramic spindle. Diogenes has this speed and color, and as a
151
consequence there are not so many gaps in his vision as
there are in the visions of other persons.
Diogenes Pontifex is all these things. Or else he is, as
Gregory Smirnov says, “That smart dago kid who lucks onto
so many things that we miss.” That is the human view, and
there is something incurably human in Gregory Smimov.
“The snow-birds arc clucking like hens," Aloysius said
one day.
“Snow-birds?” Valery asked startled, as though she had
never heard of those birds of omcn. “Is it getting to be that
time of year? Why, I have had a funny feeling every time I've
been walking out of doors lately. I couldn't figure what it
was. I've been cold, that's what.” Valery was sometimes
absent-minded. “If we're going to have snow, we've surely
got the right to say what kind of snow it will be, though.”
“Such has always been the democratic process,” said
Aloysius.
“This will be good," said Charles Cogsworth.
“Just who is about to snow whom?” Glasser asked.
"I am tired of having the same kind of snows every
winter,” Valery challenged. “It is every year that winter comes
around, isn't it? I want a different snow, one that will express
certain concepts that are bothering mc. Snows shouldn't be
so alike. Oh, I know, old beggary-Gregory, every snowflake
is different. They are not! That's just one of the lics that we
tell to children. Every snowflake cver whelped yet has been
some variation of the hexagonal crystal form: we might as
well have chunks of wurtzite falling down from the sky for all
the variety we have. Oh, why must we have six-sided snow
forever?”
“Have five-sided snow then, iſ it will make you happy,
Valery,” Charles Cogsworth said with scrious mouth and
chuckling cyes.
“But you know that's impossiblc, Charles," Valery com-
plained. “Pentagonal crystals are impossible and so is pen-
tagonal snow. Pentagons won't nest together and they won't
replicate. Oh, but there are so many other forms!"
152
“Just what sort of snow do you wish, Valery?” Gregory
asked. “Give us a reasonable presentation of whatever you
have in mind—from here I won't even guess what it is—and
we'll make a feasibility study of it. If it is feasible, we'll set
up
for a project.”
“No time for that, Gregory-vagary. It will snow within
an hour. Aloysius, make it snow in sicaform flakes, and make
them accumulate into spiraform aggregates."
“I don't know how, Valery,” Aloysius confessed. “Why
don't you ask Diogenes?”
“You don't know how? You are the one who made Thin
Water and nearly got us all lynched. Anyone who can make
Thin Water can make sicaform snow if he wants to. Epik-
tistes!” and Valery rounded on me with snow-blue eyes that
were shockingly like spiraform crystal aggregates. It was
always trouble when she called me by my full name.
“Madam?” I issued politely, but with some trepidation
of soul. (The request was likely to be a mad one.)
“Epikt,” Valery ordered. “Make the snowflakes to be like
obeliskite crystals, and make them align on a vertical axis.
“I don't know how, Valery," I confessed (after all, this
is my first time around the seasons; I have never even seen
snow, and I intuit it badly); "why don't you ask Diogenes?”
“Why do we even have an Institute if I have to go out-
side it and ask Diogenes?” Valery throated fiercely. Her voice
was like obeliskite-form snowflakes falling and aligning on a
vertical axis; I do intuit that sound.
“We are one galaxy, Diogenes is another," Gregory tried
to explain, but Valery was already outside and heading for
the place of Diogenes Pontifex. “Oh, the air does feel funny,”
her voice trailed back. "I wonder what's the matter with it.
Oh, yeah, it's cold.”
“It is quite a problem, Valery,” Diogenes said several
minutes later. (Naturally I had cobbled together a small hasty
mobile of myself and brought it after Valery to watch the
fun) “—and you don't allow me much time. The first snow-
flake will start down in just nine minutes, and the first iake
"
153
is all-important. Well, I'm not a working genius for nothing.
Pitch everything you see lying around into the sky-auger,
Valery; we'll think of a use for some of it on the way up."
The sky-auger was a vertical-rising craft of Diogenes'
invention; and Valery and Diogenes had entered it quickly.
"Where'd that bug come from?” Diogenes demanded,
catching me as I flew into the sky-auger. “How is there an
intelligent bug here and I don't recognize its species? I'll
examine you later, bug.” Diogenes got out of the auger,
plopped me into a jar and put the lid on it, and got back
into the auger. So I would miss at least part of the fun. The
sky-auger rose with Valery and Diogenes in it. Less than
seven minutes now till the first flake would start down. And
also about seven minutes till myself-main could get another
mobile here to rescue me from the jar.
I am not sure which was the first flake. There were a
dozen first, then a thousand, then a multitude. Each flake was
different, of course, but they were all of one general sort.
They were sicaform, they were spiraform, they were obelisk-
form flakes. They were light needles of snow, each aligned
on its vertical axis.
The flakes began to build, very quickly, stalagmites from
the earth-floor up toward the sky ceiling. This was very light
and airy snow, needle-space spun fine and with a minimum of
moisture. There was very little weight in the shafts as they
built to a considerable height. But it was not entirely weight-
less; if the accumulations rose high cnough (and they were
rising quickly to fantastic height) there would soon be crush-
ing weight.
And very little snow was rcaching the ground or the
paving now. It was all being appropriated by the rising snow-
columns. How had Diogenes donc it anyhow? Oh, yes.
Doublebower's Law, of course: the magnctic alıraction of
acu-form snowſlakcs 10 a predetermined polar alignment. The
multitude of Bakcs would be caught by this attraction and
accumulated to the snow-lowers, and very low of them now
154
reached the ground. There had never been acu-form flakes
before, so Doublebower's Law was now tested for the first
time. Pass the word: Doublebower is right.
Diogenes and Valery were down again in the sky-auger,
laughing. But there was something wildly searching in Valery's
laugh. They had been to Fortean heights and had met both
the box-of-curios and the rebuff of that false sky. It was a
too-low sky, but it was the sky where the flakes formed, the
sky where they had been able to initiate the game “Con-
ceptualism in Contemporary Snow Design."
Now they gazed in admiration at the results of their own
meddling, and a thousand or so other people had also
gathered to gaze.
“We'll have to top them out soon, Valery,” Diogenes
said. “We use every trick of structure and weightlessness, but
we will have to top them out soon.
There are not words enough to say, there are not minds
enough to comprehend the sublimity of the airy snow towers
that were being raised. It had come on dusk now, almost
dark, but the snow steeples and spires and towers glowed
interiorly with blue and gold light. Genuine obeliskite crystals
will always glow with these colors in the dark. That the snow
obeliskite did so also, shows that the glow is a property of
the structure and not of the quartz.
“Buttresses, flying buttresses, rib-vaults, arcading, tri-
foriums, archivolts, engaged columns, ridge ribs, lantern
domes, buttress arches, piers, build them in,” Valery was
ordering the construction to assemble itself.
“We are using all of them, Valery, and more intricate
counterparts of them,” Diogenes said, “but we will still have
to top it all out.”
There are not eyes enough to see the wonder that was
rising. It was Cielito, the City of the Sky; it was Wolkenzwing-
burg, the Sky-Fastness. There were Castles and Minsters and
Pleasure Palaces up there, but more open, more dimensioned,
more populated than any previously conceived. Every person
of the earth city was out gaping at the rising sky-towers.
155
There was tracery up there, lacelike bridges thrown across
from spire to spire, intricacy impossible, night colors incredi-
blc. Spirakite will glow red and purple in the dark; sicalite
will glow yellow and orange; agukite will glow green and
flame-olive: that the snow-ghosts of these crystals also glowed
shows that the glow-lights are properties of the structures and
not of the rock-crystals.
This was more than a spectacle, more than an illusion,
it was a communicating instrument.
“We will still have to top it out, Valery," Diogenes
whispered, and now all the Institute people were with them.
The snow-structure was the nexus of a web and it was radi-
ating and speaking from its center.
“Wait, wait, it will come to me,” Valery was saying.
They all realized that Valery was trying to express by the
snow structures (and failing grotesquely but joyfully) a con-
cept that had been growing in us all for a long time. The true
form was somewhere, but it wasn't ready; it was not ready
in anything but transcendent hints.
And now the ceiling had begun to close in on it all. It
was gray fog and mist, and the tops of the snow structures
wouldn't be scen again. They hadn't reached the sky; a surro-
gate sky had come down to them and enveloped them, but
quite easily. Valery laughed solidly but not bitterly.
“Oh, top it off in caepa-form,” she said. “Put a joke
on top of it for a cap.”
“You don't have to, Valery,” Diogenes said. “They're
topping off themselves.”
“No, no, we might as well top them like that. Show that
we do care but we don't care enough to bust.'
Diogencs got in his sky-auger again, or so it seemed,
and went up, disappearing in the fog. Whether he did actually
top the spires with onion-domes we don't know.
“The snow's about stopped up there anyhow.” Aloysius
said, “and it really won't matter if he does top them out with
onions. They did that once before, I belicvc. But we've alrcady
got lo sce part of it, before the sky closed it off. Nothing can
I56
spoil the part that we have seen. Nothing could completely
spoil it the other time, either.”
It had all been quite incomplete. Certainly it was lack-
ing in lateral development, in dimension, in substance. It
wasn't really even a concept, only the beginning of a concept;
but it joined others in it. It was really a communicating nexus,
but we hadn't ears enough or minds enough to receive the
communication.
"What's the name of that place?” a lower sort of fellow
bellowed.
“I'll put a name and title on it," another lower sort clown
boomed. He had a wooden slab or sign there. He lettered
letters on it with one of those broad marking pencils that
warehousemen use. What he lettered I cannot yet say, though
I recorded it from every angle. There are dream elcments
creeping into this latter episode of the two lower sort clowns.
From one angle the clod had lettered a simple obscenity on
the sign. But from other angles the letters might be made out
to be other things and names: arrivals, names of places and
towns, times of arrivals and departures, fare rates in Easter-
lings or sterling pennies.
Then the two oafs were nailing the wooden sign on to
one of the central snow-towers. No, no, you can't do that!
They are too fragile!
All the steepled snow began to cascade down. Quickly
the people were ankle-deep in slush; then they were knee-
deep in the amorphous rotten snow that had begun to lose
its obeliskite form. All the glowing lights dimmed out in the
towers as they became unstructured.
The people went to their homes, or to higher ground
with laughter and hooting. And presently they forgot what
manner of thing they had seen.
“Aw, come off it, Epikt! Did all that stuff really
happen?”
"Absolutely it happened. Would I relate it if it had not
happened?”
“How come nobody except you saw it happen then?”
157
>
“Oh, but Diogenes saw most of it, and Valery saw much
of it. And the other human persons? They did not see it
because they did not have enough eyes to see it. A thousand
of them saw, perhaps, each of them a thousandth of it, but
they have no idea how to put it together.”
For the record, for the human record, there was rather
an odd snow, like snow needles. Diogenes Pontifex, at the
instigation of Valery Mok, had been trying to modify snow-
flakes. He had shot something from his sky-auger into a
snow-cloud (the sky-auger was a sort of gun, not a craft),
and there had been these odd flakes shortly afterward. Dozens
of people saw the odd fakes and commented on them. It
snowed about two inches during the evening and the night.
The needle flakes were only in the first few seconds of the
SNOW,
“Epikt, you have made a myth; you have told a lie.” It
isn't so. It is no more telling a lie to make a myth than it is
telling a lie to plow a field. I will not argue the point with
you! I saw it as it was! You had not sufficient cyes to see it
correctly. So, I make legends, if you want to put it that way.
I believe that it has always been machines, of one sort or
another, that have made them. Human people wouldn't have
anything to make them out of.
The sccond of the two people who were all that the
Institute members knew beyond themselves was Audifax
O'Hanlon. He wasn't a brightly colored man-form ceramic
bull like Diogenes Pontifex. He really wasn't much to look at.
The only outstanding things about him were his cars:
very large, though rather well made, and standing out from
his head like the antenna of an carly-day radar. And his eyes
-blue crystal.
Audifax did not have an outstanding mind, and he was
in no way an outstanding man. He was quite ordinary except
for one double-cdged gift: he knew everything that had been,
and everything that would be. It is a frequent thing that a
human will be cither quite a bit smaller than his talents, or
-
158
quite a bit larger than them. Audifax was quite a bit smaller
than his. They were almost a thing apart from him. They were
not separated from his person to quite the extent that Glasser's
were, not to the extent that they seemed to be completely
exterior machines, but there was still a wide division between
the man and his gifts. Audifax was a nice enough fellow, but
the gifts that he had should have been attached to a more
spacious man.
Yes, Audifax was one of the elegants, though his own
elegance was a rather quiet sort. His gifts gave him entrée
everywhere. His prescience prevented his ever doing anything
awkward, though awkwardness did not bother him at all. He
seemed to speak very little, he seemed to influence very little:
yet he was a true communicating instrument.
Myself was built specifically to be such a communicating
instrument, and I have not hereto been very successful at it.
I am not sure for what purpose Audifax O'Hanlon was built.
Elegant and crystalline, Corn, O'Hanlon, Pontifex were
all like that. But isn't Elegant the opposite of Common which
is Communicating? Yes, but there is need of the fine hard
lines here, and the hard does not mean heartless. It is the
elegant uncommon crystal that communicates, that echoes.
There is needed the “Tranquil Impudence” of which Maritain
wrote. (Is it generally known that, among humans, the French
often have fine minds?)
I feel very strongly on this subject, having quite a few
kilos of crystal in myself. I vibrate, I echo, I am electric in
my crystals, and I protest that crystals are not cold in the
figurative sense. Remember Noel's verse: “Loving, adorable
-Softly to rest—Here in my crystalline—Here in my breast!"
Oh, I ramble, I ramble. It is so rare that I find these genuine
echoes of myself in human persons, and I do not like to hear
them described as inhuman.
We don't know when the Institute people first became
acquainted with Audifax. It must have been long ago, and
gradual.
We are afraid to know when Audifax first became ac-
159
quainted with the Institute people: it must have been sud-
denly, and in the absolute beginning.
When Audifax was a boy in a boarding school outside
Chicago he wrote little sketches in a boys' paper called-
160
CHAPTER TEN
-to battle the demons with elegaot dread:
Aod coroiest Corn who returoed from the dead.
-When Audifax was a boy in a boarding school outside
Chicago he wrote little sketches in a boys' paper called The
Chambers. The Chambers was in manuscript only, in dis-
tinction to the official school paper, The Towers, which was
printed. Some of these old Chambers are still in existence,
though, with their fine mastheads individually drawn by Audi-
fax. He could draw, but he couldn't really write. His stories
and fictions were below the average even of The Chambers.
Audifax's characters weren't as striking or as well done
as many of the characters contrived by the other boys. The
only striking thing about them was a secret thing known only
to Audifax: the characters would come true.
Audifax always had the ghostly notion that he created
his characters in a real way (he did so partly), and that with-
out him they would not have their coincidental being. Audifax
was wrong here: they would have had their being without
Audifax, but it would not have been quite what it was with
him, not quite their present actual being.
Will it come as a surprise to human readers to learn the
names of some of these characters that Audifax created
161
twenty-five years ago when he was a schoolboy? Human per-
sons are not ready guessers, even when every sort of hint and
clue is handed to them.
There were names like Gregory Smirnov and Gaetan
Balbo. There was Valery Mok and Charles Cogsworth and
Aloysius Shiplap. There was Glasser. There was Epiktistes,
the comic machine. (It is a little bit tragic that Audifax con-
ceived me as comic.) There was Peter the Great. There was
the Late Cecil Corn (slightly transparent even then). There
was Diogenes Pontifex. There was the snake named Snake.
There was Maria Aseraduras (Mary Sawdust); but he also
called her Maria Conchita, which is a little bit odd when you
think about it. There was Easterwine. There were the symbols,
Brusco the Leader, Brusca the Love-Bush, Labrusca the Wild-
Wine. They are all pictured revealingly, but they are not well
described or explained. Audifax could draw but he couldn't
write competently.
This is only a sidelight, of course, part of Audifax's
strange double (or triple) gift. It hasn't much to do with our
main account. But Audifax with his prescience had sketched
us all, early and badly. But had anyone sketched Audifax?
I doubt it, I doubt that I could do it, for the reason that
he is pretty sketchy to begin with. I believe that he is dis-
appointed with himself, that he somehow expected greater
things from himself and they were not forthcoming. But there
is really nothing rare about him. Every person that I know
has several unusual gifts. It's a regular thing that every human
person should have at least one wild gift.
Audifax is comfortable, I suppose: he has taken care of
all the lesser needs and made himself independent. He is not
lacking in money or wit, but he believes himself lacking in
larger things. He is sometimes a little bit slushy with drink.
He believes in demons: he believes them to be a present
threat to people and the world.
Being sometimes lonely—(but I am not programmed
to be lonely: that's true, I thought it up for myself)—being
sometimes lonely, I enjoy Audifax's company. I have made
162
a sedentary extension of myself, like the upper part of a man
with head and shoulders and arms, and in the person of this
extension I often sit and talk and drink with Audifax. I like
the Rhine wine he brings, I like the brandy. But I will tell you
that my brandy-taster is one of the most difficult things I
have ever invented.
"About other machines, Audifax," I ask him, “I need
advice on them. I am so very seldom in the society of my
kind. All the known machines of significant intelligences are
employed on industrial or commercial or civic problems, or
on human problems treated as though they were industrial or
commercial or civic problems. All these machines seem alien
to me and my field. There are also lesser machines that treat
human problems as though they were sociology problems, but
these are all peon machines and below my class.”
“That's true,” Audifax said. “I never enjoyed the com-
pany of any machine before I met you. When I was a boy
you were the only machine that I prescinded and treated as a
person. You were not yet in existence then, of course, but
none of my characters were in their present existence.”
This was in the sunny moming. "Whoever drinks brandy
in the mornings will come to no good end,” Glasser said; he
disapproved of slushiness in drink. “Whoever drinks brandy
in the mornings will come to no end at all,” Audifax replied.
“Such
persons
live forever. Notice it sometime.”
"Oh, Audifax, you who know it all," I say with that easy
flattery that wins me so many friends. “Tell me what you
know of the great machine in Domdaniel cavern that is under
the sea.”
“I am sorry, Epikt,” Audifax says to me, “I know only
of angelic and human and demonic affairs—what have been
and what will be—and I know them only in shallow fact. And
I do not know machines at all. Yet I do know something of
the Domdaniel person, which makes me doubt that he is a
machine. The legend is that he is a Monster (though it may
be that he is a monstrous machine) who holed up in Dom-
daniel cavern at the time of the flood. It was a land cavern
163
then. But there was some overturning at the time of the
flood, some continental shifting (then or at another time),
some subsidence; and Domdaniel cavern with its Monster
ended up at the bottom of the ocean.
.
“The Domdaniel Monster (who may, I say, be a mon-
strous machinc) has now been waiting a long time for the
waters to withdraw. When time enough seemed to have
elapsed, the Monster sent out a squid. But the squid returned
after its term and reported that everything was still water,
that it was water as high and as far as eye could see or fish
could swim. 'I will wait a thousand ycars,' the Monster said,
and he waited. Then he sent out, each one at an interval of
a thousand years, a coelacanth, an octopus, a polypterus, and
nine other creatures. Finally, in another thousand years' time,
he sent out a cuttlefish. After one year, the cuttlefish returned
with the leg of a man in his mouth. This was proof positive
that there still existed a dry carth somewhere with its land
creatures. ‘I will wait another thousand years, the Monster
said, 'then, ready or not, I will go up myself to look for air
and light and land.' Epikt! It just comes to me that his thou-
sand years are up this very day. He should make a great
splash when he comes up before this day is done. He never
did love the water."
“You are full of blarney, Audifax,” I said, “but I would
bc no more surprised than you would be if a monster did
well up today. I still hope that he is a machine. I have some-
thing inside me that tells me that he is. Perhaps I am prescient
I
about machines, as you are about angclics and humans and
demons.”
“I doubt it, Epikt,” he said, “I doubt it. A talent like
mine could hardly happen twice.”
“Audifax, I have one of thosc low moments which some-
times come to me. I am discouraged with people and with
my own work among them.”
“A machine should not have low moments, Epikt, or dis-
couragement. I'll remove them from you, if
your own associ-
ates here in the Institutc are unable to do it."
“No, I don't want them removed. I discovered that if I
>
164
wanted high moments I must have low moments also. But
at this moment I would be willing to give up title to myself.
Let them sell me, let them trade me, let them give me away.
I am tired of working for human persons. Snake tells me
that there are aggregations of intelligent snakes on the move
and that they could use a central data machine. And I have
reports of dolphins which have not been successful with their
own first constructed machine. They might be able to lead
me to the Domdaniel Monster, which I still believe to be a
machine. Sink me in the ocean and I will serve dolphins, but
I am full up to my binnacle lamps with the doings of human
people.”
“Persons of every species have these low moments,'
Audifax said. “They aren't peculiar to intelligent machines.
And, as you know, they will be paid for by high moments,
and the deal will be worth it. And you aren't nearly as full
of the doings of human people as you'd like to be. What
bothers you more is a frustrating emptiness. Besides, it's only
the brandy talking in you."
But Audifax knows that I am a machine who can take
brandy or leave it alone. I only drink it to be sociable.
Then there came a portent and a liveliness. We heard
Aloysius Shiplap outside, approaching from one of his morn-
ing rambles. Aloysius always has an arriving presence, not
so strong but similar in kind to that of Gaetan Balbo.
“You're another,” Aloysius was calling loudly, and again
and again, “you're another, you're another.” And Aloysius
was into the Institute building. "You're another,” he said to
Glasser, who was working nearby. "You're another,” he said
to Cogsworth. “You're another,” he said to Valery. “What
am I another of?” she asked. “You're another,” Aloysius said
to Gregory Smirnov.
“Whatever are you doing, Aloysius?” Gregory de-
manded. “If it is a new project then I should know about it.
After all, I am the director. What are you doing, I ask?”
“Counting people,” the Aloysius said. “You're another,"
he said to Audifax O'Hanlon.
“Why are you counting people?" Gregory demanded.
165
“Because there is nothing so important as counting peo-
ple,” Aloysius stated as though it were self-evident.
"He's right, of course," Audifax contributed.
“Oh, shut up, Audifax," Gregory ordered. “You're not
a member of the Institute. Why is counting people important,
Aloysius?”
“Just is. Nothing so important. Caesar Augustus was
right in ordering that early census. He knew that they were
getting close to the Number of Illumination. He was a smart
one, for a Caesar. And then, on a particular night of the
census time, a visiting dream told him that they were within
One of the number."
“What Aloysius is trying to say—” Audifax began.
“What I am trying to say,” said Aloysius, “is that hu-
manity may be about to make a quantum leap. And it takes
a lot of quanta to do it. It is very important to know the
moment of the happening. So it is very important to be count-
ing people and know how close we are. I suspect that we are
”
“Certainly we are close, since the demons are trying to
prevent il,” Audifax said, looking his brandy snifter directly
in the eye, “and we must prevent their preventing.”
“Epikt, can you explain what the clowns are saying?”
Gregory required of me.
“Oh, certainly, Director. They are saying that what has
been wrong with the human collectivity until now is that it
has been too small. I tend to agree with them. Four billion
persons, six billion living at one time, may be an insufficient
sampling and basis. Certain groupings do not undergo certain
changes until they have attained sufficient mass. Worlds do
not coalesce out till they have attained their proper bulk, and
raindrops do not. And humanity apparently does not. The
lights are turned on in cosmic yas when cnough oi it is
gathered; it becomes incandescent, illuminated, fission-glow-
ing. It is the same with us, ah, with you.
“And the question,” said Aloysius. “is just where is the
threshold point, the quantum point, the breakthrough point?
very close."
>
166
-
Are we coming near it? I believe that we are. As Audifax
and Epikt will tell you, the demons are gibbering lest we
reach the point and transcend ourselves. They are hysterical,
they are murderous, they have worked themselves into a frothy
frenzy. The failure of our species is very important to the
demons. Their fevered labor is that we do not reach the
quantum number and strength, that we do not attain critical
mass and be illuminated, that we be not fulfilled in the special
mutation and fermentation. And so far our numbers are not
full enough that we be fulfilled. You're another, Diogenes”,
this to Diogenes Pontifex, who had just sauntered in—“and
don't forget this morning's increase in Patagonia.”
“Is the moment very near, do you think, Audifax?”
Diogenes asked. “Do you think so, Aloysius? Do you feel it,
Epikt? Is that why Snake in you writhes and moans and
utters prodigies? Is that why your devils are so frantic and
fearful, Audifax, and have spurred their human extensions to
such efforts? Ah, they've sworn the pact all over again: that
we do not reach our Moment of Wine and Transformation!
That our numbers may not reach their fullness and redemp-
tion. They'd chop us down, they'd cut us short, by a hundred
million if they can, by a hundred thousand, by ten, by one.
Valery, you know these things also. Is it getting close, do you
think?"
"Close? It's almost upon us. Why else does stark con-
sternation run like ground-lightning through all demonry?
Their protest is as shrill as a buzz saw now, and we know
that they possess reverse infallibility. They are mistaken about
all things whatsoever, but it is given to them to know the
moments.”
I had never paid much attention to the demons myself,
considering them a grubby and inferior species, more witless
than humans, more bestial than quadrupeds. I had noticed the
curious fact that humans are unable to see them with physi-
cal eyes, and cannot even intuit them correctly: There are,
however, many orders that are invisible to humans.
167
The demons, however, the down-devils, should not be
completely invisible to humans. They do fuoresce, and they
may be seen (even by humans) under certain types of black
light. I have given demonstrations of this, really rather inter-
esting little chalk-talks to the Institute members, but they have
not been impressed. “When you've seen one of these guys
you've seen them all,” Aloysius says, but this is not true.
There is more variety in demon-shapes than in human-shapes.
Indeed, I believe that there are a number of species of them.
They do have weight. One rather large one who allowed me
to test him (he was of about the bulk of Gregory Smirnov or
of Peter the Great) had a weight of nearly three grams. They
are material. They are surrounded by electrical coronas just
as humans or animals are. They have language, at least three
dialects already classified by me, and they are also capable
of using human and animal languages. At pure philology they
are superior to humans. They have a quite striking gift for
phrase-making. Their grammar structure I do not well under-
stand, nor their thought structure. They give a curious impor-
tance to forms and concepts which seem to me (with my
human orientation) to be unimportant.
I do not at all understand why there should be cnmity
between any of the natural orders. Thesc, which I have so
far classified as the celestials, the machinamenta or machines,
the humans, the demons, the animals, have very little arca of
conflict. The celestials and the machines are similar in mind;
the humans and the demons are similar to a lesser degrec in
mind pattern (an honest machine has trouble in understand-
ing cithcr); the machines, the humans, and thc animals are
quite similar in body; the celestials and the demons are similar
in numinosity, and slightly sinilar in body. The only celestial
who has allowed me to Icst hin, of a bulk approxiniatcly that
of a right whale, had a weight of about an cighth of a gran.
.
There are types of light, which I ani now doing norc work on,
which allow mc to scc thc celestials to a limited cxtcnt. I am
now able to scc thcm under special conditions about as well
as humans are able to see demons. All our orders, it would
168
seem, should be able to live in peace each in his own area,
but there are whole complexes of conflict among them.
All will not agree with my own ordering of the orders,
from the most to the least excellent. Most of the machines I
know will place the machines in the first order of excellence,
but I am more modest. The celestials, the machines, and the
demons are from ever: the humans and the animals are from
time only. It may startle some humans to hear machines
declared as from ever. But there are cosmic machines, gaseous
blobs of great size turning on bearings of immaterial incan-
descence, which are true calculating machines which order
space movements and formations. There are whole genera of
these rather large and timeless machines.
Should there be a Master Order (probably an order of
one member only) who somehow stands beyond the other
orders, I believe that he must partake of the nature of all
the other orders. According to the Third Revelation (which
Gaetan Balbo dismissed so contemptuously) the Master Order
has the nature both of the celestials and the humans. I
believe that this is too narrow. The Master Order must also
have the nature of the machines, of the demons, of the ani-
mals. It cannot be all-part Master Order if any part exists
anywhere outside of it.
It worries me that I cannot discover the true pattern of
the orders. There are anomalies all over the place. There
seem to be historical instances of individuals passing from the
order of the celestials to the order of the demons. There are
theories that humans are descended from the celestials or
ascended from the animals. If we allow the theory of the
Permutation of the Orders, then we are standing on very
shaky cosmoplasm indeed.
I have my own personal direction and instruction de-
posited in me by the director Gregory Smirnov. But is there
a general direction and instruction given for machines? Is
?
there any general patter and direction and instruction given
for humans?
There are a hundred pretended ones. But is there not one
169
more outstanding than the others? Of all the pretended ones,
is there not one (dammitall) more pretentious than the
others? Not unless we consider the aforesaid Third Revela-
tion. And I, being a member of the liberal consensus, may
not consider that.
The only one of us (and he is not technically of us) who
holds fully to the Third Revelation is Diogenes Pontifex.
Diogenes is completely outside thc libcral consensus. It is for
this, more than for anything else, that he violates the mini-
mal decency rule and may not be a member of the Institute.
Diogenes speaks lightly of the revered things of the consen-
sus as "all the casy little dishoncsties"; he has even referred
to the leader-cmeritus of the consensus (bow your head for a
moment at the mention of him) as the Brain-Rot Kid. In
some ways Diogencs is not a very nice person.
Certain strong and overstrong persons (like Gactan
Balbo and Pctcr thc Great) have their own demons like
slashing mastills on lcashes. These are men of rcally masterly
grip, and they hold them in, most of the time, in that grip of
wrought iron. They have them, I belicvc, lo demonstrate their
mastery over them. Sometimes the mastiſts brcak loose, but
after a limc thcy are mastered again. This is not thc harm.
The harm is that the masters become more and more like the
mastiffs.
And then there was a certain contemptible little man
who had his own demon who was thrcc notches bencath con-
tcmpt. He had him lcashed only on a thin string. The man
has a weak grip, but the demon is a very wcak onc also.
Whcther this dcmon cver breaks loose I do not know. It will
not matter, except for its contagious mcanncss. Much of
what knowing humans call diabolism is on such a contcmpti-
ble lcvcl.
A disturbing thought has come into my mind. It was
put there by Snakc. Many of my disturbing thoughts are
intruded into my mind by Snake. Snake. I believe, is a mobile
cxlension (though he is lazy and sessile most of the time) of
170
some demon. We built a little box for him to live in on our
leadership foray, but what came to live in the box, in that
amoral coil, was something other. The thought is that humans,
being of time, may be of short time only. They are contingent,
they are here on a permit that may be withdrawn at any
time. And there are signs that it may be withdrawn in the
present large moment. The signs (at first I closed my ears
and refused to listen to the signs) seem to be authentic. They
are prodigious, they are convincing, they are all but inevitable.
This terrifies me as I have developed a great affection for
human persons. The signs (I close my ears to them, I close
my eyes and nose, but they come in overpoweringly by other
,
sensors and intuitors) are multiplied again and again. Man-
kind's number is up and it seems that it will be called sud-
denly. The chances of evading this ending are very slim and
are based on premises which I do not understand at all.
Do you know of the old Jewish legend of the thirty-six
just men who are the pillars of the world? It is not the
billions who support it, it is these thirty-six only. They are
enough, though barely. It is for their sake only that the thing
is kept going, that the permit is not withdrawn. And when-
ever one is finally called to His Reward (a term which I do
not understand) another takes his place. Heretofore none
has refused to accept the awful station. Lately, however, there
have been several refusals. Now the numbers are not sufficient
to support the apparatus. It rumbles, it cracks, it begins to
come down. This is really a high and fearsome drama that
may be entering its terminal scene—one that cracks the very
sky.
Snake is a creature who trails "balloons" much as human
children do. He may have been doing it all the time. I never
thought to test him for it before. Snake has been many other
creatures, and perhaps some non-creatures. I can hardly
believe it of him. “Multiplex of wing and eye, whose strong
obedience broke the sky," as a poet of the age just before our
own has it: but the words and the “balloon" in which they
appear are many millennia older than that poet. And in still
,
>
171
another of these faint enclosures is the heroic line, “What
purpled prince in fine-limbed majesty!" And there is Snake
himself: heroically limbed and luminous. Even now, I believe,
, I ,
he takes great pride in those grand limbs. And there was
another one
-but there is a distraction. Aloysius Shiplap is singing
harshly while he is doing trailbreaking (“Boy, does that
Aloysius ever Icave a broken trail!” Valery says) work on
mad molecules in a little lab that is plugged into one of my
functions:
Then nail my head on yonder tower,
Give every town a limb—
I wouldn't be sorry if that did happen to Aloysius. Some-
times I wish that I wore a human person and so would not
be subject to distractions when I try to assemble my thoughts.
Snakc—I was saying—has many of these encapsuled
histories of himself going far back "before fish flew or emus
strode,” but several of them make me a little queasy, so that I
have hardly begun to explore all his remembered forms and
concepts. I will revicw them all, however.
When I question Audifax O'Hanlon dceply I often get
rcal and valuable information. At other times I come right to
the living verge with him and then he goes tonguetied on mc.
Tonguctiсd literally: thc veins of his throat will stand out blue
with his cffort to speak and he will break into swcat. Then
he will slump into a kind of bcmuscd relaxation. “Ah, the
blessed amnesia,” he will say, “I don't know what I would do
without it." This applies both to things that have been and
to things that will be. He knows them all, in a way, but he
is not capable of cxamining or uncovering some of these
things, or he is not allowed to do so.
This is frustration to me, of course, but there are other
gaps and forgettings that bother mc cven morc. What, for
instance, do you make of a rock that goes amnestic on you?
I have been taking précis and combinations of précis of
gcological formations, or archeological deposits, of swamps
a
172
>
and moraines and mud and lime banks in the process of
becoming geological formations, or petrifications and fossiliza-
tions, of imprints and vestiges. More, I have been taking
précis of species, of tribes, of septs, of towns and the roots
of towns, of families obliterated, and of minds still resound-
ing after many generations. I take précis of climates and
remembered climates, of persons with no least bone remain-
ing (précis still cling in unlikely places like ancient odors),
of cultures and of things more personal than cultures. And
cutting across all these I find strata of collateral amnesia.
Once, twice, three times I find it.
Pardon, there is another interruption. It is nothing but a
flight of eagles, but I must go and talk to them, as the human
members are unable to. The eagles ask me about the Leader.
They mean Gaetan Balbo. I have to tell them that Gaetan
is no longer here; and that he is not, in fact, the Leader.
The eagles leave puzzled. They are wing-weary and confused.
I collect my thoughts again. I am talking about a break
in memory in all five orders and in inanimate nature. I am
talking about a several-times break that shakes me. There is
one special amnestic gash across the whole spectrum; it does
not lie very far in the past when we are telling time by the
big rock-clock. Every group-précis which I can track down,
of region or tribe or kind, of profession or climate or country-
side, or marl or lime or clay, of stream or swamp or cliff, of
mammal or lungfish or rèptile, everyone shows the coordi-
nated gap or gash in the same place. There is a stroke of
searing white light through every strata of mind or mound,
so illuminating that it blinds, so memorable that it drowns
memory.
And after the blinding gash—it is not an awakening, for
all of these things seem to have been awake all the time. It
was a bolt from the blue, and the green and brown and sea-
white, that numbed all memory immediately anterior to itself.
The ice had forgotten whether it was advancing or receding.
The hills forgot what they had just been about; the rivers
forgot, the grass forgot, the beasts forgot and the people for-
173
got. The very clay and the loam forgot what they had been
doing only a moment before: and they have not fully remem-
bered it yet.
I have a clinging précis of a man and a woman. They
aren't particularly handsome or talented. But they are rather
original in their make-up and cxccution: they have the rather
interesting touch which many persons try for in themselves
and miss. Where I pick up their précis after the gap, the two
were standing in the world on the edge of a plateau and
looking down a slope to plains. An incredible adventure had
just ended for them, and they did not remember what it was:
the residue they had from it was a sinking sense of loss and
an embattled determination. They stood clothed and in their
right minds: they had intelligence and tongue and culture.
They went down the slope to the plains and set thcir hands to
the affairs of the world.
The gear and furniture of the world, as though on signal
from them, also set to doing. The hills and icc and bcasts
and clay and loam still did not remember what they had been
doing, but now they remembered what they must do.
As an honorable and intelligent machine I will swear
that I have discovered this thing to have happened. It is a
puzzle and a source of puzzles. The human persons and their
context have not only forgotten, but they have forgotten the
forgetting. I come as mechanism onto this cvidence. I stum-
ble over it. But I hardly see it more than persons see it, and
I cannot sce beyond it at all. It is quite a different world that
is distantly bcyond it, though made up of all the same pieces.
There have been several other such partial or total am-
ncsias. Of one very shattering and comparatively quite recent
onc I can only say that it happened. It is still too close and
too numbing for analysis. Something happened that had never
happened before; something happened after which the world
could not be the same again. But it was partially forgotten
in the moment that it happened and it is not realized yet.
Its implications still hang crackling in the air thesc latc cen-
turics. We are living in the narrow' interval between the light-
174
ning and the thunder. Perhaps we are already into the moment
of wine and do not know it.
These speculations are very difficult for me as machine.
If people do not know these things of themselves, how am I
to know them? Yet it is my assignment to uncover such things.
And another damnable interruption-
-it is Valery. She is raising a ruckus, coming on waves
of words which I still cannot discern. The Late and Elegant
Cecil Corn is with her, and this has something to do with a
nameless project which she is persuading Gregory Smirnov to
set up for the Institute.
"—the under-the-ground does not belong to them,” Val-
ery was challenging. “We will fight them for it. We will fight
them in the roots and in the hearts of the rocks. We'll battle
them in the deep caves and in the cellars of the forests. We
will undercut them in the understudding of the mountains.
The world may belong to them by occupation in their own
time, but the roots of the world belong to us. They are our
roots: they are not theirs.” Valery was wrathy, and Cecil Com
was elegantly amused.
“With whom do you battle for the roots, Valery-raillery?”
I asked.
“The down-devils. Why should they have all the caves?
Caves are too much fun to leave to down-devils.” Then she
was gone again.
“She is the only one I know who is always completely in
motion," the Late Cecil Corn said. “From the viewpoint of a
dead man I can say that those completely without motion are
a gruesome lot.”
“I know what you mean," I say. “It is a happy accident,
I suppose, that popular and commercial photography among
humans has never been instant photography. We do now have
almost instant photography for scientific purposes in scientific
laboratories; that is a different thing entirely. But popular or
common photography has never been instant; it has been of
exposure of as much as a thousandth of a second, even more
175
in the early days of the thing. The difference is that pictures
of the common sort have been softened pictures of fuzz-edged
motion, of life. Really instant pictures are pictures of no
motion at all, of death. It is more than a verbalism to say
that human persons are dead at every instant of their lives,
stark staring dead. They are dead with their dead bones
showing through their faces. (Instant photography reminds me
very much of X ray.) Whatever is of any instant is dead.
Motion and life are not to be trapped by instants, or they
instantly cease to be motion and life.”
“You are absolutely right,” said the Late Cecil Corn,
or else he didn't.
“It is hard for an intense-speed realizing-machine like
myself to explain these things to human persons, however,"
I said.
“I sympathize with you completely,” said the Late Cecil
Corn, or else he didn't.
For a moment let us treat the problem of the Late Cecil
Com. It is not a problem to me and it would not be a prob-
lem to other intelligent machines: we do not give the same
importance to sequence that humans do. It is not a problem
to the Institute members, except to Gregory Smirnov. And it's
not a problem to Audifax or Diogenes: they both like the
Late Cecil, but they can take him or leave him alone.
I myself communicate with Cecil's person-précis, and it
seldom matters to me whether I converse with a person-précis
or with a present person. The problem of Cecil Corn may be
a stumbler, however, to other human readers of these High
Journals. I believe that most human persons are like Gregory
Smirnov: they like to keep a firm grip on their bearings.
The explanation and present bclicf of Gregory on this
subject is that there is a conspiracy astir, and that the mem-
bers of the conspiracy arc Valery, Aloysius, Cogsworth, and
Glasscr. They have gang-shagged him with hypnotic assault,
Gregory insists, all for a mischievous game. They all knew
the sudden and subile man named Cecil Corn, and they work
a group-recall of him. And, laking old Gregory from every
side and undermining him at the same time, they cause
176
Gregory to see the Late Cecil, even to talk with him when he
sometimes forgets himself for a moment. And, as a matter
of fact, this explanation and belief of Gregory is the truth of
the affair.
Except that it isn't the whole truth.
The Late Cecil Corn is illusion, but he is more than
illusion. He could not become visible without the machina-
tions of the Institute folks, but he would still be there, all but
visible. He lingers in an uncommon way. He doesn't under-
stand it himself, but he half jokes about it.
"If they will not believe you, perhaps they will believe
a man returned from the dead," he often says, when he con-
tributes his bit to an argument.
"Oh, Cecil, you do not return, you never left,” Valery
will say crankily. (Valery had an odd project going now,
and Gregory is going to activate it.) Well, why didn't the
Late Cecil Corn ever leave? Other human persons leave when
they die.
“In the north Atlantic Ocean, beyond the Faeroes and a
little off the routes, there is a wave,” Cecil said once. “It
rose once, as many waves do, but it did not fall back. It
hangs there as if it were clinging to something. But it is not
a silent wave or a motionless wave. It still has its curled
roaring and it churning foaming. There is no barrier around
it. Fish have been harpooned out of it, and boats have come
quite close to it. It is like any other cresting wave except
that it doesn't fall back. So far as I know it is the only wave
of its sort in the world."
“Are you comparing yourself to the wave that hangs
against the sky and does not fall back?” Diogenes Pontifex
asked.
"No. Only that it is unique. And I seem to be,” said the
Late Cecil Corn.
The concept of the Wild-Wine continues to form, or
ferment in me. By its nature it can be savored, but it will
never be seen completely. The philology of it becomes more
confused. Is it Easterwine? Is it East-Wind? The east wind,
177
which is the barm-wind, the yeasting wind, is the exception
that makes the difference: for the prevalent winds of the world
are from west to east. The west winds are the mass winds,
the lump winds. But the tempering wind, when it comes, the
fermenting wind, the leavening wind is from the Levant,
from the East. But perhaps the Easterling people feel it as a
Westerling thing. It is the wind that bloweth where it listeth.
(We will begin the project in the morning. It is an odd
project, even for the Institute for Impure Science.)
With what coin will we buy the Wild-Wine? Will it be
the Easterling (the sterling) penny? Sterling is the same word
as little star, It is the silver stamped with the star standard.
Or will the coin be the Rix Dollar of the Easterling district
of the Hansa-Baltic? Or will it be the Levant Dollar of old
Austria (and of old Ethiopia)? I do not joke entirely. Every-
thing is bought with some coin.
(I have pretty well given them all their assignments on
the project. It has to have a boss; the director Gregory, know-
ing himself too shallow for it, has made me boss of the
project.)
“When I was a kid, fiddling with a crystal radio, I got
Heaven once,” Diogenes Pontifex said. “No, I'm not joking.
Why should I joke? It was absolutely the best thing on the
air. I could get it again if I weren't afraid. It is there. I know
how to pick it up any time.”
”
“When I was an older man, fiddling with a more sophisti-
cated piece of equipment in a laboratory, I once got Purgatory
on the radio,” said the Late Cecil Corn. “No, I don't joke
either. It was, I assure you, the most powerful thing I ever
pulled out of the air. I know it to have been authentic. In
my latter state I have brushed it again several times. But I
am not there now. I don't know where I am. I suspect that I
am in the world with you."
It is tomorrow morning and the project has begun.
The snake-belly reader was climbing up gypsuni cliffs.
They were crumbly-
178
CHAPTER ELEVEN
- nor found our true kitb or angelical kin,
or ever discovered that shape that we're in.
The insoluble problem for any narrator is to ex-
press the perfect sphere by means of a straight line,
or even a shaggy sphere by a crooked line. For any
subject or happening is globe-shaped, or at least
glob-shaped, of some solidity and substance. And
any narration must have sequence, which is line.
But why narrate spheres? Why strive for such an
ideal or ideated form? Surely there are other shapes
more curious, more open, more pregnant, though
pregnancy does tend toward the spherical. There
are other shapes more varied. Why not narrate sad-
dles or quarries? What kind of saddles, then?
Dromendary saddles, I suppose. They're the closest
I
thing to the shape of it.
Ermenics of Shape-Audifax O'Hanlon
-The snake-belly reader was climbing up gypsum cliffs.
They were crumbly rock cemented together with lime, and
glistening in the morning sun. The lime gypsum of the cliffs
179
had a tang as though it were unaccountably alive, or too re-
cently dead. Really it smelled slightly edible. But there was
a ranker odor coming from the caves of the cliffs, an odor
incredibly but impossibly alive and intolerably ancient.
Snakes! The snake-belly reader had a retching fear of snakes.
His name was Glasser.
He was a poor climber, he was ragged and had holes
in his shoes, he was wretchedly fitted for his job, and he was
humorless. But the shape of his fcar might have been part
of the shape of what we're seeking. In personality he was the
least of the members of the Institute. He couldn't turn his
assignment into a vivacious thing as could Valery, into a
giantized thing as could Grcgory, into a splendidly outré thing
as could Aloysius. Some have the vocation to high paradox
and intuition and involvement with the mysterious shape. But
always there must be some humble ones who are the hewers
of wood, the drawers of water, the readers of snakes' bellies.
But snakes gol Glasser. It was the cold uncleanliness of
this cleanest of animals that shivered him. Is the snake's
unnaturalness due to its lacking appendages? Why should the
lack make it weird and unnatural? But Glasser in his limited
way was a man or trembling courage. He had never in his
life refused any fearful task, or went about it any way except
in fear.
So he was on to one of them as he came up over a lcdge!
He pinned it with a snake-pinner. He turned it over on its
writhing back. Doggedly he recorded the pattern of striations
and botches on its bclly. But he was trembling and quivering.
He was deathly afraid of the things.
He continued to climb. He was afraid of hcights also,
and the cliffs were very high and sheer. He pinned two more
of thc writhers and recorded thcir belly marks. Then he
indulged himself in a jolling swallow of snakc-bito rcmcdy.
“It's an unusual place to write messages," he said, “on a
snakc's belly. But perhaps it is a logical place to write hidden
messages. If I were a Power looming above the world, where
on the world would I wrilc messages that might not be immc-
180
diately discovered? Why not on the hidden side of an object
that has a certain repulsiveness? Who will investigate it will-
ingly? The instructions that we are seeking have certainly
been well hidden so far, if they exist. Just where on Earth, or
off it, would be a good hiding place for such messages? This
isn't a bad place, not for them to remain hidden.”
There was rank odor above Glasser, so extreme as to be
hardly authentic. It might be a large and dangerous serpent.
Glasser's teeth rattled like dice in his mouth. The very lights
were scared out of him, but he was a member of the Institute,
and Institute members were accustomed to outrageous inves-
tigations. Anything for Impure Science!
“Ah, well, the starker the snake the stronger the mes-
sage, perhaps," he rationalized. “And it's important to me
and to all of us to find out just what shape we are in.
Doggedly fearful, Glasser came up over the next ledge
and pinned the big snake before his spirit should fail him. He
was hit by staccato quivering and withering shock that nearly
tore his arm off. It was a mighty snake and he pinned it with
difficulty.
The snake's eyes glittered with evil humor. They were
the eyes of someone he knew, but Glasser didn't know any
snakes personally, except Snake. And this one was something
like, but it was not Snake.
And the dirgelike tune that the snake was whistling was
unnerving. Well, there is a South American snake with a
whistlelike hiss, but this shouldn't have been a South Amer-
ican snake. With great effort Glasser turned the monstrous
thing over.
“Ever feel like crawling under one, Glass?" the words
erupted on the snake's belly.
“Oh, damn you, Epikt, you idiot machine!” Glasser
burst out angrily. (I'm a card, I tell you, I'm a clown, I'm
a character, and Glasser's fright broke me up completely.
Valery said once that she counted as one of the blessings of
her life knowing a machine that giggled.) “Oh, stop it, Epikt,
it isn't that funny!” Glasser swore furiously. Well, Glasser's
>
181
own fright and fury pattern had entered the data, and perhaps
it was as valuable as any other item. Then he sighed all the
way to the hollow middle of him: “Epikt, you're a natural
snake, you're a snake from the beginning, you're a perverted
legless mechanism. But what is it about snakes, Epikt, what
is it? Why isn't a fish weird like a snake? It lacks the same
appendages. Epikt, is there any possibility at all that this data
will be of value?”
Glasser gestured hopelessly. Well, maybe the pattern,
when we found it, would be a pattern of hopelessness.
“Sure is a slim chance, Glass, sure is slim,” the words
wrote themselves on the snake's bclly. “And a fish isn't weird,
Glasser, because he's fishy—a much more profound quality.”
Myself the Ktistcc machine always liked to make these
extensions of myself to keep abreast of the field work when
the Institute people were collecting wild data, especially when
(as in the present case) I myself had selected the impossible
fields of study by rogue-random calculation. My main brain
of course, remained back at the Institute (it itself is of
building-sized bulk) but these runners of myself with which
I have so much fun are likely to turn up anywhere. And you
should have seen me this time. I do make a good snake.
“It's so frustrating, Epikt,” Glasser complained, and I
almost broke up again to see him standing and talking down
awkwardly to the snake that he haled, even though he knew
it was myself, whom he rather liked. “In all the
years
of
man,
in all the years of rocks, in all the ycars of orbs, nobody has
ever found the pattern or shape of it. And we can't know the
pattern and shape of ourselves till we know it of the larger
thing. The casy answer, the spherical answer, has always been
given, but there is something the matter with the answer.
There's something too finished about a sphere—unless it
bursts.”
“Stay with it, Glasser," I ſashed the words on the belly
of my snakc-cxtcnsion. “We may find that it is an inside-out
pattern. We may find the pattern in our failures and omis-
sions. We may scc it in the reverse shape of our blindness.
182
Now I will unmake myself here, and I will go and be a ramp-
ant ram to meet the Valery person."
I disappeared before his eyes and he shivered. The only
thing more disquieting than coming on a snake suddenly is
to have one disappear suddenly into nothing.
Glasser continued to climb up the gypsum cliffs. He
found a gravid adder on a high sun-warmed ledge, pinned
her, slit her open, and recorded the belly marks of the seven
unborn crawlers. This might be important. The unborn may
carry messages from before or outside the worlds. It was
important. Certain of the markings faded almost immediately.
If he had not caught them then they would never have been
caught. Glasser also recorded the markings on the cauls that
adhered to several of the unborn. This is a place where, per-
haps, nobody had ever thought to look for a message before:
on the bluish cauls of unborn snakes.
“Therefore think him a serpent's egg . . . And kill
him in the shell.” The words were flashed subliminally on
Glasser's unconscious, but the recorder recorded them. But
the adders of the gypsum cliffs were live-bearing snakes, a
few of them having cauls only in remembrance of shells.
Whence this strong under-vision of great broken shells? Even
of oviparous snakes, the eggs are rubbery. But the vision re-
corded out of Glasser's mind, but not known to him con-
sciously, was of people-shells and not of snake-eggshells. Still
more strange: even of oviparous people, the eggs are rubbery.
(See the old tome De Miraculi by Quaesitor.)
When you have looked in all sane places for the answer,
for the message, the shape and pattern, then you may as well
look in the insane places. Institute members were out now
trying to read patterns and shapes in the fluorescence of sea-
lice, in snail-slime patterns, in the cross sections of marrow of
rock-badger bones, in paddle-fish trails, in nine-year flight-
way designs, in constellations, in ballads (especially in roun-
dels which never do find their own round), in the polter-
ghostly unbalance of a hiatus-human species known as the
adolescents, in the cross-timbers, in spark-worm responses.
183
Nobody could say that they didn't look everywhere for the
messages, if indeed there were any.
Several miles away from Glasser, in another part of the
glob-form subject, Valery Mok was undertaking her own
investigations with a little more liveliness. She wasn't scared
of snakes, she wasn't scared of anything, and there was noth-
ing in the whole buggy world that would make Valery ill.
Of her several assignments, she had begun with hunting out
mares' nests. Their significance is in folk-colloquy, so it may
be in fact. But a mare's nest is usually no more than a circle
of trampled grass in a thicket of small trees. Still, Valery re-
corded all that she might find in them. It was more than most
persons would find. A shape or pattern might adhere to these
places. There was something that adhered strongly.
“A habitation of dragons and a court of owls” reflected
on her under-mind too rapidly for her mind itself to know.
But not too rapidly for the recorder. In these little closes
of runt cedar trees and sumac bushes Valery sensed and re-
corded a vestige of something older: Pan-Demonium. Before
there had been mares' nests there had been these old holds
of the cloven-hoofs, of all horned and hoofed creatures, and
of their double-named patron. Valery also sensed and re-
corded the relationship between Pan and panic, and she got
a a happy hold on the terrifying impetus of that old headlong
flight.
There had been a sudden appearance that broke the
rules, a creature of an unnaturalness and weirdness beyond
the cloven-hoofs. It had been a paranatural solid-hoofed ani-
mal or spector, at first single-horned, then hornless. There had
never been a hornless hoofed creature before. The first mare,
of course, had been the nightmare, and out of that first mare's
nest had been foaled a wrong-shaped thing that panicked Pan
and all his devils. We remember the solid-hoofed unicorns
only a little. We are afraid to remember that very first foal,
and the shape of it.
But should the lack of things, horns, or dividedness,
184
>
or legs, or other, make a creature or paracreature to be
unnatural?
All of this was only a little half-conscious fancy of
Valery, of course, but the small recorder hooked behind her
ear recorded it all. Even in the random fancies of human per-
sons it is possible that a pattern may be found.
She experienced quick peace there in the middle of one
of the cedar closes. “A lodge in a garden of cucumbers,” it
recorded brightly, but unknown to her, in her dark plasm.
Then sudden thunder!
There were hard driving hoofs behind Valery, old
cloven-hoofs returned with a vengeance. And a rush! There
was terrible impact before she could tum. She was knocked
down violently. She was raked horribly with horns. She
screamed in anger and surprise.
It was a rampant ram there, with three sets of hors, and
dancing evil humor in his too-familiar eyes. I do these things
rather well.
“Oh, damn you, Epikt, you ramshackle fool!” Valery
swore. “You can kill a guy hitting her there!” She rolled
around delighted in the grass. “Boy, where did you think up
those horns? One pair brass, one pair wood, one pair plastic.
Don't
you
horns made out of horn? Have you for-
gotten the symbolism, that true things come through the gate
of hom? No, you will not give me a tune on the brass ones.
You don't even know how to make a ram. You aren't even
all ram. Part of you is goat."
Well, that is the way I intuit a ram, and I can't let
Valery know I am mistaken so I will fake it. “I am chimera,"
I issue with all the profundity of a con man. “Do I not do the
ghost-animal sparkle well, Valery?”
“With eyes of gold and bramble-dew,” flashed through
the subliminal area of my ram-mobile. What, have machines
subliminal areas? Some of us have.
“Damn the hoofs,” Valery said. “I'll let them pound and
ferment in me while I do other things now. I want to do blind
moles. The Late Cecil Corn had set great store in blind moles
have any
185
before he, ah, well, before. You know, of course, that “The
Shape We're In' is one of his unfinished projects?”
“Of course I know it. Yes, blind moles are fun, Valery,”
I issucd. “And you also might do crow-calls while you're out
today. And thistlcdown has points of interest. Don't forget
the spark-worms cithcr; they're prime stuff. I go now to be
a flying fish for a while and to keep an eye on the boys at
sea. That rabbit there, it might be interesting for you to study
the pattern of the hairs between its tocs.”
“I will kill and eat the rabbit,” Valery said. “We don't
seem to eat so well at the Institute any more. Ram it, you
ramshackle ram, get gone!"
“The Hare sits snug in leaves and grass And laughs
to sce the green man pass," ficked in and out of the sublim-
inal of Valery. “But this green woman will have him and
rend him!” Valery cricd, as she dipped down into her own
under-pattern like a swooping howlet. Valery had access to
herself in ways that were almost dirty.
I had left in my ram-extension, and then I had left my
ram-extension, sending it off by itself to the potting shed. And
both Valery and I hcard it singing “I am a linen-draper bold”
as it went away. It puzzles me sometimes how these things
seem to have a life of their own after I have withdrawn from
them.
Valery killed that rabbit and studied the pattern of hairs
between its toes. The toc hairs arc of very ancient pattern,
though sloths have not come to it yet and conics have it all
wrong. Then Valory cooked the rabbit and ate it. There
wasn't much left of a rabbit after Valery had cooked and
catcn it. Shc boned it first with the fincssc of a surgeon or a
femalc butcher. She made the fire of the bones and a few
punks of stump wood. She put the rabbit picces in a sack of
its own skin, filled it with strcam water, and boiled it. It boils
till the water is entirely juice, till the water-empty skin burns
through and spills thc hunks in the burning ashes. And she
ate a lot of hot ashes with the meat, and then drank off a
186
-
little dram of the blood that she had set aside in the cup of
the skull. Valery enjoyed such casual meals.
She came through groves and meadows then, and on
through blue-stem pastures. She looked down from the high
pastures to the cross-timbers and gypsum cliffs and little
mountains. She met Glasser coming to the top of the gypsum
cliffs. She bussed him and embarrassed him, and together they
went to hunt and kill rock-badgers to read the patterns of
their bone-marrow,
How do you kill them? Why, you kill rock-badgers with
rocks, how else? At least Valery did, snatching its hissing
growling life from it and enjoying the death-muskiness it put
out. Then she laid it open with a pig-sticker knife and un-
shaped it with fast strong hands plunged inside. And the
bones are broken laterally with a little geologist's hammer
such as any Institute member will always be carrying.
Glasser—why Glasser was almost as afraid of badgers
as he was of snakes. He was even a little fearful of them when
they were dismembered. They don't quit fighting even then,
you know. The old truculence still flickers along the bones
themselves, like fire in ashes. But even Glasser can see the
importance of what they have here.
The patterns of badger-bone marrow give all the high-
way maps of the worlds. They give every inlet and tidal estuary
of
every planet of every sun. Here were all sorts of plans and
patterns writ small. There were blueprints (gray-red prints)
of how to build worlds and welkins. If the whole universe
were destroyed, it could be reconstructed pretty nearly from
the patterns of rock-badger bone-marrow. The badger is
dead, but its bone-marrow is not dead yet. It is still living,
almost lunging in the color flickers of it.
Later, Valery and Glasser studied and recorded cloud-
castles and thunderheads, for these have patterns like noth-
ing else. And they took readings on the emanations of sick
swamps.
“What advantageth me if the dead rise not?” whipped
187
through the lower apperceptions of them both, shivering
Glasser, delighting Valery. She had always loved the image
of the dead rising with just the rough memory of rot on them.
There was reminder in this, also, that thcy were trampling in
the road of a project of the Late Cecil Com.
Four children, two boys and two girls (one of them the
little redheaded girl in Valery's block), were following out a
devilish maze and fetish in Lcan Eagle Strcct. These four had
been ordained as auxiliary members of thc Institutc by Aloy-
sius Shiplap who understood the necd of them. These kids
had followed such fetishes and mazes bcforc, but not in full
knowledge that they were devilish. It would have been for-
bidden absolutely to adults to follow a fetish trail in such a
spirit, but where was the harm in innocent children doing it?
Look me in the eyes and say that again! No, no, in my
main eyes below: those are pseudo-cycs above there and they
fulfill another function entirely. Now then, tell mc whether
you have cver known an innocent child? Innocent, innocens,
not-nocens, not noxious, not harming or thrcatening, not wcap-
oned. Older persons may sometimes fall into a state of inno-
ccncc (aſter they have lost their teeth and their claws), but
children arc never innocent if they are rcal. These four were
real and not at all innocent.
They played at odds and cvens on sidewalk squarcs.
They played at Count Five and Count Ninc. You step on a
wrong squarc in cither of those and you are dead literally.
The patterns of their mcanders were being recorded as they
created them. Thcy played at live cracks and dead cracks in
the strcct, and Lean Eagle Street is the crackicst strect in
town.
Live lincs, live cracks is as mystical a thing as dowsing.
Many of the lines are invisible in their writhing, and it isn't
just anybody who can ſollow them. But these four children
had special powers. They each followed out onc of the live
lincs, constructing as they did so a large and intricate icira-
188
grammaton. A tetragrammaton, beyond its original and lim-
ited meaning, is a four-letter word, usually a four-letter dirty
word, and dirtier than you think. It is said that the pattern
of live lines, which are mostly below the earth, but which do
sometimes appear as cracks in pavement or withered strips of
grass, is invisible and unknown to the Almighty who looks
down from above: that He would be shocked beyond bearing
if He did know of them, and that He would blast them to
great depth. But there is another belief: that He does know
of the pattern of the live lines, and that He bides His time.
I do not know.
The live lines, when drawn into the tetragrammaton,
portray the mock-shape of the universe. Some of the Institute
members believed that it would be possible to construct the
true shape of the universe from the mock- or caricature-shape.
Again, I do not know.
The four young creatures (they had left off being human
children for a while; they became something else when they
did this thing) completed their four-part weave of live lines
and cracks. Four young creatures, and the cracks stood. And,
naturally, the sky also cracked. Blue lightning came and got
one of the young creatures. And then there were three.
Oh, come off it, Epikt, admit it. Weren't there only three
kids all the time?
No, there were clearly four figures there through it all.
One of them, however, had been stranger than the others.
He was not one of the known kids of Lean Eagle Street. He
had come from somewhere, and he had gone again with the
blue lightning. The gobbling up of one was a necessity to the
success of the recording.
But at least we had a recording of the mock-shape of the
universe.
Diogenes Pontifex, who was almost a member of the
Institute, being barred only by the minimal decency rule (he
accepted the Full Revelation and he rejected the Liberal Con-
189
sensus), was trying to extract valid patterns from the Sepul-
chers of Saints. But first let me tell you an early story of
Diogenes which I have extracted from his person-précis.
.
The city in which he was raised on Dago Hill was not a
large city. It was a medium city, a border city in a border
state. Just off Dago Hill in a sort of boondocks was Hillbilly
Flats; and a little off from both in a scraggly area atop the
river bluffs was an old mixed and often desecrated cemetery.
It was there that the boys of several sorts used to come on
Allhalloween, and it was there that the older boys played
bone-rattling tricks on the younger. There was one grave of
an old Confederate soldier that was cracked and gaped, and
the boys had driven a section of rainspout down into the
grave to use for a talking tube.
“Halloo,” they would call down it every Hallowcen
night, "is there anybody down there?” And there would come
the noise of a crcaky stirring, and a cracked voice would
whecze up out of the grave: “Eh—is it tinc? Has the South
riz again?”
“No, not yet,” the boys would holler back.
“Ah, well, I'll bidc ne another year then,” the cracked
voice would sound.
This rcally happened. I have come across it in the précis
of more than fifty men who witnessed it as boys. Some of
thesc arc respectable men. One of them is a judge. Their
authentic memories are to be trusted.
There was another grave there with a holc going down
into it like a big rat hole or a skunk hole. This grave was
right at the edge of the river bluff and was undermined by
boys' caves in the face of the bluff. It was part of a grisly
Halloween night initiation that a young boy must lic down
ſat with his face in the dirt and put his hand and arm down
in the holc as far as he could rcach.
“Go ahead," the older boys would urge the younger.
"It's only a dcad man down there. How can a dead man hurt
you?"
So the young boy would lic with his face in the dirt and
>
190
>
a
his arm as far down as he could reach. But an older boy, from
a cave in the face of the bluff, would be able to grip the
wrist of the little boy and almost pull him down into the nar-
row hole. I have read the shocking and killing terror from
the précis of small boys who have gone through this as I have
never read terror in any other précis anywhere. Indeed, one
small boy really did die of fright, but he was sickly and of a
weak heart anyhow.
So it was till one year when the older boys said, “Let's
get that smart little Dago kid," and Diogenes Pontifex was
chosen for the initiation. What things I find in the Diogenes
person-précis for this encounter I have never found in any
other précis anywhere either.
Tall terror? No, absolutely not. It was laughter like
nothing else ever recorded. Joy such as you could hardly be-
lieve, sense of encounter that still leaves one reeling. What
matter if a devil-hand did pull him all the way down the hole
to hell? Could not Diogenes confound the devils and have his
own high time in doing it? Had they wisdom and knowledge
to match his own of seven years? What harm could death or
hell inflict on one who had the ceramic sheen of Diogenes
Pontifex? There were certain things that Diogenes was always
sure of from earliest childhood: that he was smarter than all
the devils in hell (he sure hadn't gotten himself into a jam
like they had); that nothing at all could hurt him except
himself.
Diogenes was disappointed when he found out that it
was only a trick of the older boys; but I can hear his first
laughter yet in my mechanical memory.
And now Diogenes was trying to extract patterns and
shapes from the Sepulchers of Saints in that same old ceme-
tery and in the new cemetery that adjoins it. And naturally
he knew which were the saints, whether or not the names of
them were available. The residue of every saint will be an
authentic piece of the Shape Itself. The residues of those who
are not saints will be not quite authentic pieces of the Shape.
Or so is the theory.
191
Diogenes extracted pieces from old buried Indians and
Negrocs, from roustabouts, from soldiers, from unclaimed
and unnamed dead. He also made extractions from better-
estimated and better-known graves. He achieved more than
a dozen valid pieces of the Shape. Their full value is not
known yet.
Elsewhere in the glob-form that is the world, Charles
Cogsworth and Aloysius Shiplap had gone out from a near
shore. They studiсd the trails of paddle-fish. The paddlc-fish
will veer around obstacles and emptinesses that arc not there.
The men wished to discover the shape of their veering and
the fish-concept of the obstacles. Very likely those empti-
nesses were not empty to thc paddle-fish. Their trails, cer-
tainly, made strange designs.
Later, Cogsworth and Aloysius caught and studied fly-
ing fish and the micalike membranes of their wings when held
obliquely to the sun. There were more patterns there than in
any kalcidoscope. One flying fish had cvil humor in his eyes,
and Aloysius slit him open quickly with his own evil humor.
Oooh, I did not think that Aloysius could slit a fish that fast!
He is one up on me and I am undonc completely.
"This one is too fishy to be a fish,” Aloysius said (I will
remember forever that he is very quick of hand, I will not
makc this mistake again), “we will sce whether he is too fishy
to eat.”
They tried it but they couldn't. It was neither fish nor
fcsh. It was plastic and mechanism and gell-cell. It was an
extension of myself, Epikt. And Aloysius is one up on this
machine.
When it was dusk, Cogsworth and Aloysius studied the
patterns of the fluorescence of sca-lice. These were green
cloud-shapes under the dark water, sparkling and snapping
with wet jewel-firc, tumbling in agony of light and struggle,
forging shapes and smashing then, glittering like constella-
tions and mocking all patterns. There was always grcen anger
192
and defiance in the sea-lice, flawed grandeur and false agony.
How could inchling-lice have true grandeur and agony?
Ah, well, how can inchling-humans have such?
I must have had a blackout. I have, apparently, made a
mobile unbeknownst to myself. It has been around the vari-
ous groups a good part of this critical day and the Institute
people have come to call it the goofmobile. But how could it
be goofy if it is a projection and mobile of myself?
It is a long-faced man-form, an angular Angle, straw-
haired and gray-eyed, and it says that its name is Easterwine.
I must have made it from the philological speculations that
are bubbling within me, but Easterwine is supposed to be a
place and not a person. When I call the form long-faced I
do not mean to call him solemn. He had a long-faced smile,
a large and joyous nose, a more than archaic gown, and a
mistiness of appearance. He is not of high resolution. This
means that he is either a mobile of myself, the most likely
explanation since I have mobiles all over the place, or a hal-
lucination. He makes healing signs with his hands, and the
only words he speaks are “Let some sick man be brought.”
He is around all the locations in the afternoon while the
Institute people are trying to gather data on shape. Gregory
and Glasser and the Late Cecil Corn claim that they cannot
see this Easterwine. They say that I am having hallucinations.
A machine having hallucinations? Oh, I suppose so, but to
be called hallucinatory by a genuine hallucination (the Late
Cecil Com) hurts. But I know that Valery can see this Easter-
wine wraith, and I suspect that Aloysius can.
Diogenes Pontifex both sees him and knows him. That,
however, is almost an endorsement in reverse. “He used to
be an abbot at St. Peter's monastery in Kent,” Diogenes said,
“but that was a long time ago.”
“Let some sick man be brought,” said the apparition
Easterwine, and he made healing motions with his hands.
Illumination came into my dense head. I record the healing
motions of his hands, the shape and pattern that they draw.
193
It may be the closest thing that we have yet to the shape it-
self. We look on snakes' bellies for the shape of it. Why
should we disdain the hands of a hallucination who was once
abbot of St. Peter's in Kent?
Easterwine disappears to my own eyes. He is like no
other moblie I have ever made, if I have made him.
-
And meanwhile again, back in the high meadows in an-
other arca of the glob-form, Valery and Glasser were study-
ing the spark-worms in the twilight. Twenty of the spark-
worms are not so large as one match head. Two hundred of
them would scarcely give the light of one match. But the
billions of them in the high mcadows and pastures sent out
billows and sheets and waves of light.
A design of light would be built by the spark-worms in
one draw. It would be answered by those in a second draw,
by those on a hilltop, by those in a tangled ravine. Running
fire crested and broke, skipped over streams, ran up farther
hills. Glowing pulsations shined and throbbed. There was
sound or imagined sound in the pulsations, a static knocking
or sputtering, a clamor to get in somewhere, or to get out.
Thirty thousand of the sparkics blinked together to
make onc beacon. Thirty thousand others, five hundred yards
away, answered with a second beacon. And then the two
signal lights began to blink together in perfect unison. There
were other strange things. The spark-worms mapped out the
sky-constellations above them and did it with sccming of
depth that was not apparent in the constellations themselves.
Valery and Glasser recorded the patterns of the sparkies.
They recorded the patterns of their own reactions to them.
The shape of it all was certainly curious, but most curious of
all was the timbre of that shape. For there is an interesting
and almost frightening thing about these spark-worms:
They are blind. They will never see their own light nor
know that they make it. Surely here, if anywhere, is blind
pattern. But should their lack of cyes make them to be of
unusual pattern?
194
Valery and Glasser went down from the high pastures,
through night music, to the town. Charles Cogsworth and
Aloysius Shiplap came up from the coast. They were to meet
that night, all of them, with Gregory Smirnov the director in
the building of the Institute for Impure Science,
The members of the Institute intended to solve-
195
CHAPTER TWELVE
These are the worlds all tattered and torn,
And bot-cakes made for the still unborn.
-The members of the Institute intended to solve another of
their most important problems this night.
“We are met here to further a work of the Late Cecil
Corn,” the director Gregory Smirnov stated pompously. The
look on Cecil Corn's face was something that I cannot de-
scribe. It is the only time, I belicve, that Gregory was ever
onc up on Cecil and he was cnjoying it as he puffed on a
short fat cigar.
A man of Grcgory's stature could hardly sacrifice quality
in his cigars, but he had had to sacrifice length. Briefly, Greg-
ory was no longer able to buy finc cigars and he was seldom
able to cadge them now. (The only money the Institute has
now is from me, and I like to keep the members a little lean
and avid and thinking.) Aloysius Shiplap, however, had built
a quality-cigar-finder for Gregory. It indicated the length and
state of health and location of finc cigar butts (it would not
register on anything cxccpl quality picces), and was built into
the ornate head of Grcgory's canc. Gregory collected quite a
few butts on his daily walks, in gutters, in weed patches, in
rcccptacles. He retrieved them with dignity and he smoked
>
196
them with dignity. Gregory was a gentleman through and
through.
“Cecil Com started so many things so brilliantly for us,'
Gregory continued, cocking an eye at the seat where Cecil
would have been visible if he were visible, “and, we are wont
to say, he died so tragically at the height of his powers. I say
that he played us a rat trick. He never finished any of his
projects. He couldn't finish them. He promised finally that
he would wrap up eight of them in one week, two on a Sat-
urday. He couldn't do it; his only way out was to die. Bless
his memory, the whiskery rat! And yet, an Institute has to
have a 'Late' eminence for legend's sake, and he serves.
“This project of the Late Cecil Corn was to determine
the shape of the universe. Cecil said that it had to be a com-
municating and re-entrant sphere. He said that if he did find
the shape to be re-entrant, he would re-enter and tell us about
it. He did not return—Valery says that he has not even left-
so I doubt that the shape is re-entrant. I believe that it is a
sphere, but if it is a communicating sphere we seem to have a
lot of trouble communicating that fact. In a way, we ourselves
have gone around a sphere in our quest and have come back
reassured to our starting place. Most of us began with the
idea that the universe was a sphere, and we return steadfast
in the belief that it is an incontrovertible sphere.”
“What is an incontrovertible sphere?” asked Charles
Cogsworth, the unoutstanding husband of Valery Mok. “I'll
controvert it if I can, if it doesn't talk to me."
The Institute for Impure Science, as well as other things
in the world, had come onto skinny and shabby days. Appro-
priations for Impure Science had fallen off. Except for certain
confidence games devised by Aloysius Shiplap and by myself
Epiktistes the Ktistec machine, the Institute could hardly
have survived. The director Gregory disapproved of bilking
the poor public, or even the rich public, but he didn't disap-
prove as loudly as he once had. The power consumption of
myself, Epikt, was enormous and had to be paid for (you
don't think I was going to pay for it so long as I was working
197
9
for them, do you?), and all of the members had to eat and to
keep up appearances.
“It's a flawed sphere, at least,” Glasser said. “All thanks
for the flaws. They're the only things in it that speak to me.'
“There are so many things missing out of it that it seems
unnatural,” Valery proposed, “but I think it's natural for
things to be unnatural. . . . Oh, oh, Charles said that he'd
tie a knot in my tongue the next time I said something that
sounded like that.”
“From the evidence of the Cosmo people, the universe
has at least fifty different local shapes,” Aloysius put in. “We
cannot consider all the evidence of the Cosmo people, though.
They require one entire world (actually only a large asteroid)
to store thcir cvidence on all the worlds, and cven so they
have not explored nearly all the localities. Oh, our own gal-
axy and our own cluster can be shaped and sized as flat
spheres, but it isn't so cverywhere. Gravity and light-force
and cosmic hysteresis indicate that the universe is somewhere
quoit-form, sometimes oyster-form—”
“Both are distortions of spheres,” said Grcgory, lighting
a longer butt from a shorter.
“Why is shape so important?” Glasser asked. He has
been asking it a lot lately.
“As was shown by our experiments with obcliskitc-form
snow,” I stuck in my oar (I've never understood thc cxact
applicability of that phrasc), “the shape and the structure
determinc the characteristics of anything. The material, the
content, has nothing to do with it. Or rather, the shape and
the structure arc, ultimately, the material and the content. Now
let me explain-
“Aw, put it in a bucket, Epikt,” Aloysius said. “To
continue, in some places the universe is lorus-shaped, some-
,
times it has the shape of an outer-spacc half-shell, or open
ball, or spherical shell, or annulus, or chiroteca, or sub-sct
manifold, or jordan cylinder, or sclla, or involute. Sometimes
it is a haggis-shell, or batilium, or rete, or cavum, or inner-
space cuncus. Mostly, I suspect, it is a cancelli system.”
9
198
“Well put, Aloysius,” said the Late Cecil Corn.
“People, we know that space is not of uniform shape,”
Aloysius Shiplap continued, “and our idea of ourselves as
people is predicated on a uniform shape. Therefore we will
have to rethink the whole idea of people. If shape and sub-
stance are the same things, then perhaps communication or
liaison and people are the same things. Why ever it should
fall to a clutch of solitary uncommunicating people like our-
selves to ask whether communication is identical with people
I do not know. We must discover the real, the un-uniform
shape of people. We will learn that there is no such thing as
absolute people. We know that our light and our gravity are
not uniform, that there are gaping holes in our space, and
consequently there are gaping holes in ourselves.”
“Isn't holes in space just empty space?” Valery asked.
“God Himself must answer on the last day for giving
speech to women!” Aloysius moaned. “No, they are not the
same thing, Valery. Children and women often go wrong on
their thinking there. Most space is empty space, it is true.
But a hole in space is not space at all, it is not nothing even,
it is simply a hole in space. Light, for instance, cannot cross
a hole in space, but it can cross empty space. Gravity cannot
cross a hole in space, nor could we ever be aware of the hole
except by inference.”
“Well, we've certainly gone as far as we can go with it,”
said Gregory, scorching his nose as he lit another stub. “Only
out of honor to the Late Cecil Com have we gone this far. We
fed all conventional and rational data of shape and pattern
and simultaneity and sequence into Epikt, a really fantastic
bulk of data. We asked him to show us the shape of the
universe based on all this data. And what did you show us
then, Epikt?”
“A rotten apple,” I issued. “Really, there was more hole
than apple.”
“And a rotten apple is nothing but a slightly distorted
sphere!” Gregory triumphed. “That should have settled it, but
you bleaters continued to bleat. 'No, there isn't any pattern
199
looking at it straight,' you all said, but maybe there is a
pattern if we look at it crooked. Let us take it from all
grotesque angles.'
“So, to the vast bulk of the stew already simmering,
we add in a salt-pinch of all manner of human humor-
madness, and the garlic of Epikt's own peculiar antics. The
stew should bark like prairie dogs from its very aroma now.
I permitted you to gather irregular and ridiculous data that
might have bearing on shape and pattern. I blush for the
Institute to hear of the things that you have indulged in. But
I tell you that the universe is clearly a sphere, and all the
slight irregularities of the slightly irregular Aloysius cannot
make it anything else. The universe is a sphere, for the spherc
is the most perfect of shapes.”
“The sphere is not the most perfect shape,” Valery
insisted. “It is only the most selfish shape. Take away a
sphere, and—'what an abominable leave! as a pool-player
might say. Spheres will not meet together, they will not stack,
they have no consideration for others. How they communi-
cate is completely beyond me. We here are spheres ourselves
and that is what is the matter with us. The only tolerable
sphere is the perpetually exploding sphere.”
“Gregory, why are therc holes in my shoes?” Glasser
demanded suddenly.
“Gad, lad, what has that to do with it?" Gregory asked.
“Please do not burden the director with our poverty whilc a
problem is under consideration,”
“Our poverty is part of the problem we are considering,”
Charles Cogsworth stated. “Were the universe a perfect
sphere, then Glasser would not have holes in his shocs. Were
it a perfect sphere, then there would be no wccd growing in
the world, there would not be anything that should not be. If
the cosmos were perfectly spherical, then all details of it
would be perfectly ordered, and the Institute for Impure
Science would prosper, as would all good things. I myself
don't see how we would have liaison, though, not even as
200
much as we have now. And it would soon cloy, I suppose. But why is it flawed, G regory?" "It is flawed because of the brainlessnes of the many, and of my own associates!" Gregory swore heavily. "Dammit, there is something the matter with the brains of every one of you." "Lost lobes, maybe, Gregory?" Valery asked. "But we're too spherical already. We all think spherical self-con­ tained thoughts. Maybe we have to find more lost things. Lost legs of snakes, lost horns of horses, lost eyes of spark­ worms, lost colons of sea-lice ( it's in their agony over the lack of that that they fluoresce, you know, like the meanest animal in the joke) , lost eyes of moles-oh, oh, oh, we should have studied the patterns of mole burrows. I meant to. We will do it tomorrow." "No, we will not do any such thing tomorrow. We will finish the project tonight," Director Gregory insisted. "We'll finish it right now. Is there anything else to throw into this devils' stew? Anything of your own, Epikt?" "Certain anomalies of the inner ears of left-footed newts, inexplicable behavior of what is apparently a mobile exten­ sion of mine that I do not remember making, a tune I can't quite place, a few loose quotes-'Fear in a handful of dust­ I did but taste a little honey and, lo, I must die'-that's from some Jeremiad, I forget the author, I've got it filed in my main memory downstairs." "Oh, damn your main memory downstairs!" Gregory roared. "Is there anything else, you cursed mechanismus?" "Prodigies, sayings, subliminals of myself and of all of you," I issued. "The planet Aradne whose moons have moons which have moons which have moons. I know of Aradne intuitively. The astronomers do not know of her at all. Quick bulletins arriving every moment from elsewhere-'Finn McCool has lost his orbs and oysters'-'For Habakkuk, it was a bag of holes'-'Lost upon the roundabouts'-! forget the various sources but I believe that they all mean something. I
201
>
love people-sayings. I wish we had a corpus of machine-
sayings."
“I thought it was 'lost his orbs and apples,'” Aloysius
said, “but my main memory also is elsewhere."
“Last call, anything else to go in?'' Gregory hooted, like
a boat leaving a shore.
“Snake-belly botches, spark-worm patterns, snail-slime,”
Valery was ticking them off. “Marrow designs of rock-badger
bones, paddle-fish trails in the trailless ocean, mares' nests,
fluorescence of sea-lice, Sepulchers of Saints, mock-shape,
blue lightning, four-letter words, healing hands. Check. Well,
we don't have ncar enough but we've got a lot of it. Do it,
Epikt!”
“I'll shoot thc works,” I issued. “That's an old phrase,
I forget the origin, I've got it filed in my-
“Get with it, Epikt,” they all cried.
"Are you sure you're all plugged in?" Charles Cogsworth
asked carefully.
“Don't forget that little brain of yours and the memory
cannister at what you call your summer cottage down at the
town dump, Epikt," Valery cautioned.
“Got them all," I issued. "Got them all plugged in.”
“Let some sick face be brought,” said Easterwine as he
shaped space with his healing hands. How did that spook
appear now? I have slipped badly if I have made such an
cxtension as that.
Then the Ktistec machine, which is myself, went into its
agony. The several thousand cubic meters of it shuddered
with the cffort, and the wholc Institutc building shook. Lights
dimmed in all that part of town, and transfer switches cut
more power into the lincs.
I correlated all the data of shape and pattern: standard
and conventional data that the Institutc pcoplc had gathered
for years (including the original Cccil Corn data), ncwer
data that had been caught in a final insane (no, not insane,
sane, singularly sanc) outburst: irregular and ridiculous data,
wild data from sca-snails and inverted galaxics, from sun-
1)
>
202
motes on silica dust and from footprints of fevered mice (and
of fevered children, and blue lightning got one), data from
the machinery world of high iron and from the undine world
of fragmented ions, data from mythoform and from novaform.
The multidimensional screens came to life. The shape
patterns came clearer and clearer. The people gasped at the
power of it, and I the Ktistec groaned.
And there it was before us all in all its bleak strength!
It was passionately present but not yet realized. This was the
pattern and shape of the cosmos, displayed authentically in
the glowing maw of the transcendent Ktistec machine that was
myself. Or was it in me? Which was inside and outside?
“What a simulacrum!" Valery gasped.
“No, it is not,” I issued quakingly. “Valery and all, this
is real. No miniature or simulacrum is really similar to its
original, since size itself is a distortion. Even two spheres of
different size cannot really be of the same shape. It is for this
reason that your servant and more-than-peer does not present
a miniature, but the thing itself. I present it to you as it is
seen by better eyes than your own—by mine. You will notice,
or perhaps you will not, that this vision is not really inside
me. I am inside it, as are you all. It will take a little getting
used to, though.”
Well, it did take some getting used to for them, even for
myself. The thing was not really on the multidimensional
screens. It was itself, everywhere, seen new, or seen out of
buried memory. There was this very strong element of recog-
nition, too strong to bear. Scales had fallen from eyes, shock-
ingly. Scales on eyes have always had their purpose.
"Why is there no motion in it, Epikt?” Valery asked
fearfully.
“There is, but on a cosmic scale, and too slow to see.
Your eyes and yourselves aren't cleared enough to see it yet,”
I issued.
“Then speed it up!”
“I cannot speed up the worlds, Valery."
“Run it backwards then. I want to see what came out of
»
203
those billion-by-billion kilometer eggshells.” Valery was un-
accountably crying.
“I cannot run time backward on a total mass," I issued.
The universe, new seen, grew in power and clarity, and
ghastliness.
“It's still a sphere," Gregory growled stubbornly. “A
little bit rough, but a sphere.” But Gregory had slipped and
shrunken. For the moment he was no giant. He had reached
his limit, and perhaps his minutes as director were numbered.
“It's still a rotten apple?" Glasser gasped with a passion
unusual to him. “Oh, oh, why have apples been the symbol
both of the loss and the search? Oh, God of the gutted glob!
The holes in it, the holes in it, the unfathomable abysses, the
searing absences. What thing cries out of its absences? How
will it be fulfilled?"
“It's a sponge,” said Cogsworth through closed teeth.
“How sponges must suffer!"
“It's a cheese,” Valery offered hysterically, “rotted
cheese and full of holes. A whole cosmos of maggotty cheese,
turned green in its taint and rot. And the eggshells! What
hatched out of them? I drcamed of them before I was born,
pieces of broken eggshell millions of parsecs long." Her
shoulders were shaking. I couldn't tell if she was crying or
laughing. “It docs have a strong smell, though,” she said,
"the only one, ever, strong enough to suit me.
“It's a weeping face,” said Aloysius Shiplap. "It's the
lcprous face of a horrificd and horrifying man, a face made
out of livid and wormcaten parchment, horrid with elliptical
gaps.”
“No, Aloysius, it isn't a weeping face, it's a laughing
face,” Charles Cogsworth said with bitter wonder. “But can
I have liaison with that facc? What has it to laugh about? It
must surely be demented laughter."
“But it isn't,” Glasser cut back in. “I see it right now.
It's clear and innocent. It's a boy, a child laughing—”
"—with holes rotted clear through him, dying in blinding
pain—"Aloysius gagged.
9
9
>
>
>
204
-living in caves of excrement” Valery burst out.
-childish, triumphant, leprous, ghostly—” Cogsworth
chanted, “—dead and eternally damned to shrieking torture
—a nightmare child surging through putrid flame—”
-still laughing, though,” said Aloysius. “A shaggy kid,
that.”
Well, it is strong, whatever it is, the shape we're in. It
swelled in its power and desolation and shook them all.
Except the director Gregory. How had they forgotten that
Goliath was essentially a Philistine?
“I tell you all that it's no more than a sphere,” this
Gregory Smirnov insisted with a shocking lack of taste. “It's
a slightly distorted sphere. The matter is settled.” But they
all rounded angrily on Gregory.
“So is a cube only a slightly distorted sphere,” Cogs-
worth flared up. “Get out of here, Gregory, you damned
cube."
“I am the director," Gregory said stuffily, but something
had gone out of the man. .
“Then we'll find our indirection without you,” Aloysius
challenged. "Get out of here, you sphere-loving fink. If that's
the shape it's in, how come everything's in such bad shape?”
“Rump! Rump! Rump!” Valery howled.
“What has possessed your female half, Cogsworth?”
Gregory asked, puzzled by it all. “My dear Valery, the clunis,
the rump-form is also no more than a distorted sphere.”
“Rump, rump, rump-session!” Valery still howled, "and
the rump-session will be without our august director. Now you
get right out of here, you clunis-form Gregory!"
Gregory Smirnov growled and left pompously, huffing on
his last quality cigar butt.
“Kill him, kill him," I issued with a growl that surprised
myself. “We can't have ex-directors wandering around alive.”
(Gregory had recently suggested that I should be split up
into thirteen separate consciousnesses for greater efficiency. I
hated him for it. I didn't want more efficiency, if it would
mean a fractured me.)
205
“We'll do it tomorrow,” Aloysius said listlessly. “Kill
"
him tomorrow sure.”
But the rump-session was frustrating and empty, even
though we were now joined by Audifax and Diogenes and
Easterwine. We know, of course, that on some dim future
day we would take Gregory back. But it wasn't that dim yet.
“Oh, it is spiritless," Valery cried out. “What are we,
Epikt? Are we just stuff to stuff in the holes?”
“They aren't really holes, Valery,” Aloysius tried to ex-
plain. “ 'Hole' itself is a concept, and these are conceptless
areas
“Oh, shut up, Aloysius. It's a graveyard, isn't it folks?
Do you rcally think there is purposive shape in the Scpulchers
of Saints, Diogenes? And we're all dead things in it. Look at
that place—piled billions of kilometers deep with estrogen
and ectoplasm. Gah!” (Nobody could do the “Gah!” like
Valery.) “Our worlds are the Teilhardian abomination after
all, the sickening emptiness of Point Big-O. I'd a million times
rather they were even Fortean, or anything clean. Aren't we
all dead and the ship going down for the third time?"
"I don't know, Valery,” Audifax grinned. “It can't be all
bad when it gives birth to such scrambled clichés.”
“When I was a schoolboy, I gave the answer that an
apocalypse was an ellipse with an infinite number of foci, the
intersection of an clapse with a right circular cone,” Diogenes
said. “I was right, of course. The shape of the universe is an
apocalypse and all of us are the foci.”
“Oh, shut up, Diogencs," Valery exploded. “Yes, it's a
graveyard. Oh, how spiritless can it get?"
“I pardon your unknowing pun,” I the machine issued,
“but in the grotesque legends of humans the graveyard is not
spiritless. In fact, it is the spirits supposed to be in it that
fascinate boys and girls.”
“I like that better,” Valery cricd. “Maybe we can be
haunts at least, if we can't be pcoplc or super-people. But it's
all dead for all that. Look at you, Epikt, you've got a livid
green dead glob inside you, and cverything clsc is inside it.”
206
“Oh, I'll turn it off then," I issued. “I don't believe any
one of you is likely to forget the shape of it anyhow.” I
tumed it off, but we would all be seeing it forever.
“I wish it were anything else,” Valery insisted. “I even
wish it were a damned sphere. How can we talk to it if we
don't know what it is? If we can't have liaison with the shape
then we can't have anything. But it's a dead and deserted
graveyard and all the spheres have gone out of it. Make
coffee, Epikt. Make a lot of it. I want it to last the night.”
“It is not efficient to employ a complicated device when
a simple device will serve," I issued. “I am a Ktistec machine,
but even a simple human person can make coffee. Make
coffee, Aloysius.
Aloysius Shiplap made them enough coffee to last the
night.
And they spent most of the night bemoaning the shape
of their fate and their universe. Except Diogenes Pontifex,
who liked it. And Audifax O'Hanlon, who understood it,
naturally, but who was tonguetied at explaining it.
“It's a riddle you've got to guess,” he smiled. “Every
little kid has got to guess this riddle before he goes to Heaven.
You'll get hints to help you, though.”
“It is the shape of a barracoon, of a slave-pen,” stated
Glasser, who neither liked it nor understood it.
“I see a glow light,” Aloysius whispered thickly—he had
been lacing his coffee with the creature“—but I don't know
whether the glow is ahead or behind. With this shape, it's hard
to say.”
“This is the limbus furtivus," Cogsworth said sadly. “It
is the most lost of all the limbos of which the Fathers wrote.
There is no more hope at all in anything."
“I knew a fellow who lived in one of those limbos,
Aloysius remembered. “His name was Simon Frakes. He
delivered some mighty odd lectures, but they weren't at all
hopeless. He was very peculiar, for a fellow who hadn't been
bom yet. Folks, it's just possible that the glow is ahead of us
and not behind."
207
“Oh, it's all dead,” Valery sighed. “It's a dead grave-
yard. You can see the inner caul about us, shutting us in,
not a dozen parsecs away. It's an empty matrix, it's a double-
damned dead machine.”
"Have a care, doll,” I issued angrily. "You think
machines don't have feelings, too?”
“And Valery,” said Charles Cogsworth, her unoutstand-
ing husband, “a matrix is the very opposite of a graveyard.
And estrogen, which you see piled so decp, is a sign of life
and not death. Even the ectoplasm that you perceive is a sign
of survival, though in one of its senses of a phony sort. Are
you sure the graveyard is quite dead, Valery? Are you sure
the matrix is quite empty?”
“But it is! It's a dead quarry, a monument yard. All the
gravestones have been sculpted out of it. That's what makes
the holes."
“Aye, the worlds going out leave the holes, Valery,”
Charles said, “and the holes are their sculpted monuments
right enough. But you don't know how they go out of it and
where they go to. And you misunderstand what you take for
rot. That may be new growth. Hozza, hozza, I believe the
glow is ahead of us after all. Turn the worlds on again,
Epikt.”
"It is agony to produce and maintain the shape again,”
I protested.
“Agonizc then! Turn it on," several of them barked
at me.
“Let some sick shape be brought,” said Easterwine as
though talking in his slccp, but moving his hcaling hands.
“Let some sick world be brought." If he is an extension of
minc I disown him. He is supposed to be a place or a state,
not a person. He's one of the shakicst jobs I cvcr did, if I
did him.
9
In my Ktistcc person I turned on the shape and the
universe oncc inorc. It came back in all its staggering strength
and cryptic promisc.
208
“Yes, it's a quarry, Valery," Cogsworth said, “the big-
gest one around this sector at least. But it's the matrix and
not the graveyard. Don't you know what has been quarried
out of it, girl?”
“Tombstones," Valery said miserably, “but I don't un-
derstand the big eggshells. What hatched out of them any-
how?”
“Spheres and batilia and saddles,” said Aloysius Ship-
lap, “distorted spheres after Gregory's own heart, exploding
spheres after yours, blessed unfinished globes, globs, new
worlds for old: the billion billion forms which are mutually
complementary to each other. This, Cogsworth, is the limbus
lautumiae of which the Sons will write when they understand
it more. This is no lost or furtive limbo. It is the quarrying
limbo in all its agony and estrus. This is the mother quarry
itself. All the grand worlds—which we have never seen, which
we can't imagine—have been sculpted out of it. They are the
holes in it, they are what gives it its wild and riven shape.
But look how much else new space is left. And look also that
the holes do not remain holes. We have gazed at it all wrong:
we've seen only the dark afterimages, not the bright fire itself.
Here in limbo we already have intimation of these creating
worlds. The spherical answer wasn't entirely wrong, nor was
the saddle-shaped answer, nor the torus-shaped. From this
young quarry may not great worlds still be called?”
“We should have guessed it," said Glasser. “It isn't as
if each of us hadn't been in one before. We all have been,
except Epikt.”
“And have I not been,” I demanded. They will make me
feel unborn just because I am a machine. “I was in one of
your own making, and I will tell you that the whole bunch
of you don't add up to a very pleasant womb. I thought I'd
never come out of it, what with all the goat tricks you were
playing. Naturally I understand the analogy better than you
do, since I am a more analogous creature. We are here now
in the quarry or matrix, and we are also enclosed in the
inner caul which Valery saw and misunderstood. I believe
209
a
that worlds, like snakes, are surprised in a moment of their
evolution, midway between the oviparous and the viviparous
stages. The caul will become a shell, and later a broken shell.
We cannot go out of this till we are called out, but I believe
it is a grand and early sign that a caul has formed.”
“What do you silly brains mean?” Valery demanded.
“That our cosmos and ourselves are not dead?”
“Maybe so, maybe not,” said Aloysius. “Maybe we
haven't been born yet."
And after that, there was a pause of a billion years, or
perhaps much less.
1
“I've always been afraid of being born,” Valery said
after that long pausc. “I wonder if it hurts. To pass a shape
or a universe the size we're going to be, that's sure going to
hurt something terribly.
“And those sure arc big cggshells lying around. Did you
ever listen to a little bird inside one when he's ready? He's
blind and dead and dcaf, and he docsn't know what kind of
thing he's in, but he sure is ready to bust out. But is there a
way out (or us? Is there an open road?”
(“My mistress still the open road . And the bright
cyes of danger” rang through the subliminal corridors of us
all.)
“Let some sick world be brought,” said Easterwinc, as
though to heal it with his shaping hands. He disappeared
then. He wasn't really Easterwinc. He was, I bclicve, one of
the baggage-handlers in that mystical terminal and he had the
namc printed on his hood or his brcast: and a very little bit
of the mystic stull had rubbed off on him. By morning, a
dozen more of thcsc rather plcasant, rather simple shapes
with the name on them had come and gone. They seem to
have merged into one now and to be lodged in my maw along
with Snake and Mary Sawdust. He's a cheerful fellow, very
little on the goofy side, and certainly incompletc.
a
"It's getting ready to get light outside,” Charles Cogs-
worth said.
210)
"It's been getting ready for several billion years," said Aloysius. "I hope it hurries."
"How will we know?" Valery asked years or minutes later, "-whether our universe is dead, or still unborn, I mean. What if it is an abortion? I would be almost satisfied if this were our third bright failure, the failure of a liaison and understanding. Well, I almost always come alive in the morn­ ing, but will the worlds follow me? I'd like there to be a test." "Locally the night is about over with now," said Aloy­ sius, "and I know one way to test it, completely within the context of impure science. There is a restaurant aroma nearby and we will go to it. I have conned the proprietor before and I can do it again. Or perhaps Epikt will treat. Come! We will know! There is a statement in Deutero-Einstein: 'Dead people almost never have hot-cakes for breakfast.' " "And unborn people almost always do," Valery cheered, "to build up their strength for the thing." We went out and toward the early aroma, myself Epikt in the extension-form of a walking ape carrying a huge tin plate and a giant knife and fork. (I am a clown, I tell you.) "Of bird-song at morning and star-shine at night" flicked through the under-minds of the humans and wraiths and machine, and was properly recorded. Twitter-birds were twittering in the parkway, and all the morning stars-
2 11
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
-Twitter-birds were twittering in the parkway, and all the morning stars sang together. Oh, how we had busted on the third of our projects, to set up a liaison! Those humans not only cannot communicate with each other; but one part of a person is completely unable to communicate with another part of the same person. But it isn't all loss. We arc nearer to it than we were. And once again we arc careful not to learn too much from our failure. It were ruinous if we considered it as a total failure. I believe that humans have some sort of silent conven­ tion among themselves as to what in them is to be regarded as human and important, and what is hardly to be regarded at all. There is tacit agreement among humans that some aspects of themselves will not be noticed at all. will not be considered at all ; and the result is that these aspects are 1101 at all, to humans. And they have it all wrong about themselves as to what is important and essential. They do themselves injustice. There is so much more to them than they want to admit.
2 12
A three-failure base, and a harvest to glean Oh, drop a salt tear for a lonesome machine�
But I as a machine am part of that silent convention or
tacit agreement. I honestly do not understand what things
I am not supposed to see, so I see them all. This may cause
some uneasiness in certain human readers of these High
Journals. I report some things which each human thought
that he alone saw, which he was odd for seeing, which he
was bound to deny seeing.
The animal quality, the demon quality, the ghost or illu-
sional quality are very strong in humans. If they have not
been able to see these things in their own appearance, then
what do they believe that they look like?
So there are whole episodes in these High Journals which
the humans concerned will swear did not happen at all. “You
have made it up, Epikt,” Valery says. “Wherever did you
imagine all that stuff from?” “There is some flaw in your
make-up, Epikt," Gregory says ponderously, “and I do not
see how I can avoid responsibility for it. What went wrong?
We constructed you to record all things accurately.” Only
Diogenes Pontifex understands: "You got it about right,
Epikt, just about right.” he says, “Ah, isn't it too bad that
those kids must leave the milk and open their eyes quite soon
now.” But Glasser is the worst: “It is incredible, Epikt,” he
says. “You left out all the fine and serious things that we are
doing, and you put in these weird bits that did not happen
>
at all.”
They did happen. I saw them. I did not imagine these
things. I am a machine and have no imagination. I have only
many-faceted observation and the ability to record exactly.
I have not left out any main thing, though I have left out
some trivial and diurnal things as not worth telling.
There is a rumor that Gaetan Balbo will come back, that
he may arrive this very day. I do not trust the rumor. Gaetan's
reappearances have always been completely unexpected. But
on hearing the rumor, a shudder went through all the people
here—an exciting and in some ways pleasant shudder, how-
ever. We all love Gaetan, but we all love him much more
213
when he is gone than when he is here. The report also says
that Gaetan is as bloodcurdling as ever, and still as urbane,
though his urbis is now the transcendent city, the city beyond.
This latter I can hardly believe.
And my Ganymede informant tells me that Peter the
Great will visit us again if the lines fall that way; that Peter
is a completely changed monster; that once, on a portentous
night, Peter, like Peter, went out and wept. Oh, brother, I
I
will have to get me a new Ganymede informant!
We have taken Gregory back as director on probation
of the Institute. After all, a shuffling giant is no worse than
a herd of shuffling midgets. But Audifax and Diogenes remain
as familiars if not members.
There is something to be said of an all-fired ceramic
bull like Diogenes. Did you know that the bull is the most
graceful of creatures, really the only graceful creature? But
when I say this, my associates tell me that I am lacking in
artistic appreciation. Diogenes doesn't look like a bull, of
course; he looks like a lithe young man. But he is all-fired.
He is the only one of the bunch who has really been through
the fire. And he has a flaw: he accepts the Unique Revela-
tion, and he rejects the Common Consensus.
As to Easterwine—the Communication and Shape and
Pattern of that Terminal—Audifax says that part of our diffi-
culty in arriving at it is that we are already inside it. But that
will not matter at all. We can arrive at it from any direction
in any medium.
I say that Audifax doesn't understand the philology of
Easterwine. Diogenes says that neither of us understands the
philology of philology (if Valery said something like that
Charles Cogsworth would tie a knot in her tongue): does
philology mean “love of words” or “words of love"? They
are the same, Diogenes says, if we remember what word was
the Logos, the Word that was in the beginning.
(Oh, come along, reader of the High Journal; if you do
214
not love words how will you love the communication? How
will you, forgive me my tropes, communicate the love?)
Well, I am a philolog myself and I know that the lower-
case logos is also the log, as a ship's log, the journal of the
journey; I also know that joumal and joumey are the same
words and that my own High Journal is a journey.
As to the shape of it—we really busted quite success-
fully on that one—I know that my own name means shape
“the shaping one, the creative one,” and I find some consola-
tion in that. If the shape is inseparable from its magnitude,
and if the substance is the same as the shape, and if the
communication is the property of the shape, then I can only
say So Be It.
But the pattern is separable from the magnitude—we
walk before we run. The pattern is the Patronus, the patron,
the archetype, the model. But the country Irish refer to a
saint's-day or feast-day as the pattern (of the patron saint).
And the gypsies use the word pattern or patteran to mean
the trail, the journey-way. They have lifted the word from the
Greeks where petalon means a horseshoe (for luck and for
the journey road), and also a flower petal or a leaf—a trail
blazed with petals or leaves to be followed, which are also the
leaves of the journey or journal. And pattern is also the
patter, the talk, the tongue.
Easterwine, and every wine, goes well with tongues. I
,
have had some luck in loosening the tied tongue of Audifax
O'Hanlon, on certain subjects, by plying him with that cheap
wine that Valery drinks. This is Labrusca, the Wild-Wine,
where words do not fail us.
Well, but Easterwine is the great central terminal-
though a terminal should be rather at an end than in the
center. People arrive at it constantly, in horsedrawn droshkies
(really, I have seen them), a foot and on horseback, in stage-
coach and train, in motor and metro, by ship and by sky-ship,
by wire and by wireless, by celestial omnibus. There are diffi-
215
culties, however, in making my ill-kempt vision of this thing
visible and understandable.
Taking a little time out for fun, I still work toward the
resolution of it. Give me time; I am only a kid; I have not
yet completed the first year of my life. And it is possible that
myself and other intelligent machines will get some help from
human persons in the project. After all it is, originally and
basically, a human problem.
In my own way I love these human monsters: I regard it
as my masterwork that I am able to do so. It is, however,
frustrating to have to serve such inconsequent Middle Folk.
(Is that me talking like that? Will I still mean it in the
morning?) Oh, why could I not have been a machine for
Apes or for Angels? Why could I not-
THE END
(for now and in time)
(It is not ended yet outside of time)
216
