BERKLEY
600
X1528
A new Science Fiction novel
R.A. LAFFERTY
THE REEFS
OF EARTH
Arwens
THE REEFS
OF EARTH
A PLAGUE OF DEMONS
—that's what the people of Lost Haven called
the six children (seven, if you counted Bad John)
of the Dulanty family. They looked like normal
Earth children... except when they flicked their
ears like animals, or made their eyes glow with
a green fire...and if you looked at them side-
ways they did look strangely like nightmarish
gargoyles.
The truth is: these children are Pucas, aliens
from a strange planet. And they have taken it
upon themselves to reduce the world to a popu-
lation of six (seven, if you counted Bad John).
Wishing will make it so, for by making up an
appropriate death-rhyme, they can destroy their
victims.
These frightening, far-out kids take a black de.
light in destroying their neighbors, and the Earth
people are defenseless against them....
THE PUCA THEMSELVES ARE NOT
HANDSOME. .Mostly, the Puca if
they happen to be bom of a pretty ap-
pearance and face, are able to maintain it
while they are young. But with the coming
of maturity, the shattering profundity of
the developing Puca character will smash
and bevanish that pretty mask and replace
it with a deeper face, intricate and ugly.
Elizabeth was the best-looking of them
all. But for the gleam in her eyes and the
way she flicked her ears and crinkled her
nose when she talked, nobody could have
told that she wasn't an Earth child. ..
R.A. LAFFERTY
THE REEFS
OF EARTH
pas
BERKLEY MEDALLION BOOK
published by
DERKLEY PUBLISHING CORPORATION
Copyright © 1968 by R.A. Lafferty
All rights reserved
Published by arrangement with the author
BERKLEY MEDALLION EDITION, MARCH, 1968
BERKLEY MEDALLION BOOKS are published by
Berkley Publishing Corporation
200 Madison Avenue
New York, N. Y. 10016
BERKLEY MEDALLION BOOKS ® TM 757,375
Printed in the United States of America
CONTENTS
1 To Slay the Folks and Cleanse the Land
7
2 And Leave the World a Reeking Roastie
15
3 High Purpose of the Gallant Band
24
4 And Six Were Kids, and One a Ghostie.
33
5 A Child's a Monster Still Uncurled
40
6 The World's a Trap, and None Can Quit It-
47
7 The “Strife Dulanty” With the World
57
8 Was Mostly That They Didn't Fit It.
66
9 No Setting For the Gallant Brood
75
10
In Sacred Groves of Yew or Lindens
82
11 They Found a Hold More Near Their Blood
91
12 A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
98
13 In Brazen Clash of Helm and Greave
112
14 Fit Subject For Heroic Chantey
121
15
The Battle Joined That Could But Leave
129
16 Or Altered World or Dead Dulanty.
139
1
To Slay the Folks and Cleanse the Land
Nowhere in all the worlds was there a more fearless family
than the Dulantys. And the Dulanty children had such
towering intrepidity as to leave even their elders gasping.
Then what was it on this one world—the one on which
the children themselves happened to be born—that so
scared them?
Listen, people, creatures, devices, entities, it was the
meanest world in all the universes! It'd have spooked you
too.
We don't know why anyone would want to visit it. We
sure don't know why anyone would want to be born on it.
But the children hadn't been able to control their place of
birth.
Sometimes traveling people will be talking together.
They will say how good it is in some places and how bad it
is in others. And, sooner or later, one of them is bound to
mention it. “Talk about really being out in the boon-
docks!” he will say, “there's a little planet named Earth—"
There were six children, or seven if you counted Bad
John. At that time they lived in the Big Shanty, and they
told stories at night. It was their way of exorcising all the
bleakness of Earth. It was whistling in the dark. A place
like Earth will wilt the flesh off your bones unless you can
make fun of it, or treat its persons and places as no worse
than ghosts and ghost places.
This is the story that Elizabeth told:
“There was this picture of a man that looked at you. A
Puca man and woman had just come to Earth, and they
thought they should have some Earth things around their
house so people wouldn't suspect them. They bought the
picture and hung it up in the hall downstairs, and went
upstairs to bed. But they couldn't sleep for thinking about
the spooky thing.
7
8
The Reefs of Earth
“'It bothers me the way the man in the picture looks at
one with those green eyes,' the woman said. “They're not
green, they're brown,' the man said. “Damn this crazy world
where everything's woolly!' 'You are woolly yourself,' the
woman said, “his eyes are green. Let's go down and see.
They went down to see, and the man in the picture's eyes
were brown, but the woman knew they had been green the
first time. They went back upstairs to bed.
'We shouldn't have bought it,' the woman said. 'He
looks like a madman with all that red hair.' 'It isn't red, it's
black,' the man said. 'Let's go down and settle this homy
business. They went down to see, and it was black; but the
woman knew it had been red the first time. Things like that
shiver you when they keep happening. 'I've known haunted
houses,' the woman said, but this is a haunted world.
They went back upstairs and went to bed.
‘Another thing I don't like is that dog,' the woman said
when the man was just drifting off to sleep. 'I'm afraid of
that dog in the picture.' 'There isn't any dog in that
picture,' the man said. "What's the matter with
.
you
anyhow? You're as silly as an Earth woman. Let's go down
and see.'
“'You go see,' the woman said. “I've been down twice,
and I know there is a dog in the picture.' Then she said a
Bagarthach verse:
>
“I'm turning livid in this bog,
This woolly world that spooks and spites you.
You'll find that picture's got a dog!
I hope the blinking bugger bites you!"
"Boy, she sure shouldn't have said a Bagarthach verse
like that! But she was sleepy and not thinking very hard.
The man went downstairs. And in a minute there was a
growling and gnashing and tearing. The woman went down
then to see what in pumpkin pickers' heaven the racket was
all about.
"And the man was dead with his throat bitten through.
And the dog was back in the picture and his mouth was
foamed with blood. 'See! I was right, the woman said,
'there was a dog in the picture. Remind me to get rid of that
thing in the morning, Albert.' She forgot for the moment
,
To Slay the Folks and Cleanse the Land
9
that Albert was dead with his throat bitten through and
wouldn't be able to remind her of it. She shouldn't have
used a Bagarthach verse when she was just kidding. Earth
things are so dumb that they don't know when to obey a
Bagarthach and when not to.”
That was Elizabeth's story. Elizabeth was nine years
old, the oldest of the seven children (or the six, if you
don't count Bad John). She was as beautiful as an Earth
child.
There is no use kidding about it. The Puca themselves
are not handsome. And the people of Earth (they deserve
that, they have so little else going for them) are. Sometimes
they will have a Puca child to be bom good-looking.
Witchy (Elizabeth's mother) was bom so and remained so.
Veronica (the mother of some of the children) had been
bom so and had given it up. Mostly, the Puca, if they
happen to be born of a pretty appearance and face, are able
to maintain it while they are young. But with the coming of
maturity, the shattering profundity of the developing Puca
character will smash and bevanish that pretty mask and
replace it with a deeper face, intricate and ugly and of a
high humor.
Elizabeth was the best-looking of them all. But for the
gleam in her eyes and the way she flicked her ears and
crinkled her nose when she talked, nobody could have told
that she wasn't an Earth child.
All the children were brothers and sisters and cousins.
This is the story that Charles told:
“There was a Puca man who had to be on Earth a little
while. He was a traveling salesman, and he didn't notice
that in his new contract one year they had added Earth to
his territory. 'Boy, isn't that something?' he said. 'I bet I
read the fine print next year.' Well, he came to Earth and
he walked all day and didn't see a good customer
anywhere. And just at night he came to a country hotel.
The hotel man was greedy like all people on Earth, and he
charged him a dollar for a room. So he went up to his room
(the Puca man, not the hotel man) and locked the door,
and answered a couple letters from the home office, and
tumed out the light and went to bed. And that is when
things started to happen.
10
The Reefs of Earth
“Everything on Earth is either alive or spooked or both.
The wood that they build the rooms out of is alive and it
squeaks and whispers and coughs. The air is full of stuff,
and there are whole multitudes of creatures living in the
walls. Then it went Bang and the man came out of bed
scared to tum the light on. But it was already tumed on,
and nobody could have tumed it on but himself. He went
to see, and the door was still locked. 'I'm too scared to turn
the light off now,' he said. “I'll go to sleep with it on.' He
started to get back in bed and he saw that there was already
somebody in the bed. 'He looks kind of like the hotel man,'
the Puca man said, 'and he looks kind of like me. We don't
look anything alike, but I will just be damned if I can say
which one of us it is lying there. Whichever one of us it is,
he's got his throat cut and he sure is dead.' It was the hotel
man that was dead, though. Those Earth people look real
mean when they're dead—you can always tell them that
way. The Puca man was so scared that he unlocked the
door and pulled it open so fast that the doorknob came off
in his hand. He ran out of the hotel, and when he looked
back, the hotel was gone. 'But I know I didn't dream it,' he
said, 'because I still got the doorknob in my hand.' Then he
looked down and the doorknob had turned into a rock.
After that, when he traveled, he went by train even if it cost
more, and he didn't stop at any more of those little country
hotels."
Charles was eight. There were seven children: Elizabeth,
Charles, Helen, Peter, Dorothy, John, and Bad John.
Mostly they told stories on the nights of heavy thunder, and
in the Crow Creek country in the early autumn it was heavy
thunder almost every night.
This is the story that Helen told:
“There was a man who came back to his home town
after a long time. He got off the train at the town, and
walked down the tracks to the junction where he lived that
was so little that the train didn't even stop there. He saw a
man named Silly Jimmy sitting on a pile of ties, and talked
to him, Silly Jimmy didn't seem to be in his wits, but then
the man remembered that Silly Jimmy never had been in
his wits. The man walked on home and saw his folks and
told them that he was glad to get back to Earth to see them
To Slay the Folks and Cleanse the Land
11
again even if it was a miserable place. And then he told
them that he had just been talking to Silly Jimmy out by the
pile of ties.
“'But Silly Jimmy died a long time ago,' they told him.
'We wrote you about it, how the train ran over him.' And
the man remembered that they did. They had even made a
Bagarthach verse about it:
"'The engine spattered him like tar,
And broke his bones and burst his belly.
We gathered Jimmy in a jar.
Hey, pass the Silly Jimmy Jelly!'
“So the man went outdoors again to where Silly Jimmy
had been sitting and whittling, and there were fresh whittles
on the ground. Silly Jimmy had been whittling whether he
was dead or not. That's the way things are with Earth
people. You think one of them's dead, and then you'll run
into him again.”
Helen was six years old, and the smallest of them all.
This is the story that Peter told:
“There was a little girl that died and went to Hell, but
she kept saying, 'I didn't do it, it was my sister that did it, if
you let me out of this damned place (Hey, that's kind of
funny!)—I'll prove that I was the one that didn't do it.'
'How would you prove it?' the guard asked. (He wasn't a
Puca, none of the people who run it down there are Pucas,
they're all from Earth or from Ifreann.) 'I'd scare my sister
into admitting it,' the girl said. 'All right,' said the guard,
'but no tricks.'
“They went back to her house and up to her sister's
room who was named Clarissa. 'I'm Alice's ghost,' said
Alice. 'I came back to scare you into admitting that you
were the one that stole the money so you can go to Hell
instead of me.' 'Hello, Alice,' said Clarissa. 'Hello, sir, are
you the guard? Then you must know what a liar she is. If
you will step outside, sir, I will take care of my sister. She
must be punished for telling lies.'
"So the guard stepped out of the room for a minute, and
mean Clarissa (she was the one that stole the money, all
right) shook Alice till her head nearly fell off and she
a
12
The Reefs of Earth
dropped her ghost sheet. Then Clarissa put on the ghost
sheet and scared Alice till she lay on the bed and howled.
“The guard came back in. 'Did you scare her into
admitting it?' he asked Clarissa who was wrapped in
Alice's ghost sheet and he thought she was Alice. 'I sure
did,' Clarissa said. “Do you admit you stole it?' the guard
asked Alice that he thought was Clarissa—they looked just
alike. 'No, I do not,' Alice said, and she wasn't scared any
more. 'Take her back and don't pay any attention to what
she says because she's a liar.' So the guard took Clarissa
back to Hell (he thought she was Alice), so everything was
all right. A lot of times, you can make everything work all
right if you send just one person out of a bunch to Hell.”
Peter was eight years old, and the funniest-looking of
them all except John, and except Bad John, if you count
him. Elizabeth and Charles and Helen looked like angels,
or like handsome Earthlings. Their cousins Peter and
Dorothy and John and Bad John looked like potato-faced
goblins, like real Pucas. Witchy said that they had planned
it that way, that some of the children should look like
children of this place, and some of them should look like
the children back home.
But they all had those eyes that glowed like green coals.
Look at them straight, and you'd hardly notice a thing. But
look at them sideways accidentally sometimes, just
catching them in the comer of your eye, and they'd scare
the liver out of you,
This is the story that Dorothy told:
“There was a man that was run over by a train right
outside here on the track that goes by the shanty. The train
cut him up in little pieces when it ran over him. After that,
he came back once a year and would stand in the middle of
the track at night like he was made of fog. He swung a
lantem that made about as much light as a lightning bug in
a fruit jar. The first time, the engineer of the Flyer just
barely saw him in time, and he hit the whistle and the
brakes and scattered sparks for a quarter mile. Then they
got out and couldn't find any pieces of that man.
“But after that, they got onto him, and went right
through him without paying any attention. But one year the
To Slay the Folks and Cleanse the Land
13
man stole a real live lantem and swung it, and the man was
thicker than he used to be and made out of heavier fog. A
train came down the tracks loud, but it was an old train
that nobody had seen before. The train saw the man and
switched onto the old track to miss him—it was the old
track they don't use any more that runs right under our
shanty. I was the only one awake to see it, and I made a
sign or we'd all have been killed. The train hit the shanty
with a noise like a big wind, and went right through without
breaking it up. It was a ghost train too; it was the same
train that killed the man the first time.'
Dorothy was seven years old.
a
>
This is the story that John told:
“There was a boy and girl that got married. He was a
good Puca boy, but she was an Earth girl, and you can't tell
about them. They said that whichever one of them died
first would come back and tell the other one what it was
like. Then the man died and his name was William. But he
didn't come back to tell her what it was like right away, so
she married a man named Tom and her name was Polly.
The first night they were married, someone came to the
door, and Tom went to see who it was. Then he came back.
'He asked for you, Tom said, 'He said to tell you
that it
sure is cold.' 'He must be the man selling coal,' Polly said.
'Tell him to leave a load.' After a while someone came to
the door again, and Tom went. Then he came back. 'He
asked for you,' Tom said. 'He said to tell you that it sure is
dark.' 'He's probably the man selling kerosene,' Polly said.
'Tell him to leave a barrel for the lamps.'
“After a while somebody came to the door again, and
Tom went. Then he came back. 'He asked for you,' Tom
said. 'He said to tell you that it sure is lonesome.' 'Well,
you go tell him that it isn't lonesome here,' Polly said, 'and
it isn't cold, and it isn't dark. You tell him to be gone back
to that hole where he belongs. I don't care any more how it
is there.'
"Then a big wind came through the house and knocked
Tom down dead. It blew so cold that it froze Polly stiff. It
blew the house away and blew a hole in the ground and
Polly fell down in it. The wind covered her up with dirt.
>
3
14
The Reefs of Earth
Then William said, 'I knew you wanted to know what it
was like, Polly.''
John was six years old.
>
Last of all, it was Bad John's time to tell a story. But
nobody ever listened to Bad John's. He couldn't tell ghost
stories, 'he could only tell people stories, and nobody cares
about them.
After the stories, they would all go to bed in the old loft
there and turn out the lights. Except Bad John, who didn't
have any bed. Nobody knows where he went when the
lights went out.
It was their way of defying that tricky place Earth. That
place will hurt you if you let it get the hop on you. They
spooked the Earth spooks away with their stories. They
whistled in the dark.
Except Bad John, who couldn't whistle.
2
And Leave the World a Reeking Roastie
The Henry Dulanty and Frank Dulanty families were
pilgrims on Earth, and had been in Lost Haven only six
weeks when this disintegration begins. The way of their
coming was this:
The double family had been on the move in two station
wagons, a sideboard truck, and a van truck. Veronica
drove one of the station wagons and had all the children
with her. Witchy drove the other wagon, loaded with
everything in the world. Henry in the sideboard truck had
the furniture, and Frank in the van had the tools and shops
of the several professions of the two brothers.
They stopped the four vehicles one noon in a quiet weed
patch by the road, and Veronica brought out lunches for
the ten of them. (Bad John is not numbered in the ten; he
did not eat.)
Then an angry man appeared and barked at them and
offered to bite them. Does anyone ever get over the shock
of meeting the people of Earth? They make your hair rise
up.
“We won't have our town dirtied up by strangers,” the
man said, “and you're the strangest clutch I ever saw.'
"Where's any town?” Henry Dulanty asked sharply. A
Puca man can't let an Earth man jump him like that.
"You're standing in the middle of Lost Haven,” the man
said.
Well, there was a town there, a shabby one, hidden by
the weeds and thickets, and the Dulantys hadn't noticed it.
But Helen had this man pegged. She didn't like him at
all. So she killed him with a Bagarthach verse crooned low:
"Old Crocker man, be belled and banged!
You hound-dog hunk, we'll have you hounded!
On else than gallows be you hanged!
In else than water be you drownd-ed!”
15
16
The Reefs of Earth
Say, Helen killed that man neat, even though it'd take
him a few weeks to realize that he was dead.
“We won't harm your town, but we might ham you,
Frank Dulanty said out loud to the man. “You go now. We
go when we're ready.”
The man went away, pale and jerky, as though he were
the one who had been given a summons. His name was
Crocker, and he was a mean one.
And half an hour later, as the Dulantys were getting
ready to leave, a larger man came and barked at them in a
louder manner.
“My man told you to leave," the big man said. “I don't
know what you are, but you don't belong anywhere on
God's green Earth. I'll boot the lot of you up the road if
you're not gone just as quick as you can climb into those
crates and fire off. I'm Coalfactor Stutgard, and I own this
town.'
“Let me kill this one," Peter whispered to the other
children. Then he growled out a Bagarthach verse that
would finish that man off forever:
"Too long, too late you steal and strut;
Your bubble breaks, your grip relaxes!
Beware the under-studding, Stut!
Beware of jackals bearing axes!"
Peter got him too, as neat as Helen had had her prey.
It's
funny that when you kill a man, he's often the last one to
know about it.
“We will stay,” said Frank Dulanty. "Nobody can tell us
to go.
“You can stay nowhere,” Stutgard said. “I own every
house in this town.'
"We will stay,” said Henry Dulanty, giving a solid echo
to his brother. That man wasn't about to boot them up the
road! Though a big man, he wasn't as big or as young as
Henry Dulanty. So Stutgard left them, shaking with fury.
But the Dulantys were shaken also. It had happened to
them dozens of times, and they never became inured to it.
Earth people have a capacity for hatred, and it goes out of
them like waves.
The Dulantys were always uneasy at these times. They
And Leave the World a Reeking Roastie
17
were unusual-looking, and they knew it. They could, of
course, have looked a little more like Earth people if they
had wished to, but this day it just didn't seem worth the
bother.
A little later, a man came to them furtively, and told
them that Coalfactor Stutgard had lied. There was one
house in town that he didn't own. The big ramshackle thing
by the old railroad tracks belonged to an Indian lady who
lived in Catoosa. So they unloaded and moved into the
building. This was the Big Shanty.
Then Henry Dulanty drove the sideboard truck to
Catoosa and rented the shanty from the Indian lady. He
also bought a truckload of groceries, guessing that for a
while nothing would be sold to them in Lost Haven.
So, they had stopped there out of stubbomness, as they
would not be run off. They found the place, as they found
every place, interesting. It was one of their jobs to find out
about places.
Then a series of disasters struck them down, and they
could not have moved on if they had wanted to.
The Dulantys were Irish according to one story that they
told. They were French according to another. And they
were something entirely different according to a story
which they did not tell to Earth people.
Aye, but they were Puca! If you belong to Earth people
you might not be familiar with the name of them. But
you
know the thing from before you were bom! There is a little
hackle-raising on both sides whenever the two people meet.
Whatever their descent, the Dulantys had a hard time
getting along with the people of Earth, and it wasn't
entirely the fault of the Earth people.
They had come to this fundament ten years earlier, the
two Dulanty brothers newly married to the two Corcoran
sisters. (Neither name is even a rough transliteration. There
are not sufficient characters in Earth languages to tran-
scribe the names they had at home.) They adopted Earth
first names, and gave such to their children.
It was after coming to Earth that they sowed their seven
children (Bad John is included in this count). The children
were thus citizens of Earth if they wished to be. Moreover,
it was believed that by their birth on Earth they would have
immunity to Earth Allergy, that killing sickness.
a
18
The Reefs of Earth
"Earth is, after all, one of the four worlds,” the Puca
instructors had instructed them. “Earth people are, com-
ical though it seems, our cousins in blood. So far, the
blood between us has been bad blood. We send out picked
young couples now. It is time we achieved accord with
Earth. And, if not accord—ah—we believe it is time tbat
something was done about the planet. Perhaps your own
offspring will solve the problem intuitively. We frankly do
not know what to do about a people so closely related to us
and yet so alien to us.”
Well, the Dulantys (and a few others) had been working
at the problem for ten years and more. They had not
achieved accord.
Of the sisters, Veronica looked like an old potato, and
Witchy was of an unearthly ('tis a Puca abhacht, and not a
pun) beauty. But who can say which was the more
beautiful where they came from?
They were not twins in age, Witchy having been bom
eleven months after Veronica. But Veronica swore that
they were conceived on the same night, and she told an
Aorach story that proved it.
(The Puca have but two art-forms, both of them verbal:
the Bagarthach verse, and the Aorach story.) Veronica was
mistress of the Aorach. She winked with her whole potato
face when she told one of her stories to Earth people, and
this is what she told of her getting and Witchy's:
“Papa had to get up at four in the moming to light the
fumace at the brickyard. (It wasn't really a brickyard; it
was where they made something else in another place, but
you wouldn't understand that.) And Mama used to sit up all
night playing cribbage (it was really another sort of game
with another name, but we will call it cribbage) with
Grandma. So Papa and Mama never got together, and year
after year nature's purpose was defeated. But one night
Mama got mad at Grandma for cheating, and she went to
bed at one minute before four o'clock.
'Fulfillment!' Papa shouted with his ears and nose
twitching, 'now I will have offspring at last.' And one
‘
minute later the brickyard whistle blew, and Papa jumped
up
and put on his clothes and ran down to the brickyard to
light the furnace. But he was uneasy in his mind.
“ 'I wonder if it will be fruitful?' Papa said. “A man
19
And Leave the World a Reeking Roastie
should have more than one minute. Let the fumace be late
for once!' So he ran back home to Mama. 'I had so little
time, I'm not sure I did the job right, he told Mama. 'You
did it right,' Mama told him, “and Veronica is already on
the way.' 'Well, I'm going to do it all over again,' papa said,
and he did. That one was Witchy. But I was already on the
way, so Witchy had to wait for eleven months after me to
be bom. That's why she's prettiest too. Papa took more
time to her.
“It had to happen that way. That's the only time Mama
and Papa ever got together. Papa still had to get up at four
o'clock every morning to light the fumace at the brickyard,
and Mama and Grandma still played cribbage together all
night every night. Not that Grandma stopped cheating—she
cheated till the day she died—but she was the only one
Mama had to play cribbage with.”
An Earth doctor, who treated Veronica (unsuccessfully)
for Earth Allergy, told Veronica that such a thing was
impossible, that twins could not be born eleven months
apart. Imagine an Earth doctor trying to tell a mistress of
the Aorach about something as fundamental as that.
“What does a country horse doctor know about how
people work?” she asked. “Especially our kind of people."
The doctor grinned and rubbed his pate that time. He
doctored humans and not horses, and he suspected that this
was the trouble. He was fascinated also that Veronica saw
and talked to a young son who had died and saw nothing
unusual about it. Ah well, under her influence he could see
the translucent boy also, but it was peculiar. Veronica was
the real center of the two families.
Her sister Witchy was not so full a vessel as Veronica,
but there was a lot in her. She had a curious effect on Earth
men, she would set them panting and roaming like dogs. By
Earth standards she was as beautiful as it was possible to
be, and yet her appearance was just a thing she had once
devised on the spur of the moment for the fun of it. She was
really a burlesque of Earth beauty, but it was better than
the original.
Henry Dulanty was tall and heavy. He looked like the
ogre out of a fairy tale. He was. Earthers retain memory of
earlier Pucas with such heads and hulks, and Earth
children still dream about them. But the Earthers have lied
20
The Reefs of Earth
about the ogre. He was the finest fellow you'd ever want to
meet—in the daylight—not in the dark.
His brother Frank was tall and lean, All four of these
parents had a striking
a striking goblinish strangeness in their
appearance, though Witchy’s was shimmered over with
beauty.
Could they live on Earth? The adults did not expect to
live to any great age, there seeming no way of avoiding
Earth Allergy. But it was believed the children (being bom
here) would miss its main effect. They suffered it early and
lightly, and they built up immunity to it.
The children did well. They were faster and more
intelligent than Earth children, and half of them (as had
been planned) looked like exceptionally handsome natives.
To leam custom and to be gainfully employed, and
perhaps to decide if something could not be done with
Earth; that was the assignment of the Dulantys. And they
were very much on their own. They leamed Earth custom
by their own picaresque adventures.
The brothers were, for a while, gainfully employed as
directors of a university that offered a total education in six
weeks. The university failed, and for the most damnable
detail! Who ever heard of having to have a pennit to teach?
It was like having to have a permit to breathe. They were
employed as construction contractors. Quicksand fouled
them up on one building. “There is something wrong with a
world that has its continents so poorly supported!” Frank
Dulanty swore. “The floor hasn't sunk more than a foot,
and you want thirty thousand dollars for that?” But Henry
always insisted that they pay off, and it made a hole in their
fortunes.
They were employed in invention and mining and
chemicals, in wheat and cattle and rice. They sold quite a
few businesses that were going good, but nobody else
would be able to make them go. Why, you can sing a
Bagarthach verse over a business, and it will give it the
semblance of prosperity long enough to sell it! It was easy
as breaking sticks to make money at almost anything on
this world. The Dulantys were loaded when they came to
Lost Haven, but nobody knew that part of it.
But they moved on often. Wherever they stopped, there
were always a few Earthers who called them goblins and
And Leave the World a Reeking Roastie
21
buggers and ncanderthals, and who hated them. It hurt.
But whatever the brothers were occupied with, it was as
though they were really on some other commission. And
they were.
"There's been a mistake,” Henry said once. “We were
told that we would be in rapport with the Indian population
and could easily set up a hegemony over them, but we find
them a vanishing minority. I believe that our information
was centuries out of date. An old folk-psyche analysis
showed that the Indians would accept us readily in spite of
our difference. These things were suggestions only, how-
ever. We are to discover the present state of affairs for our-
selves.”
The Dulantys were in rapport with the Indians, much
more than with other people. There just weren't enough
Indians left.
“There is an anomaly about the Earth people,” Frank
said. “Though incapable of intelligence, they operate with
frightening instinct. They are not able to think, but they are
well able to act; and that is the danger to us. They have the
unity and communication of the hive.
"They remind me of the fireflies on Mercator. You
remember how the millions of those pseudoinsects would
cluster on hillocks and trees and all pulsate with their light
together? Those on one hill would answer the beacon
flashes of those on another hill, and yet they were creatures
so small that fifty of them could be heaped on the end of
your finger—and blind. Ah, they spelled out derisive words
with their pulsing light on the hillsides, but the individuals
of them were ignorant of words and of concepts and of all
else.
“The people of Earth are like that, which is why it is
called the Haunted Planet. The Hive Ghost hovers over
them invisible, and they feel it from one end of their
communities to the other. We can handle Earth indi-
viduals as though they were fumiture or stones, but we
cannot handle the Hive Ghost that hangs over them. And it
hates us, Henry.”
So the Dulantys traveled and raised their bright brood,
and exanıined situations and leamed custom. Then Lost
Haven caught them in its little trap.
Were this a true Earth chronicle, there would be a
22
The Reefs of Earth
buildup here. But Puca drama and life is otherwise. It has
its own pace and climax, which is not that of Earth.
Something touches, something wilts, something dies. It
is so told, and why should anything be added to it?
For now, in Lost Haven, Veronica had died suddenly,
leaving the double family inconvenienced. She was the real
head of the families, the mother of some of the children
and the aunt of the rest of them. She had been their
guarantee on Earth. No creature of any species could
dislike her. That was not true of the rest of them.
She died of Earth Allergy, and all the adults of them
suffered from it. "I can't very die just yet,” was the last
thing she said. “Witchy is going out of her wits and she
needs me. If I die, the family will break up." But it is no
great thing for a Puca to die.
But Frank Dulanty took the death of his wife all wrong.
Earth Sickness had tainted his viewpoint. His mertiment at
the wake was of a forced sort. The Bagarthach verses he
made for it were funny, of course, but not really hilarious.
He should have done much better.
The Puca believe, contrary to Earth people, that death is
not an ending, but a mere passage to something new and
interesting. Consequently, as do all who so believe, they
make a happy celebration out of death.
But the Earth Allergy, attacking the liver and the
kidneys (the seat of the good humor), taints one's views
with the Earth outlook. It sours one on life. It even makes
one, to a limited degree, fearful of death. It mixes a little
wrong in all the right things.
“Henry, we can't live on this world,” Frank said the next
day.
"We were told to try,” said Henry.
“We sicken, and now we die. It upsets all our plans. We
are in danger of losing our patience and our balance, and of
doing something that we may regret. And will the children
really be able to live here, Henry? Can they adapt to the
world?”
“They have advantages,” Henry said. “They were bom
here, and should already be immune to Earth Sickness.
They have imagination and intelligence, and they can play
Earth roles well."
And Leave the World a Reeking Roastie
23
The two men watched the children from an upper
window of the big shanty. The children were playing in the
little choppy hills off to the southeast of Lost Haven,
running and leaping out of trees and down hills. If they
missed Veronica, they took it out with great activity and a
sort of angry joy. And soon they were ravenous. Elizabeth
glanced at the big shanty, and her father and uncle read her
mind. It is a bother to go eat. One should eat on the run
and the fly.
"Sing us a bird, Helen!" Elizabeth called in a clear
carrying voice, "a big one with black juice in it!"
And Helen went into a sort of sly ecstasy and sang a
Bagarthach verse towards the scuddy sky:
"I catch you, crow, in curving orb
No matter how you caw and cough you!
I sing the corbie to the corb!
I sing the silly wings right of you!"
Folks, there was a crow in the cloudy sky, and it jerked
as though caught in a wire loop. It was dragged down
through the steep air, cawing and coughing and fighting.
Charles and Peter caught it as it came to their fingertips,
and tore it to pieces with black gloss flying. They tore it
apart and ate it up, gulping the black-red blood that tasted
of hot salt and iron. You can have your white-meat
bamyard peckers. This was their kind of bird.
Well, what Earth kid can sing a crow down from the
sky? Don't knock the trick till you can do it yourself.
“But no, Frank," Henry said as they watched their
children from the distance. “They can't really adapt to
Earth, I see it now. The question then becomes: Can the
Earth adapt to them?”
Then Henry raised his head and listened as to the
sounding of a horn off Earth.
3
High Purpose of the Gallant Band
>
If there were only six persons in the world (or seven, if
you
count Bad John), the Earth would be a much better place.
All you had to do was kill all the other people on Earth.
This, of course, must include not only the Earth people,
but also the older Puca since they had the Earth Sickness.
The Elder Dulantys—and a handful of other Pucas on
Earth-would have to be murdered with kindness and
imagination. “Bam! I bet I'm good at killing people that
way,” Helen said, “I have so much of both.” The older
Dulantys were not happy here. And the children could,
perhaps, have more fun when they were gone.
But this first step would be the ticklish one. You can't be
killing your own parents and avunculi without having it
wory you a little. After all, the children loved their parents
with a blinding fury. But they had been raised to make
intelligent decisions.
There was an easy answer to it. You can imagine that it's
already done. Such a device would seem childish to Earth
children, but Puca children have the means of putting their
imagination into effect. They could sing a Bagarthach
verse, and so make certain that it was done. They counted
around by evens and odds, and it fell to Dorothy to sing the
verse. She wasn't as good at them as Helen or Peter, but it
is the intention that counts in these things. Besides, it is
nearly certain that Helen whispered one line to her.
Dorothy sang the thing with a full dogged voice:
"We'll wither Witchy with a prank,
And kindle them in flames like roses-
Veronica and Hank and Frank-
And give them all Apotheosis.”
So, the big shanty would bum down that very night, and
everybody die in it except the six (or seven) children who
would, fortunately, be out roistering around. The
24
)
High Purpose of the Gallant Band
25
Bagarthach wasn't very well detailed, but these things work
themselves out. Perhaps Papa Henry would have his throat
slit by a blasted window pane in all that heat. Veronica was
already dead, of course, but Dorothy forgot that part when
she made up the verse. And the brains of Witchy, in a way,
were already braised. “Hey, that works out pretty funny,
the part about Mama,” Helen said.
And after they were all roasted and put into their coffins,
the rest of the road would be clear. You can't help it if your
folks bum to death, especially if it's the best thing that
could happen to them. And it would be the accomplish-
ment of one of the great and valid dreams (even Earth
children have it), to kill everyone in the world except your
own small elite, and then to have the whole world cleared to
do what you wanted with it.
They'd kill the Stutgards first, that very night, with axes.
They'd axe old man Stutgard, and all the blood would run
out of his big red neck. They'd cut off Mrs. Stutgard's head
that was round as a pumpkin, and it would roll down to the
bottom of the hill and look at you. They'd kill the Stutgard
kids. It's most fun to kill kids who are just enough bigger
than you to make it interesting.
Elizabeth, who was nine years old and already getting
silly, at first had sonie doubts about killing everybody in
the world. Kill the Stutgards and Crockers and Schermer-
horns and Masters and Stones and Franklyns, sure.
Especially Mr. Crocker who was the first man to bark at
them when they came to Lost Haven. Kill Mrs. Cowper
who had eyes like a little pig, and Mr. Kranker who had
hairs in his ears. But Elizabeth thought that was enough to
kill.
Her brother Charles partly supported her. He would, in
addition, kill the Bacons and Lanyards and Kirbys, and
possibly some of the Fabers. And Elwood Elgin and Rex
Remagen and Bamey Bottleby, three big boys, and Sheriff
Train. But he thought that was almost enough.
So little Helen had to show them the big picture. The
whole thing becomes silly unless you kill everybody, she
said. And speaking about killing the older Dulantys, nine
years old might be pretty near the borderline, she said,
looking darkly at Elizabeth.
Peter and John were of Helen's way of thinking, and
26
The Reefs of Earth
they bullied Dorothy into siding with them. They brought
those older kids around and made it unanimous.
They'd start that very night. They'd kill Mr. Stutgard
first of all. They drew straws for it, and John got the short
straw.
The children went swimming in the bayou, to pass the
aftemoon till night should come and their big plan go into
operation. You always do the first murders at night. Then,
after you are onto the trick of them, you can do them in the
daylight too.
They went swimming in the bayou, and they could swim!
And they could dive like no children ever seen on Earth
before. Elizabeth who was the oldest was still the strongest
swimmer, though little Helen was the fastest and slipperiest
and hardest to catch. But it was Charles who dove from the
highest branches, clear out of the very tops of the tall
sycamores. And they could all stay under water as though
it was their element.
Veronica had once told them that they must not stay
under water for too long at once. “If people are watching,
they will wonder why you do not have to come up to
breathe,” she said.
But now Veronica was dead and gone and her advice
unheeded. And somebody else was gone also, but in
another way; and the children were still in a vague shock
from it—the strangeness of such an un-Puca thing. A
second disaster had struck the Dulantys the night before.
Now they swam and dived most of the afternoon. They
frolicked in the three dimensions of the deep bayou, and
seemed gay. Then
Then they spread themselves out on the
overhanging branches to dry off. Now they would have to
think—but in parables, not directly.
A chicken will live for a little while after its head is cut
off, and will not know what is the matter. And a young
Dulanty will seem to survive mortal blows, with the action
long delayed. But it had been another mortal blow,
deprived even of the gaiety of death.
For Witchy had been taken away the night before. She
had gone mad in a way that could not be ignored. We say
not much about it yet. The shock has not taken its full
-
High Purpose of the Gallant Band
27
effect. The second event, for the Pucas, was much the
worse. But Veronica and Witchy were both lost to the
families now. Earth Sickness was stifling the family. Could
they live on this world any longer?
Four of the children told fanciful stories as they dried
out on the branches and waited for the night. They were
parables of things not to be admitted directly. But three of
the stories had already happened, and the prophetic story
of little Helen would happen that very night.
“There was this little girl," said Elizabeth, “and her
mother went out of the shanty one night. It got later and
her mother didn't come back, so at midnight the little girl
put on her dress and went to look for her.
“She went down the dark streets where the houses were
hid in the weeds and the trees leaned together and touched
each other across the street. The little girl could smell her
mother's perfume the way she had gone. Then the girl saw
a crazy floozy up ahead making a crazy noise.
“So Elizabeth went up to the floozy (no she didn't, her
name wasn't Elizabeth, I don't know what it was)—so the
little girl went up to the floozy to ask her if she had seen her
mother. But the floozy screamed and ran down a dark
street.
"And Elizabeth—I mean the little girl—ran down the
street after her till it came to a place where it closed in and
the foozy couldn't run any further; and people were
stumbling out of their houses to see what the screaming
was all about. Then the floozy turned around, and the light
from somewhere fell on her face.
“My God, Elizabeth!' the floozy said. No she didn't-
she said, 'My God'—whatever the little girl's name was—
‘that you should see me like this.' Then the little girl
screamed too, because the floozy had eyes just like her
mother's; only they were cracked and her face was
crooked, And Elizabeth didn't know whether it was her
mother or not, but she thought it had been her mother.
“It was a crazy Earth-people face that the floozy had.
How could a Puca face be crazy? It was like a mask tumed
into a face, and the real face melted away behind it. Dying
is fun, or everybody makes out that it's fun. Going crazy is
-
28
The Reefs of Earth
not fun, and nobody can make it so.
“Then the people had to tie that floozy up like a dog and
take her to the hospital.
“The little girl ran all the way home and climbed up and
looked into the looking-glass over the sink in the kitchen.
Would you believe it? It wasn't her at all. She laughed, she
was so relieved. Then she looked around, and it wasn't
even her own house she was in. It had all happened to
somebody else and to somebody else's mother.'
Elizabeth had the blackest hair and the whitest skin in
the world, but now her skin shivered. She lay stretched out
on an old branch up against the sky, a live image too real to
be real.
Now they were all one quarter dry from their swim.
“There was this little boy,” said Peter, "and he sat in the
kitchen and watched his father one night. His father had a
brown bottle and a glass. His father winked at him, but
there was something just a little bit wrong with that wink.
Then his father poured the glass full and drank it. It made
his father look a little more like an Earth man. The father
began to change when he drank it, like the man in the story
that changed into a frog when he drank the drops off a
mushroom. Then the father winked again, but his face was
still differenter when he did it; and he drank another glass.
"The third time he did it, when he winked again and
when he opened his eye after the wink, there wasn't any eye
there, just a gray glaze. The father kept changing, his face
got redder and his arms got darker. He winked with his
other eye; and when he opened it, the other eye was gone
too. He drank the whole blamed bottle empty.
"Then the man got littler and littler like a frog. 'I bet
there's still a little bit in the corner of the bottle if I could
get to it,' the man said. Then he crawled inside the bottle
and found another good drink down in the very comer of
it. No he didn't. I just made that part up. He didn't get any
littler, and he didn't crawl into the bottle. It was just a
notion the little boy had that his father was about to do it.
“Then the man broke the empty bottle on the edge of the
table, and put his head down in the middle of the broken
glass and went to sleep. Then Peter—then the little boy,
not Peter—watched the man all night. But when the sun
High Purpose of the Gallant Band
29
shined in the window in the moming, Peter saw that it was
a different man, not his father. He didn't know what had
happened to his father. He is afraid to see if his own father
has come back yet today.”
They were half dry from their swim now. It was near
evening.
"There was this other little boy,” said John, “and his
mother. All they had to eat was one onion. Every night
they ate one layer off it till it was all gone. Then the mother
lay down and died, but the little boy didn't know she was
dead. It was the first time he had run into a situation like
this. The little boy went out and stole another onion and
brought it to her. But there were some more people in the
house then, and they had put his mother into a crate.
“'Your mother is dead, they told him, and he was both
glad and sorry to hear it. “I'll give her the onion anyhow,'
he said. “They keep you from getting colds, and I think she
has to cross a wet river to get where she's going.' He put it
in her hand, but she gripped the little boy's hand in hers,
and it was like cold iron. 'Let me go,' he said, but she was
dead and couldn't hear him, and she gripped him all the
harder. There wasn't any way to get him loose from her.
'Well, we don't have all day to waste, one of the men said,
'somebody get a bone saw and let's cut this little boy's arm
off.' 'Judas priest! Don't do that to me,' the little boy said.
'Wherever I go, I want it to be all of me.' 'Well, get in or get
out,' the men told him. The little boy couldn't make up his
mind, so the men pushed him down into the crate and
nailed down the lid, and buried him there with his mother.
It scared him to death to be buried like that.”
Now they were all three-quarters dry from their swim.
The children had believed they were poor because they
were living in the big shanty. They thought that Veronica
had starved to death, though the house was always full of
food. Elizabeth had recently read a story about a woman
who had starved to death, and she had embellished the
story to the rest of them, and it was on their minds.
>
9)
"There was a little girl and they put her father in jail,”
Helen said. “It was the sheriff that did it. The little girl
went to see her father in jail, but they wouldn't let her in to
30
The Reefs of Earth
see him. “You go home and forget about him,' those men
told her, 'he's so far back in there that we have to shoot his
beans to him.' 'I thought that was just a joke they made up
about people in jail,' Helen said. Not this time, they told
her, 'we've got him so deep in the cooler that we couldn't
get him out with an ice-pick.'. 'I thought that was just a
blamed way of talking,' Helen said. 'Not this time,' the men
told her, 'we got him so far in there that we got to pipe
sunshine to him.' 'I thought that was a blasted colloqui-
alism,' the little girl said. “Naw, we locked him up and
throwed away the key,' they told her. 'Won't the key
show up as short on inventory control?' the little girl asked.
'I'll fix you guys,' the little girl said, so she sang a
,
Bagarthach verse:
“I blast you corny country cops,
I'll blow the bars and locks, by hokey!
I'll kill the sheriff's cows and crops,
And get my papa out of pokey.'
a
“Say, that Bagarthach verse didn't work at all. It didn't
blow the bars and locks or do a thing to that jail. You know
the reason? It was all a dream. Lots of times a Bagarthach
won't work in a dream. None of it had really happened to
the girl and her father, not yet at least.
“But the gir knew that she would never see her father
any more, so she stole a boat and went to sea to be a sailor.
I forget whether this was while she was dreaming or after
she woke up."
“How'd she know which way to go?” Dorothy asked.
“She went down Mud Bayou till it runs into Crow Creek
in the strip pits,” Helen told her. “She went down Crow
Creek till it goes into Green River, down Green River till
it goes into the Arkansas River, down the Arkansas till it
goes into the Mississippi, and down the Mississippi till it
goes in the Ocean. It's downhill all the way and you can't
miss it."
By this time they were completely dry, so they put on
their clothes and gave the trees back to the sulky crows
who were returning from the fields. They went to hide in
Stutgard's fruit cellar till it was dark enough for John to kill
Mr. Stutgard.
High Purpose of the Gallant Band
31
Bad John was their lookout, for he could be outside the
cellar, and then inside again, or into the Stutgards' house
and in all the rooms of it, and out again without using the
doors or without anyone seeing him. But he wasn't a very
good lookout. He couldn't tell them whether it was dark yet
or not. He didn't know what it meant to be dark.
But just when Helen had looked out and told them that
it was dark enough, Bad John came back to them. He told
them that it was no good anyhow, that John could not kill
Mr. Stutgard.
"Why can't I kill him?” John demanded. "Here I am
almost four foot tall and as salty a man or boy as there is
on Earth. I can kill anybody I want to.”
But a man had already killed Mr. Stutgard, and he was
dead, Bad John told them.
“What man?” Peter demanded. “Nobody better be
poaching on our preserve. We thought of it to kill him
6
first."
Bad John told them what man had killed Mr. Stutgard.
“Why, you are just silly,” Helen told Bad John. “He
would be the last one in the world to kill him. I think we
better get a dog to be our lookout man the next time we kill
somebody at night.”
They didn't believe Bad John, and they went about it to
do it themselves. The children came under the window of
the high room where Mr. Stutgard spent his evenings. John
had his small axe ready, and as sharp as a com knife.
Peter stood on Elizabeth's shoulders, and Helen on
Peter's, and Dorothy on Helen's, and Charles on Dorothy's.
Then John climbed up the swaying tower of them with his
axe in his hand. He went in through the window which Bad
John had left unlatched. Bad John could do things like
that, as he could work from either the inside or the outside
of a room.
John was in there quite a wiile. The swaying tower of
children chittered in anticipation like a grove full of
crickets.
John came out with the bloody dripping axe in his
hands, and climbed down them, and then they climbed
down each other. Then they all ran away, for a sudden
great screaming was heard from the Stutgard house.
>
32
The Reefs of Earth
They reassembled in a dark lane full of pigweeds and
sunflowers.
“You did it! You did it!" the happy children screamed.
"No, I didn't do it,” said John sadly and with a
frustration older than his six years.
“But you did! You did!” exulted Helen. “Just feel all the
nice blood on the axe. People who don't love blood don't
love anything."
“No,” John said. “Bad John was right. Mr. Stutgard was
already killed. That man got him before I could.”
"Just imagine a man killing another man, and neither of
them a Puca,” Elizabeth shuddered. “It almost makes me
"
sick. But how did you get all that blood on your axe then?”
But they all saw at once that it was not the little boy's
axe that John held now. It was a heavy man's axe, nine
times as big as John's little one. And it was covered with
blood.
“It hasn't started the way I intended it,” Helen said. So
they all started home in the dark, still excited over the
murder that they had come so close to doing.
It was when they came near where the old shanty used to
be that they saw something that really astonished them.
They had to look twice, and then they hardly believed it. It
loomed up in the dark as it did every night, and their
fathers were inside under the lights.
The big shanty was still there! It had not burned down at
all. Their Bagarthaclı verse had somehow failed in its
effect. Well, it was something that would have to be lived
with.
Tomorrow they'd make a better Bagarthach, comical
and correct, that would kill Henry and Frank Dulanty
correctly. And it was good to sleep one more night under
the same roof with them.
They left the bloody axe on the back porch, and all went
up to bed.
4
And Six Were Kids, and One a Ghostie
It was a little after midnight that six men (they were Sheriff
Train and five hasty deputies) came with flashlights and
rifles to arrest Henry Dulanty for the murder of Coalfactor
Stutgard.
"He is dead?” asked Henry."—A silly question if I am
—A
to be taken for his murder. But you all know that I couldn't
have done it."
“We don't know anything about you or what you could
do,” said the sheriff. "You have several times threatened
his life.”
“I have never done anything so trivial,” said Henry.
“At least there have been angry words between the two
of you, which amounts to the same thing when testimony is
given,” said the sheriff. “For your own safety, I am going
to have you lodged in the county jail. The Lost Haven jail
wouldn't keep you in if you decided to get out, I know; and
it wouldn't keep the men out if they decided to go in after
you. It's no more than a crackerbox. You aren't liked by
the people here, you know. They say that you are neither
fish nor flesh."
"Must I be one or the other?” Henry asked, “Oh well,
I’U
go with you after a bit then; but first I must talk with my
brother here alone, and then take care of a few other
things.”
"You're not going to talk to anybody alone. If you're
going to say anything, say it real fast right now, and then
come along,” Sheriff Train ground out, and he looked
around to his five green deputies for support.
“Frank,” Henry said, "put the bottle away. You have to
look after the children now. This is three of us they have
lost in three days: one dead, one demented, one arrested
with intent to lynch. Now they have only yourself.”
(Since the death of his wife Veronica two days before,
Frank Dulanty had been drinking in a blind stupor. It was
a Specific against Earth Allergy, he said. His despondency
33
1)
34
The Reefs of Earth
had been deepened by the derangement of his brother's
wife Witchy.)
"I'll put it away," Frank said, “and I'll take care of the
children if they seem to need care, a thing hard to imagine.
I will also do what can be done about this other thing. But
you don't have to go unless you want to, Henry. You're not
sick enough to believe that you have to go with them. I will
settle these six quaking lawmen and their hardware if you
wish, or you can do it yourself. Neither of us have fallen so
low that six of their sort could give us trouble.'
“But this is their hour,” said Henry, “and the power of
darkness.
“What kind of talk is that?” Sheriff Train demanded.
“From Luke," said Henry. "He was an Earth writer, but
he could almost have made it as a Puca."
The men led big Henry Dulanty away then—like a
confused bull with a new ring in his nose. They would
never have ringed him had he not been shot through with
Earth Allergy and its accompanying listlessness. Neverthe-
less, they were six shaking men with their rifles, and he was
calm,
Well, did you ever arrest a goblin or ogre who stood six
feet four and was as heavy as a yearling ox? One who, it
was said, could rot the flesh off your bones by making a
sime about you?
But they took him away. Then Frank and the children
went to bed with a chill on their spirits. They all slept till
moming, except Elizabeth. She arose, as soon as the house
was quiet, and went out on the porch and got the bloody
axe and hid it.
“I think you children should stay very close to the house
till we see what is going to happen,” Frank said the next
morning.
“I think we should do no such thing," said little Helen,
"and I know what will happen. A welfare lady will come
and take us away. They'll put us in a home, and we'll get
stubbom and we won't eat, and we'll all be dead within a
week. I think that we'd better be hard to find. Andah–I
guess we won't have you killed for a while yet. You're the
only one of the parents left, and we might need you. We
>
And Six Were Kids, and One a Ghostie
35
sent a Bagarthach to get you all yesterday, but something
went wrong with it.'
"We shot your Bagarthach down with another one,"
Frank said. "You can't use them against the Kindred. And,
kids, don't ever kill Pucas! Nor even Earth people unless
you have a good reason for it. I thought we'd told you that
before. Yes, possibly it is best that you be hard to find.
I don't believe anybody can find you if you don't want to be
found. I will go see Witchy today, and Henry in jail, and
get a lawyer, and find what friends I can. I'll be back to
night, though. If you don't come back, then send someone
to tell me that you're all right.”
The children went out into the town and considered it.
“It is time that we became persons in this world,”
Charles said. “We need a base of operations, a moving
One."
"Come along then,” Helen said.
The children went to the little tin jail of Lost Haven to
talk to Fulbert Fronsac. This was not, of course, like the
strong jail at the county seat where their father-uncle
Henry was held. This was a flimsy little jail that seldom had
more than one prisoner, who was in residence now. The
children entered the little jail by the hole in the roof, as
they always did.
"Misere!” said Fulbert, the prisoner, when he saw them.
“That tragedy should strike you again! There are days
when the Good God is not good. He and I are due a serious
talk on this very matter today. Ah, you have brought Ange-
Jacques with you!”
Fulbert was one of the few regular people who could see
Bad John, and he called him Ange-Jacques. Fulbert was an
old French bum who was also the lost Dauphin. And, if not
he, then he was the son of the Dauphin, or the grandson,
sometimes the one, sometimes the other. But to the town,
he was the town drunk.
The Puck (the same as with Indians) were always in
rapport with French drunks. And the trouble (again in this
case) was just that there weren't enough French drunks in
this part of the country.
Fulbert, however, was a man of property. He owned
both the Ile de France and Catherine de Medici. The lle
1
36
The Reefs of Earth
was a fishing raft that Fulbert used on the streams and
canals of the strip pits, and on Crow Creek and Green
River.
Catherine de Medici was a she-goat who (like Fulbert)
was of royal blood. She was the great-great-granddaughter
of the first Catherine de Medici, the queen of France. How
it happened that, being so, she was a goat and not a person,
is another story.
“There must be an end to this idiotie," Fulbert said. "I
know that your loving father-uncle would not kill a man.
He could and has flattened noses and scattered his share of
teeth in his short time here. He hasn't made himself
popular with the people of Lost Haven. All are afraid of
him, and he the kindest of men! But he did not kill that
man.
“No, he couldn't have killed Mr. Stutgard,” Dorothy
said. "He was already dead.”
"Who was already dead, my favorite goblin?” Fulbert
asked her.
“I don't know anything about goblins, but Mr. Stutgard
was already dead when we went to kill him. Bad John was
watching them when the man killed him, and it wasn't
Uncle Henry.”
“Who did kill Mr. Stutgard, kids?” Fulbert asked them.
So they told Fulbert who had killed Mr. Stutgard. And
they gave him all the details. And Fulbert thought about it
quite a while before he spoke.
“It isn't very tangible evidence,” Fulbert said, “mostly
because Ange-Jacques isn't a very tangible boy. Do any of
you know what time it was when you were in the fruit
cellar? Had any of you a watch?”
“No,” John said, “but Helen knows how to tell time if
we had one.'
“Ange-Jacques could not testify in court,” Fulbert
mused. “There are advantages as well as disadvantages to
invisibility. And invisibility combined with inaudibility is a
combination hard to touch.'
“We could tell people what Bad John told us," Peter
said. “And if they ask a question, we can ask him for them.
When he answers, we can tell them the answer. A lot of
people can't hear him talk, you know."
>
And Six Were Kids, and One a Ghostie
37
“I know," Fulbert said. “People being constituted as
they are, it wouldn't be too successful. But this isn't why
you came to see me today.”
"No," Helen told him. “Charles said that we needed a
moveable base of operations. And I, being the most
intelligent of us, immediately comprehended what it should
9
be.”
"She means,” Elizabeth explained to Fulbert, “that we
came to get a deed from you to the Ile de France. We need
it in our business, and we don't want to steal it from you
without a deed."
“A deed wouldn't be binding unless you gave me a
consideration," Fulbert told them. “Give me a dollar to
make it legal. The timber alone is worth a dollar, not
counting the craftsmanship. If you haven't a dollar, then go
steal me a bottle of whisky. Or have you scruples about
stealing whisky without a deed to it?''
“Helen's the only one that knows what scruples are and
she won't tell us,” John said. "Have we scruples about it,
Helen?”
“Not a trace,” Helen affirmed. “And I know just where
there is one. I'll take John with me and make him get it.
We're trying to get him over being so bashful about going
into people's houses and stealing things. Come along, John,
we have to be back before these children manage to mess
up the whole deal."
3
>
“Let's write the deed right now before she gets back,"
Elizabeth said. “Hurry. You've no idea how much time it
saves to do things when she's gone.”
"I'll write it,” Peter said. “It'll look better in a man's
hand. Besides, I'm not sure whether the Salic Law obtains
in Crow Creek Township.”
“Oh, you talk just like Helen!” said Elizabeth.
“Has anybody a paper and pencil?” Peter asked. “You
scratch out a deed on a shingle with a nail and somebody's
going to look down on it."
“I have them,” said Fulbert, producing the objects. “In
my youth I was a natural son of Le Franc de Pompignan,
and I always carry writing materials in case I should be
taken suddenly with an ode.”
38
The Reefs of Earth
“To whomever it is respected,” Peter wrote slowiy in a
solemn voice after taking the paper and pencil. “This is to
convey one raft the Le de France with the boathouse and
blanket and lantem and automobile hom and the box of
snuff and the frying pan and the coffee pot and other
accessories in fee simple for one bottle of whisky stolen
by Helen and John Dulanty and given in token to Fulbert
Fronsac, dated today (I don't know the date and I bet
nobody else does either) and agreeable to all parties."
It took him a long time to get this out, speaking a word
at a time as he wrote it.
"Put down 'Witnessed and amended by all parties
present,'" Charles said.
“All right. Whoops! Finished just in time. She's back!”
Peter completed the document.
“You forgot what to do about Catherine de Medici,"
Helen chortled as she returned with John and the stolen
whisky. “I knew, of course, that you would go ahead on
your own the moment my back was tumed. I knew also
that you would botch it. Just let me see it a minute. Not as
bad as I feared. Fortunately there is nothing here that a
thoughtful person can't quickly put to rights. Catherine is a
sea goat, not a land goat. She lives on the Ile most of the
time.'
“We will put in a clause that she can be our guest for as
long as she likes," Charles suggested. “And we will let her
off at any port if she wants to visit friends or has business
to transact.”
“How long will you be using the Ile?" Fulbert asked
them.
“For as long as we like," Peter said. “You see, we're
going to kill everybody in the world, and that includes you.
You won't be needing the raft any more after that so we're
doing you a favor buying it from you. Please sign this
(Helen's written in the new clauses), and then we will all
sign.”
They all signed. Bad John could not write the way others
wrote, but he used a different kind of pencil and made a
queer mark. Fulbert was near frightened when he saw it,
and he muttered something in a tongue older than French.
There was this else about the mark that Bad John made.
When, later that week, the children showed the deed to a
And Six Were Kids, and One a Ghostie
39
certain lawyer and to others, none of those people could
see Bad John's mark though it was plain as the face on
your head.
After this, the children went to the boat raft, checked it
over carefully in maritime terms, provisioned it, and set
sail to be gone forever.
5
A Child's a Monster Still Uncurled
The strip pits are a dozen square miles of mountains tumed
inside out, threaded by canals, and with bottomless
chasms. The artificial hills are full of shafts and pits and
caves both above and below water level. Coalfactor
Stutgard owned all this, but he had closed down the coal
mines several years before.
The Dulanty children loved the pits. Their own home
world (which they had never seen) was made up of land
and water inextricably mixed, with endless caves inside the
hills, and even better caves below the water level. These
old waterlogged surface coal pits made a good substitute,
and they'd claim every watery acre of the pits as soon as
they got the Ile to moving properly.
Fulbert had told the children that Catherine de Medici
knew how. the small sail on the Ile de France should be
rigged, in case they could not figure it out for themselves.
There was something they meant to ask him about that but
they forgot. That old bat Fulbert had twinkled his eye when
he said it, and he was a tricky one.
Of course Catherine knew how the sail should be rigged.
She had seen it done hundreds of times. But, being a goat,
she could neither do it herself nor tell them how it should
be done. Finally, Charles figured it out.
There were five kingdoms in the strip pits that the
children had to reduce before they went on to exterminate
the people of the rest of the world. You can't leave
unreduced strongholds behind you when you go into the
exterminating business.
First of the five kingdoms was that of the Stinkers, a club
composed of Elwood Elgin, Rex Remagen, and Bemy
Bottleby—three big boys, the oldest of them eleven years
old.
The Ile de France billowed boldly up to Port Stinker
with Helen laboring the old automobile hom for a waming
40
A Child's a Monster Still Uncurled
41
and a challenge. The Stinkers came out to do battle in their
own craft, the Sea Bear.
"You look like pigs and you're not people at all,
Elwood Elgin challenged them.
"You hop like frogs and you eat raw fish,” Rex
Remagen sang out.
"You swim like pollywogs and you got tails like them,"
Berny Bottleby shouted.
It's the half-truths that kill you. Only three of the
Dulantys looked like goblins, which is not the same thing
as looking like pigs—except under the eyes where the
snoot begins, and where the ears fasten on. They did not
hop like frogs, though they could leap further and higher
than regular people could, Sure, they ate catfish raw, but
sometimes they fried or baked other fish if they had time
for it. Of course they swam like pollywogs; it's easier to
slither your whole body than just to chum your arms and
legs. And they did not have tails, none that amounted to
anything
That was war talk the Stinkers were hollering at them, so
let it be war then! Helen let go with a Bagarthach verse that
should have settled the Stinkers forever:
"Oh Stinker limbs that reek and rot,
A Stinker head that decomposes!
We'll splatter all the blood you've got,
You seven-letter sos-and-soses!”
a
The two vessels moved towards each other at a
combined speed of more than three miles an hour. But the
Sea Bear had forgotten to mount any artillery, while
Charles and John both had a great store of throwing rocks.
And Elizabeth had mighty cannon-crackers that she lighted
and tossed,
But it was Helen, with a variant of Greek fire, who broke
the Stinkers' center. These were paper sacks which she set
afire and flung with rock warheads to give them carrying
power. They landed and flamed on the deck of the Sea Bear
as the battling craft came close. The hardy Stinkers
attempted to stamp them out barefooted, and that was
where the battle tumed against them. The Stinkers
suddenly began to holler and cany on like crazy.
42
The Reefs of Earth
The burning sacks were filled with splinters of glass,
thumbtacks, cockleburs, cactus, and devil-claws, all im-
bedded in a soft matrix. You stamp down on those bare-
footed and you're hurt. The Stinkers were wounded, and
the deck of the Sea Bear was red with their blood.
Yet this was only a diversion, not the main attack. The
Dulantys knew, even if the Stinkers had temporarily
forgotten, that inside the Stinker shack was a .22 rifle. Now
Peter made his move. He slipped over the far side of the Ile
de France, swam under both craft, and made shore. He was
inside the Stinker stockade, had the .22, and was out
barking orders:
“Hold, halt, stand, abaft!"
“You don't even know how to shoot it!" Rex Remagen
yipped savagely, deep in his own pain.
But Peter did know how to shoot it. He shot it, “Ka-
zing!” And then there was silence.
“Now, if one of you will just put that boy's ear back on,
we will get down to business," Peter said.
The Sea Bear, in the meantime, had been boarded by the
Dulantys. Elizabeth, never one to miss a tum like that,
came up behind the stunned Stinkers and slapped a handful
of fish innards from a bait bucket to the side of each
Stinker head. Each thought that it was himself who had lost
an ear and that it had been replaced.
"Truss the prisoners," ordered Peter, one of the most
astute eight-year-old generals in the world. The Stinkers
were bound up, and a rock tied around the neck of each.
Elizabeth hit each of them sharply on the head with a pipe
wrench, and Charles and John booted them off the craft to
their destruction.
“Death and destruction!” Helen sang. "See all the nice
bloody water.” And the Dulantys began to jubilate, and let
their guard down.
For, possibly because of faulty staff work, the spot of
execution was near water only two feet deep. This was the
Stinkers' own water, and they knew the shallows. They
swarmed onto shore, for only their arms had been tied, and
disappeared around a shoulder of rock.
Following them on shore, after a stunned interval, was
no good. Kids always loow their own stronghold, and the
Stinkers kaew theirs. They had escaped.
A Child's a Monster Still Uncurled
43
"It's a black failure,” said Charles. “I hold myself partly
responsible. Let us consider our strategy so that a thing like
this can never happen again.”
“It is no great matter," Helen said. “What I really want
is for you little children to leam tactics, and you leam by
your failures. They won't live long. I put chicken dirt and
cow dirt and dog dirt and people dirt in my fire bombs. If
they don't die of their head wounds, the lockjaw will kill
them by sundown.”
The Dulantys burned down the Stinker shack and cursed
anyone who should assemble there again. The Dulanty
navy had now been doubled by the capture of the Sea Bear,
and the Dulantys had a weapon in the .22. They had
reduced one of the strongholds of the strip-pit country.
The screen and canvas shack of the Stutgard children,
the second kingdoin of the pits, seemed to be deserted. But
it was heavy, and it could be moved but slightly on its piers
of rock-filled oil drums. The Dulantys started a bonfire
under its floor to kindle the old crib. They got it to burning
pretty good.
But the shack hadn't been empty. As the fires arose,
Amada Stutgard jumped out of the building and ran back
into the hills. And Peter started after her.
"Mind you, no mercy,” Helen called after him. “You are
instructed to bring back her ears as proof that you've killed
her.”
"All right,” Peter called back, but he was worried as he
ran. He didn't have a knife or anything else to cut her cars
off with. By the time Peter had caught her and thrown her
down on the ground, they were out of sight of the others.
He pinned her down, kneeling on her. She was a big girl,
len years old
“Where were you?” Peter demanded.
“I have a place up in the rafters where I hide when I
want to cry,” she gasped. She went up and down with her
breath as he knelt on her stomach. It was like riding in a
boat. “I was crying because my father is dead," she
whimpered
“Why'd you cry for that? He was the meanest man in the
country. Do you know what I'm going to do to you,
Amada? I'm going to push you down in the quicksand and
44
The Reefs of Earth
stand on you till you go down, and jump off your face at
the last minute, and you'll die with your mouth full of
green
mud."
“The quicksand's half a mile from here."
“Let's get started then. I don't want to lose time."
“All right,” Amada said queerly. She was half again as
big as Peter, but he gripped her soft wrists so as almost to
sever her hands from her arms.
“Why don't you let me go, Peter?" Amada said when
they were halfway to the quicksand. “Nobody would have
to know."
"I can't. I have to cut off your ears and bring them back
to Helen to prove that I killed you."
“Why don't you break a couple of pods off one of those
Cherokee creepers and bring them to her? They're ear-
colored.”
"I couldn't do that. You wouldn't want me to cheat,
would you?"
They came quickly to the quicksand.
“This is as good a spot as any,” Peter said.
“Let me get that clump of grass across the draw,”
Amada said. "I'll spread it out to lie down on the
quicksand on.”
“You give your word to come back?”
“I give my word.'
“All right. And see if you can find a real sharp rock over
there to cut off your ears with. These here aren't very
good.”
Then Amada went away. But she crossed the little draw
and was up a hill like a swooping lark, running so fast that
Peter wondered what was the matter with her. Then he
understood. She was very near her own house, and Peter
wouldn't be able to catch her.
"Your uncle killed my father,” she cried fiercely when
she was safe. “And you are dirty and ugly and you look
like a porky-pine.”
Peter was shaken by the deception. He learned that
Earth people will lie to save their lives and will say a thing
when they don't mean it. Earth people are the most
treacherous creatures in all the universes.
But that didn't get Peter past Helen. There was only one
thing to do. He broke a couple of the flesh-colored pods off
a
>
3
A Child's a Monster Still Uncurled
45
a Cherokee creeper and handed them carelessly to Helen as
the ears of Amada Stutgard, as soon as he got back.
Helen exploded, and Peter's heart sank; he should have
known that she was too smart to accept them. But her fury
wasn't turned onto Peter.
“Kids, we don't know what we got ahold of!" she
screeched. “I swear these ears are partly, at least, vegetable
fiber. What are Earth people, anyhow? What ungodly half-
plant half-animals have we got ourselves involved with?
And look, there's seeds inside the ears like in a pod. Earth-
people seeds! Do you suppose that's the way they generate?
Kill them all as fast as we can, I say! They're monsters!”
They plowed up Stutgard Landing and sowed it with
salt. Or at least they made a symbolic scratch, and shook
salt into it. And no grass ever grew there again. No grass
had ever grown on that sour mud flat before.
The next objective, the kingdom of the Fiddlers, was
hard to find. The Fiddlers made illegal whisky, and their
place was the best hidden in the pits. The sheriff had never
been able to find it. But Catherine de Medici knew the way,
and she showed the direction by her attitude. They came to
Fiddler's Landing—it was only a gash in the hills where
one could nose a boat. Helen sounded the automobile hom
for a challenge.
Jack Fiddler was a suspicious man. He stuck his head
out from behind an unlikely hill, and he had them covered
with a blunderbuss before they saw him.
"Ha! Ye've stolen the lle from old Fulbert!” Jack
Fiddler intoned at them. “Have you killed the vicious old
saint, ye evil kindred?”
"No, we're going to leave him till one of the last," Peter
explained reasonably. “We've come to kill you now. Boy, I
bet we blast you wide open.
“I'll just come aboard and belabor the crowd of
you
and
get to the truth about this raft stealing,” Jack Fiddler
growled. And that is where he made his mistake.
When Jack Fiddler bounded aboard the raft, he left his
rifle leaning against a rock on shore. And when he collared
the first two children to bounce their heads together, he
found himself looking down the small but serious barrel of
the .22 into the weird green eyes of Peter.
>
46
The Reefs of Earth
That Jack Fiddler carried on like a crazy man when they
had the jump on him. He roared and pawed the plank
decking, but he couldn't scare the boy loose from the
weapon. Then Fiddler folded, swallowed his cud, as they
say. They ordered him around, and he went meekly, but
with an evil sly look in his eye and a bide-my-time set to his
mouth. But Charles had Fiddler's big rifle now, and there
was nothing the man could do.
They made him get a wheelbarrow and rig a plank and
load a barrel of com whisky and a barrel of choc beer and
a tubful of mash. The mash smelled as good and as sour as
anything you ever nosed.
"It will be good to eat for breakfast,” Dorothy said.
They made Fiddler load a ham that his last customer
had just left with him. Then they told him to kneel down in
the mud and say his prayers, that his time had come to die.
But Jack Fiddler did no such thing. He bounded off into
his tricky rocks and hills, whipping and evading like a
cotton-tail going to ground, as the .22 and the big riie
barked in futile pursuit of him. That Jack Fiddler had been
shot at more than once before, that was clear. They weren't
about to get him.
The Dulanty kids would have to do something about
letting their jumped prey escape them every time. Oh well,
they could send a Bagarthach verse after him to kill him.
And there was plenty to do wrecking his stuff.
They tumed over the rest of his barrels, sank his boat,
and set fire to his wagon. But they couldn't find his house
to bum it. The sheriff had never been able to find it either,
or his main reserve stock for that matter.
Now the Dulantys had a second rifle much larger than
the .22. And they had com whisky and beer instead of rum.
Helen, who was on a pirate jag lately, had wished for rum.
But the whisky and choc would serve as well, for
fashions change in both piracy and liquor.
6
The World's a Trap, and None Can Quit It
The next objective of the Dulantys was the stronghold of
the Lanyard family, but here they ran into difficulties that
were mostly mental. It is hard to plunder a people who will
willingly give you anything they have. The Lanyards were
good people, and they did not themselves know how many
were in their family. It depends on where you start and
finish counting.
The Lanyards were part Shawnee Indian, which made
them better than the Fiddlers, who were part Quapaw, and
better than the Fabers who were part Cherokee.
Well, it had to be done nevertheless. You can't start
getting kind to people when there's a job to do. The
Dulantys landed to a terrific blast of the old automobile
hom and the terrible cry of Peter:
“A swift and merciful death is the best we can offer.
Don't make us do our worst.'
The Lanyards were either off somewhere, or else they
were too terrified to show a head. Finally there appeared
Phoebe Jane Lanyard, the mother of the brood, in answer
to the racket. She came out openly, and did not seem to
comprehend her danger.
Phoebe had always had a way of looking at the Dulantys
and chuckling, without answering their extravagances. She
understood this goblin brood better than anyone else did,
and she mocked their own look back at them with a rakish
looseness of features. She could be as goblin as they could.
The goblin look, as you know, is characterized by an
extreme mobility of the features. “We can look like regular
people till we have to laugh,” Peter had said once. Even the
non-goblin-appearing of the Dulantys (the beautiful Eliza-
beth and Charles and Helen) had increasingly taken
on the goblin hue these last several days. “Look at them
sideways and they're goblins too,” Phoebe Jane said out
loud—to herself, not to them. She had a talent for looking
at things sideways.
47
>
48
The Reefs of Earth
Phoebe's chuckling at all their threats got the Dulantys'
goat, and we don't mean Catherine de Medici. They
stormed onto shore and blazed at her with green eyes that
they tried to make angry.
"You do well to hide out in the pits,” she said to them,
seriously now, when they were on shore. “They are having
a meeting on you today, and there will be an order to put
you
in a home. Crocker is behind it.”
“We hate him!” Elizabeth spat. “We really ought to go
back and kill him before we kill you."
“I think so too,” Phoebe said. “I'd appreciate it if you'd
leave me pretty well to the last.'
Phoebe Jane was more Indian than the rest of her
family, for her husband was a good part white. Sometimes
Phoebe said that she was Shawnee and French and that
Jean Chouteau was her grandfather; or that she was
Shawnee and Texas and Charles Goodnight was her
grandfather; or Shawnee and Arkansas and
and Jessie
Chisholm was her grandfather; or Shawnee and Missouri
and both Jessie and Frank James were her grandfathers.
She was also granddaughter of Charles Curtis, Chief Crazy
Horse, David Payne, and Sequoyah. The reason she had so
many grandfathers was that she came from a big family.
And by now she had surveyed everything on board both
of the rafts.
“I think that a group in your position should be willing
to barter,” she told them. “I will just take that keg of com
whisky—my husband and children love it so much. Here,
here, give a hand, kids. You'll get back full value.'
She wheeled the keg of com off the Ile on a little loop-
wheeled cart, set it up on chocks with the help of Charles
and Peter, and broached it to see if it was good. It was. She
liked it.
Then she brought to the Dulantys a big gunny sack of
pecans, a jug of grape juice that was just beginning to tum
heady, some jars of hominy, and a slab of deer meat as
hard and black as old leather.
“Now you kids be gone before someone comes," she
said. “They know you come here often, and they're looking
for you. Stay hidden in some inlet for the rest of today and
tonight and tomorrow. I'll find you tomorrow night and tell
you what has happened to Henry and Frank, whether they
9
»
The World's a Trap, and None Can Quit It
49
have hung either of them yet. I'll see Witchy the next day.
I'd try to get permission to keep you kids with me but they
wouldn't allow it, me being only a common-law wife and
having seven children and three grandchildren and quite a
few other people all living in one shack. But I am the one
you are to look to while you are hiding out in the pits.”
“How will you find us tomorrow night, as slick as we can
hide, and when we don't even know where we're going to
be?” John asked.
“I will find you,” Phoebe said. “Now go quickly. I know
when people are going to come to my place, and people
will be here very soon.
The Ile and the Sea Bear weighed anchor, or anyhow
were poled away froin the bank by the Dulanty crew.
“A-wa-wa-shingay!" all the Dulantys called to Phoebe
as they left. It was all the Shawnee words they knew.
“A-wa-way,” Phoebe called softly after them.
“We got to start killing people,” Charles said. “We can't
keep leaving everybody till last.'
But at the final principality in the strip pits there could
be no question of mercy. This was the stronghold of the
Fabers. From past raids, the Fabers hated the Dulanty chil-
dren with a white hatred, and the Dulantys hated the
Fabers. But this would be a dangerous sortie. The Fabers
were commercial fishermen and they knew every splash of
water in their region. Besides, as was common talk among
children both Puca and Earthian, the Fabers weren't above
killing a stray child who came their way and chopping him
up for bait. There wasn't any real evidence for this, some
of those damned cooler heads used to say. Of course there
wasn't! What can you do when the evidence is already used
up for bait? Who else catches so many fish as the Fabers? It
has to be the kind of bait they are using that makes the
difference.
The Dulanty annada stalked in quietly, splashless and
furtive. It hid itself till two rowboats with two fishermen in
each passed them going down to Green River to run and
rebait their trotlines. The Faber day-fishers had not yet
come up Crow Creek that evening.
The Dulantys eased into Faber Landing where there was
only one boat, and that one did not seem to be in recent
50
The Reefs of Earth
use. Well, there was the stronghold before them, the shack,
the privy, the open-front boathouse, the net racks, the bait
tubs. Where was the strategic point to strike?
Charles and Peter fired a number of shots through the
Faber privy. The .22 pitted pleasantly into the wood, and
the .30 seemed to tear through the front of it and embed its
shots in the back boards. The privy made a nice little echo
box, almost like a drum.
“If there's anybody in there, he's sure dead now,” Peter
said. So they tried the shack from their distance. They fired
a dozen shots through the door of the shack and got no
answer. Now was the time for frontal assault.
"Hit the beach!” Peter howled. “Land ho!”
“What's so funny about land?” Dorothy asked.
They hit the shack in a wave of small flesh. Bad John
went through and unlatched the door for them from the
inside. Nobody was there. They broke out the shack
window, and started a good fire inside the building. They
threw furniture on, and cord and cloth, and some
shoemakers' wax to make it smell good; the Fabers
apparently employed this somehow in their net-lashing.
Then the fire took the whole shack so fast that the children
had to scurry to get out. It was the fastest and best fire they
ever started.
Then they got to it. They dumped several hundred
pounds of good fish from the tanks into the pit streams.
They armed themselves with fish knives and discovered
that these were just what they had been needing all their
lives. They slashed nets and gear, and piled and bumed
everything that would bum. They loaded two one-hundred-
hook trotlines onto the Sea Bear where they would be
handy. They took the last and best tray of bait, and a
bunch of buckets that are always good for something. They
got the remaining Faber boat burning good.
"If people knew how much fun this was, everybody
would be doing it all the time," Elizabeth sang. And that
open-front boathouse went almost in a single blast of flame
when they got it started. It burned sizzling down to the very
water.
The Dulantys hoisted sail and fared out upon the blue
bosom of Crow Creek. And they had timed it perfectly. It
clouded over suddenly at sunset, and the dark fell down on
The World's a Trap, and None Can Quit It
51
everything like a curtain. They passed the returning Faber
fishermen in that dark, all Dulanty noises being masked by
the Fabers' loud and excited cursing at seeing the glow of
flames around their own place.
The Dulantys passed so close that one hurried Faber oar
actually banged the hull of the low-lying Ile de France,
Then the Dulantys glided downstream, and in no time at all
they were at the confluence of the waters, and immediately
they were on the Green River itself.
It was night, and a memorable one. To be on the Green
River was not really to be at sea, but to the Dulanty
children it was very like a first night at sea.
They moored in the tightest and most covered cove of
all. Trees came down low and pretty well screened them,
and they were hidden well enough with the help of the
darkness.
On that night there happened things of such variety and
so out of every context that it almost seemed that they
could not all be true. There were six major complexes of
events; each happening when only one child was awake to
observe and partake, and the rest were asleep. We are able
to give only that which occurred to Helen; not that it was
the most remarkable, on the contrary that it is the easiest to
believe. The other five (Bad John did not remember
anything unusual happening) had all said their sagas, and
Helen moved easily into hers.
“There were ships came up Green River,” she told, “real
ships. Peter hinted at something like this in his only silly
story, but he did not get the big picture. I believe he was
half awake for a short moment only while it was
happening, and then he dreamed the rest of his. Well, these
were really big ships, as I could tell by their outline
between me and the trees and the stars. You may ask me
how really big ships could come up Green River, and I
believe I am able to answer you. They were remarkable
shallow-draft vessels, a hundred feet high some of them,
and drawing only two foot of water. They were pirate craft,
and they were built that way for easier raiding up rivers
and tidal estuaries.
“There was the Spanish Dancer. That was a ship! It is
the fastest ship in the world. It can go twice the speed of
52
The Reefs of Earth
the wind because of the way they reef its sails. It has tive
bloodiest pirates of all on it, except for the Flying Snake
which has even bloodier ones. I went onto the Spanish
Dancer and as soon as they realized my worth they made
me captain. They said that, with my own courage added to
their complement, they would even be able to whip the
Flying Snake which was lurking down Green River for
them.
“After I had established order on the Spanish Dancer
and delegated authority, I got in a binnacle and rowed to
investigate some of the other ships that were around here. I
went on the Vampire, whose crewmen are served every
night a cup of blood with their scuttle of rum. This is the
ship that they had really taken Peter on, but he was sleepy
and scared and he got the name wrong. They didn't
actually take a gallon of his blood. They took only about a
thimbleful to see what they had there. 'Oh Hell,' their
blood-man said when he had run it through the tests, 'this
kid's a Puca. We can't be drinking Puca blood; we got a
contract with them says we don't drink their blood and
they don't drink ours. I thought he was an Earth kid.' They
put Peter to sleep then and carried him back to the Ile and
put him in his bunk. And that's all in the world that
happened to Peter. All the rest he told is lies.
"Hey, I stayed with those guys a long time and drank a
lot of blood. Any of you ever drink a Bloody Mary or a
Redhead made with real blood? I bet tomato juice will
never do a thing for me again. They begged me to be their
captain; and I had to slip away quietly, as I hate sticky
goodbyes.
"Then I went onto the Gigantis Transfixus, the same
ship that Fulbert told us about once. It is the tallest ship of
all, and there is this about it that you cannot say about any
other ship in the world: its mainmast is a man! The
mainmast is a giant that the pirates captured in the Persian
Gulf; and they made him stand there with his arms
outstretched. All the yardarms and sails and things are
spiked onto him. The way they got him to stand there was
to put a spell on him for thirty years. His time was already
up, but he didn't know it. Once a year they showed him a
calendar, but it was an old calendar with a lot of time to go
a
The World's a Trap, and None Can Quit It
53
on it. The rest of the time they kept hiin blindfolded so he
couldn't count the days.
“The giant is old now, and he's simpleminded, or he
wouldn't have let them put the spell on him in the first
place. The pirates were mean to him and they hadn't given
him a drink of water for five years. We heard him moaning
when we moored last night, but we didn't know what it
was. He was the moaning we heard up in the treetops.
“I set it all to rights. I dipped a davit full of water and
climbed up and gave him a drink. “Thank you, Helen, he
'
said, 'that sure is good.' 'You count three,' I said, 'and then
bust all those spikes and things out. You can be free now,
thanks to Helen, because your time is up. And I will back
up your claim with mind and sinew.' Then I whistled for
the men from the Spanish Dancer to come, as the men on
the Transfixus were shooting at me and hitting me too.
Then the giant busted out all the spikes that were sticking
in him, and the whole superstructure of the Transfixus
went down just as the men from the Spanish Dancer
swarmed on board, and at the same time there was an
explosion below decks and flames billowed everywhere—”
“Pirates are perhaps the greatest invention of Earth
people,” Elizabeth interrupted loftily, “and their pirate
stories are wonderful entertainment for small children. We
have to give Earth people credit for that, they invented
pirates."
-staunched the blood by a trick I'd learned from a
Hindu lama years before,” Helen was continuing, "and
picked up my left eye from the deck to replace it later.
Then, taking an old toggle harpoon—"
“Uncle Henry says that Earth people invented pirates,
but they used Pucas for a model," Peter said. "He says that
Bartholomew Portuguese was a Puca, and so was Teach
(Blackbeard). They were doing a little irregular trade on
Earth, and people modeled the pirate stories on them. But
the second-rate pirates like Kidd were Earthmen.”
It was almost dawn and almost time for breakfast. Helen
was still telling how she had sewed her severed arms back
on, first the right and then the left, with a sail needle and
gut-string made of the bowels of one of the slaughtered
Transfixus seamen.
1
1
54
The Reefs of Earth
“How could you have sewed your right arm on first if
you didn't have your left arm on to sew with?” Dorothy
asked.
"I just said that to see if you were paying attention,”
Helen said. “I really sewed my left arm on first and then
my right.”
You only think there aren't hidden inlets on Green River
till it means your life to find one. The Dulantys found one
(much better than their night mooring) when they heard the
Fabers coming looking for them just before dawn. They got
the Ile and the Sea Bear both into an inlet and secured
them. And even the Fabers who knew every splash of those
waters missed them. Charles was afraid that Catherine de
Medici would make an outcry, but that goat was smart; she
knew she'd go into the pot if the Fabers caught her. But the
Fabers came so near that you could see their hard black
eyes. It was a long time before those Fabers gave up the
search.
The Dulantys lay in their branch-covered inlet all day.
Sheriff Train came looking for them in a boat, calling out
to them in a friendly fashion. Mr. Crocker came looking
for them in a crazier boat with the three bloodhounds and
the other dogs in it, and he let them out to snufile the shore
every few feet. And another bunch of Fabers came looking
for them, and then another bunch.
And yet the children were able to catch and eat great
strings of fish as they lay hidden. So the taunt of the
Stinkers had been right! They did eat raw fish! Don't knock
it till you've tried it.
And after they found out what made Catherine de
Medici so cranky, they milked her and had goat milk to go
with the choc beer for an original drink. This was the life,
laced with adventure, sweetened with danger, full of
challenge. They were as secure in their inlet as a turtle in its
carapace, and the whole world could look for them forever
and not find them.
That's why they were so surprised when, just after dark
of that second night, Phoebe Jane Lanyard was on the Ile
before they saw or heard her.
"Now you kids listen to me and stop making trouble,"
The World's a Trap, and None Can Quit It
55
she said before they could get in a word. “I saw Frank just
an hour ago and told him that you were all right and that I
would watch out for you. I went and talked to Hank in jail
today, and I went up and saw Witchy for a little while.
Things look bad for all three of them.
“You will have to stay hid. And you will have to stop
burning down people's houses. It makes them mad.
I brought you a honeycomb and some Indian bread. I
brought you a peck of corn, and some pancake flour. I
brought you a frog fork, and a gunny sack to put the frogs
in. And I brought you some pepper, and six eggs. Oh, I
forgot to bring one for you, Bad John! I'll bring you two
tomorrow night. Which one of you is cook?"
“Myself, until I can train one of the younger children,”
I
said Helen.
“But you're the youngest of them all, Helen,” Phoebe
said. “Oh, I forgot, forgive me. You don't inean chrono-
logical age, do you? I forget just what it is you do mean.
I brought you sone shot for the .22 you stole from
the Stinkers and the .30 you stole from Fiddler. I brought
you a blacksnake to play with, and a bar of soap.”
“How could you find us when even the Fabers
couldn't?” Peter asked.
"Oh, they're only Cherokees. I wonder God doesn't take
their eyes away from them since they never use them. What
if smart Indians came looking for you? I'll have to hide you
in a better place where everybody in the world can't see
you when they go by."
“But Sheriff Train and Mr. Crocker looked for us, and
the dogs too, and they couldn't find us,” John said.
“Why, they're not even Indian (except that dog Candle is
one-quarter Scneca Indian); how could they find anybody?
They have to use both hands to find the noses on their
faces. Cast off now! We have to move!”
Phoebe Jane piloted them down the river about a mile.
She put them in an inlet so hidden that the stars didn't even
shine. It was like the inside of a blind shed.
"A family lived in this inlet for three generations once,
and they never did see the sun,” she said. “The parents
never saw the faces of their own children. It's so dark in
here that
you strike a match here and it shines dark instead
56
The Reefs of Earth
of light. It's so dark here that you didn't see me go, and I
left my voice here to talk with you for two minutes after
I'm gone.
And Phoebe Jane had indeed leapt lightly towards a
probable shore and disappeared like a whisper into the
total darkness.
“A-wa-wa-shingay,” the Dulantys whispered after her.
7
The “Strife Dulanty” with the World
Little Jack Wilson—a poor man of Lost Haven-came
and talked to Frank Dulanty one afternoon in the hills
away from town. Little Jack didn't know how he had
happened to meet Frank there, or even how he happened to
be walking in the hills. But Frank knew. He had summoned
Little Jack by means of a Bagarthach verse broadcast on
the wind. You slant your verse to the man you are calling,
and it will bring him almost every time. .
“Little Jack, my family is lost and marooned and taken
on all sides in a strange place,” Frank said. “What do you
think we should do?”
“I think you people should leave this region entirely,
Frank,” Little Jack told him, “though you seem to be the
only one left to leave. You have no friends here. I'd like to
be, but I'm scared on both sides: scared of you because I
don't understand what kind of thing you are, and scared of
the men of Lost Haven who will chop down anything that
attaches to you. We sense you here as they wouldn't sense
you in a larger or busier place. You look almost like
everyone else, and damned if you don't act almost like
everyone else—and I like you and your kindred better than
—
I like anyone else in town. You've treated me decently and
made me feel like a person, but I'm the butt of the lowest
Lost Haven clown of theni all.
“But, Frank, you are different! And you devil us out of
our minds with the difference. I don't know whether your
brother killed Stutgard—I think not—but they'll kill him
for that killing, and we both understand that. I don't know
which of us are the sheep and which the goats, but we're of
a different species. Get out of here, Frank!”
"What did you have in your mind to tell me, Little Jack,
when
you slid off up into the hills here? You had something
on your mind to tell me?”
“Sure I had, Frank, and I have the feeling that you put it
on my mind to come tell you what is going on.”
57
>
>
58
The Reefs of Earth
“What is set in the minds of all of you? The time is
tonight, I can read you that much, but what is the thing?”
“Ah-if I were you, Frank, I wouldn't be in that shanty
of yours tonight at, say, ten o'clock,” Little Jack said. "Í
would not light a light in that shanty at all tonight, and I
would be out of it quickly after dark, if I went back to it at
all. I'd stay in the hills if I were you. I'd watch it from some
high vantage point and see what I might see.
“What would I see—them take myself out and hang me,
Little Jack?”
"That's what you'd see if you can be in two places at one
time, and I'm not sure that you can't. Aye, they intend to
hang you—and it doesn't seem to bother you much. I'm
told that you, whatever you are, do not fear death.”
“Oh, we don't mind going when it's time to go, Little
Jack. But we don't like being told by our lessers that it's
time to go. And this hanging, for personal reasons I wish to
avoid it. I tell you, any man or group that wants to hunt us
like prey, we will make it an interesting hunt. And that goes
for Crocker's Crocks. We've plenty of sporting blood in us.
We'll make it fun.”
“And sober up, Frank,” Little Jack said. “It's your life
they'll require of you."
"I have sobered up, Little Jack. Not a drop for two days
now, though your world has always seemed a little bleak
without it. What afflicts me is something else.”
The men of Lost Haven believed that Frank Dulanty
was still on the drunk, as he had been immediately after the
death of his wife, and that he could be handled easily. He
wavered in his walk like a drunk, and he had the flushed
look and the hot eye of a drunk. But he was sober as a
Rogers County judge. It was the Earth Allergy that had
caught up with him and sent him along reeling and sick,
that would kill him soon if something else didn't do it first.
But real sporting blood can bubble up even through
Earth Allergy. Frank would give them a run for it. There
would be fun for all.
9
It was not completely dark till after nine that night. And
the men came long before ten. It was very close.
It was so close that Frank, sliding out of his darkened
shanty by a loosened plank that only he and little Helen
The “Strife Dulanty" with the World
59
knew about, mingled with the men in front of the shanty
and mingled his voice in with theirs in Lost Haven accents.
(AU Pucas love to mimic.) It was very dark there. It had
better be.
The men had several ropes, and they made a lot of noise
asking each other who had them and if they were all set.
Crocker arrived then, giving orders. He was the man
who gave all the orders in Lost Haven, now that Stutgard
was dead.
“Go in and get him," Crocker snapped. A dozen men
were heaving up a heavy twelve-by-twelve to use for a
battering ram on the door. Crocker let them get their
momentum up, then twisted the knob, flicked open the
unlocked door, and let the twelve men and their balk crash
on their faces into the shanty. Some of them are still
picking splinters out of their jowls today.
Crocker was smart, and he enjoyed doing things like that
to his men. But he knew that Frank Dulanty would devise
something more intricate than a barred door. He suspected
a trap of some sort inside, and sending twelve men crashing
in like that with a heavy timber would be enough to spring
most traps.
Crocker went in after the men. They lit the lights in the
shanty, and they seemed to search the place pretty
thoroughly. The expectation fell in the men outside. Too
long a time in there. The man had skipped, that was plain.
"No show tonight,” Joe Cottonhead grumbled outside.
Cottonhead was another poor man of Lost Haven.
“No, I just don't believe they'll find me in there, Joe,"
Frank Dulanty said low to Cottonhead who was standing
beside him in the dark.
"Is it yourself, Frank?” Cotton head asked even lower.
“You have nerve. I could call them out and have them over
here, but I've always been afraid of you
your brother; I
don't know what you'd do to me before the other men got
here. What do you want now?"
“The same thing you want, Joe, a show. You said there
wouldn't be one tonight. There will. I've just picked the
spot for it, partly with yourself in mind.
"A man with a thirst like yours isn't all bad, Joe. It
shows you're still alive. I know where you want to be, and
we'll have it there. I'll slip off now and check the script.
and
60
The Reefs of Earth
And here's what you do: When the men are tired of playing
around here and not finding me, you just sing out
‘Everybody over to Blind Ben's Bar! Drinks are for
everybody!' Tell them that somebody will be along to pick
up the tab in a little while, and I will be. If Crocker talks
about getting the dogs to track me down, you sing out
‘Everybody over to Blind Ben's Bar! Start the manhunt
from there!'"
Frank Dulanty slipped away then, and Joe Cottonhead
,
began to bawl: “Everybody over to Blind Ben's. We got a
live one in a minute.'
Crocker and his men finally decided that Frank was hid
nowhere in the shanty. They came out and left the lights on
and the doors open. Blind Ben's Bar sounded all right to
Crocker also, if there was a live one somewhere to pick up
the tab.
“I'll get the dogs after we've all had a drink,” he said.
And the bunch of them, about twenty men in all, started to
Blind Ben's.
>
"Is it you, Frank? You can't jump us all?” It was Little
Jack Wilson who had lagged behind.
“I can if I time it right," Frank said. “Go along after
them, Little Jack. I'll make my entrance shortly. The show
will be worth it."
Frank entered his own shanty boldly. He went to the
only place Crocker had gone, though Crocker's men had
gone everywhere. On his own bed (Crocker was himself a
little fey to know for sure which was Frank's bed in the
shanty) Frank found a rope with a noose. It was heavy and
neat and well tied, and attached was an obscene and
taunting note. Crocker had a gift for this too. If he'd been a
Puca, he'd have put it into verse, but it was essentially a
Bagarthach.
Frank sat down for a few moments and tapped with his
foot as though counting time. He felt better by the second;
the Earth Sickness flowed away from him and he became a
real Puca again. He began to grin, a mean crooked grin
that he seldom used, a grin that would back off even his
brother Henry.
In Lost Haven they hadn't thought of Frank as a giant,
-
a
The “Strife Dulanty” with the World
61
since they had usually seen him with his heavier and uglier
brother—the one who really spooked them. But Frank was
a long, strong man, larger than life, and unbelievably swift.
He had the sudden tide in him—as have all Pucas and
many Earthmen—and it rose up now; the essence of that
tide is power and timing. And he had, when he wished to
use it, what the Puca call the Fianaise—the Presence.
Frank was capable of his moments.
Frank took the note, and the rope with its noose. He
went out of the shanty, still leaving all doors open and all
lights on. He went toward Blind Ben's Bar.
A man had gone for Crocker's dogs, and he was bringing
them across that rough little milo field on the south end of
town. They were booming and baying as they worked up to
their own sort of excitement. Frank knew exactly when
they got the cross-wind whiff of him. He heard them cower
and refuse.
Then he knew that he was at full effect. The dogs were
afraid of him, and their men would be. He came the last
steps with a lion-swiftness, entering Blind Ben's with much
more noise than was necessary, banging the door back with
a heavy clatter. He stood there with the noosed rope in his
hands. He had studied it out in his mind just where the
hanging lantern in Blind Ben's would light him most
effectively, and he made that a part of his timing when he
jumped them. The men drew in breath like bayed badgers,
and they stiffened like dogs.
"Holy horse-hocks!" breathed Sad Sam Bums. "It's The
Dulanty!"
Frank held them all rigid for a long moment, drained
them dry, and then released them—except the whitefaced
Crocker.
“Take your ease,” Frank said. “Everybody drinks but
Crocker. Set them up, Ben. It's a celebration.
"Who'll pay?” Blind Ben asked doggedly. “They've been
bugging me that there's a live one coming."
"I'll pay, Ben," Frank said, “and then I'll pay off
someone else."
Ben set the drinks out, beer and choc beer, horse whisky
and crooked-neck jug whisky, turnip brandy and granny
wine. The men glowed into them as to a feast and fell to it.
“Crocker, back up half a step!” Frank ordered suddenly
>
>
62
The Reefs of Earth
in a throaty whisper that was so loud that it echoed. That
throaty thing was always threatening and effective when
used with Earthmen. And Crocker fell back half a step.
Frank Dulanty whistled a little tune in an unearthly key.
He went over to the scared Crocker, put the noose around
his neck and fitted it snug. He tossed the end of the line
over a rafter and pulled it tight.
"Some of you men take this fool!" Crocker babbled.
“Sad Sam, you've got your rifle. Take it and level on this
.” But Frank pulled the line tighter and cut off Crocker's
words.
The men all watched it like a show. This Crocker, be it
understood, was no patsy. He was a rough man who
handled killer dogs. He had been running the town for
Stutgard and running it by force. Now he had intended to
run it for himself.
Frank unraveled a paper from his pocket and presented
it in front of Crocker's now ashen face, at the same time
slackening the line a little. Crocker tore the noose with his
hands till he could breathe again. Nobody had realized
what a tall craggy man Frank was, nor that he had such
great hands on him.
“Did you write this note?” Frank asked Crocker.
?
"No, I swear to God I didn't, Frank,” Crocker blurted.
"Some of you men take this animal! There's enough of you.
Surely twenty men can handle one of him!”
But the men would not be done out of their show. They
were liking this. "He wrote it. Crocker wrote it," several of
them volunteered.
“If you wrote it, eat it,” Frank ordered, and he stuffed it
into Crocker's mouth. Crocker's eyes boggled and he
closed his mouth on the paper, but he still looked stubbom.
“I said Eat it!” Frank cried angrily. He gave a strong
pull on the line and half strangled Crocker. Crocker's jaws
began to move to save his neck. He swallowed. His
Adam's-apple popped like a cork and the note was down.
Frank jerked the billfold from Crocker's pocket and
threw it on the bar. “Keep the drinks coming till it's used
up,” he told Blind Ben. “Crocker promised these men a
show tonight, and this is the least he can do for them.
'—But you can have none!” he said fiercely to Crocker
The “Strife Dulanty” with the World
63
who was still noosed. “Your tongue must stay dry for a
while. And just let me see the color of it, I've heard that it's
black.'
Frank pulled on the rope till Crocker showed the color
of his tongue. It was not black; it was muted red.
"Go home now, Crocker," Frank said, drawing the line
back across the rafter. "But leave the noose around your
neck and the rope trailing you in the street. I will have eyes
following you to report it if you do not. Don't take it off till
you're in your own house. And keep it handy. Whenever I
am ready I will send for you, and you will bring it, and I
will complete the job. But that is not for tonight."
Crocker left, still white with anger and fear, and he
trailed the rope behind him. That jackal-cat Crocker had
been belled now, and he would be banged and hounded by
things both within and outside himself,
9
Frank had timed the tide of Crocker and the men, and he
took them all that easily. Now he slid easily into the
drinking with the men, drawing on a fund of Puca-flavored
stories and jokes to entertain them. They were his for
tonight, but he couldn't have pulled such a trick again. He
felt the Earth Sickness stealing back over him, and now he
was less than a full Puca.
It had been a temporary thing, and he knew it. Oh,
they'd still kill him, or one of their kind would. But he was
the bear for a while, and they were the dogs. Was it
possible that, for the short interval, he had seemed much
larger than he was? Can the Puca fake such appearance?
Frank Dulanty was but little above average man-size,
but all the men would remember him as some sort of giant
in that episode.
The men of the town liked him more after this show, and
yet it had become still more inevitable that they would kill
him and his brother Henry. The Dulantys were almost-
men. That's wliat spooks are.
Phoebe Jane Lanyard had gone to see Witchy at the
institution at Vinita. Witchy was not all right. Her eyes did
not focus properly, and the two sides of her face were
different. But she was lively that day; and she recognized
64
The Reefs of Earth
Phoebe, having always been a friend of the poor Indian
woman. Witchy's voice was now like that of a small girl,
perhaps her own daughter Helen:
“Phoebe, I've found a passage in Scripture that explains
everything,” she said. “It's by Saint John, so our faith
constrains us to accept it:
"The Devil and Crocker and Stut
Put all of their heads in one hat,
And mixed them and added them up,
And hadn't the brains of a cat."
“I don't think Saint John really wrote that, Witchy,"
Phoebe said. “You just made it up.”
“Oh? I thought it was in the Apocalypse, but maybe not.
The Apocalypse and me are a lot alike. There's another
one, I think it's from Tertullian:
“The Devil sent Crocker for Stut
To bring him his head on a plate.
The Devil said 'I'm in a rut,
That's something I oughtn't to ate.'”
“I don't believe anyone wrote that either, Witchy. You
just made it up.”
"Well, maybe so. I make up verses all day long.
Sometimes real dirty ones. I wonder why. I wish Veronica
would bring the coffee."
“Veronica is dead, Witchy.”
“Don't you start giving me that funny look, Phoebe. I
know she's dead. I still wish she'd bring the coffee. They
won't let me have any more, just because I always bend up
the spoons and break the cups when I'm through with
them. Can you get me out of here, Phoebe?"
"Sure, I can shuck you over the wall easily enough after
dark. We'll pick a night real soon, Witchy.”
“Phoebe,” Witchy said in a suddenly rational moment,
"there's several other people of our sort in the United
States. I wonder if you could get in touch with them. I hate
for the family to be broken up and the kids spilled into the
world as young as they are. That might not be safe.”
"What are the addresses of these others, Witchy?”.
The “Strife Dulanty' with the World
65
“Oh, we don't keep addresses. The only contact we have
with each other is of an informal and intuitive sort."
"Well, haven't they at least names?”
“Oh, Willy McGilly, Diogenes Pontifex, John Pan-
demonium, Aloysius Shiplap, names like that. They're
important people, scientists and musicians and confidence
men and such. Hell, you're a Shawnee. You say that
Shawnees can sense things as well as we can. Find one of
them as a favor to me, Phoebe.”
“All right. It had sprung up in my mind this morning like
a mushroom that I would meet one of those names very
soon. He's about a day's travel away and coming in this
direction.”
After that, Witchy had one of her attacks and was not
coherent. Then she was much worse. She looked like
something entirely different. She foamed and raved. No
one had ever found fault with the people who had tied her
up like a dog and brought her to the hospital that other
night. She had been in such a state then.
Attendants brought Witchy under control, and told
Phoebe that she would have to leave.
But this attack passed quickly. Witchy called out once
more in her old-new little girl voice-
“Wait, Phoebe, there's one more-
»
"The Devil rolled Stut like a ball
And said as he dropped in a hole,
'It tickles my tail to recall
The prices he charged us for coal."
After that, Witchy was led back into the building, and
they saw no more of each other that day.
"She didn't even ask about the children,” Phoebe said to
herself. “Maybe she thinks that Veronica is still taking care
of them.”
8
Was Mostly That They Didn't Fit It
>
There is one spot on the Green River that is always foggy.
Even at midday there is so strong a haze that you can look
straight at the sun, and it is blue. The fog comes from Misu
Mound that stands on the right bank of Green River,
though Helen said it was the left bank.
"When you face downriver, the left bank is the left
bank," she told them. “Is that clear to everybody? But
when you tum around and face upriver, then the left bank
is the right bank and the right bank is the left bank.”
"You can't make the right bank turn into the left bank
just by tuming around,” Peter protested.
“Oh, but you can. The bank that you called the left bank
when you faced downriver will be the left bank forever. I
think there is an international covenant on that. But when
you face upriver, the left bank will be on your right hand,
so the ignorant will call it the right bank.”
“The only place it is still the left bank when it is on your
right is in the left lobe of your brain,” Peter argued
stubbomly. “I suspect the Helen-brain is mostly left lobe.”
Well, the Dulanty children had to look upriver to Misu
Mound from their hidden inlet, and from there Misu
Mound was on the right-hand bank even if Helen called it
the left bank.
The mound had been started by people older than the
Shawnees, so Phocbe Jane didn't really know much more
about it than the Dulantys did. She faked a lot of her stuff.
But she told them that this was the way the mound was
made:
First they lay a number of dead people out on the
ground. A lot of them weren't ready to go, Phoebe Jane
had told them, but you can't start a mound with only two
or three dead bodies. Then you put whatever you think the
dead people would cnjoy with them, and bring dirt and
cover them up. The next year you bury more people on top
of them, and in a very few centuries you have a mound. But
66
Was Mostly That They Didn't Fit It
67
the fact is iliat there was something there below the ground
when they started. You don't build a mound just anywhere.
If you dig deep there, even today, below the level of the
surrounding ground and under the mound itself, you will
find the bones of unknown animals.
Phoebe Jane's uncle once dug out a set of those bones
and took them over to the University. He thought he was
performing a service, as University people are supposed to
be interested in things like that. But those hangdog
professors looked at him like he was the weird one. They
went over those bones snuffling like a bunch of dogs, and
they seemed to get madder the more they snuffled.
"You didn't find these bones all together," one of the
professors gruffed at him. “There couldn't be an animal
like this. The shoulder bone is from a deformed buffalo, or
perhaps an exceptionally heavy angus. The ribcage is from
an old plowhorse whose skeleton you must have found in a
pasture somewhere. Both are about fifty years old. These
are bear's jaws. The hindquarters are from a jack, wouldn't
you say so, Professor Elmo?”
"A jack or a mule certainly. He got them up in the big
lime country, the only place that recent bones would be so
well preserved on the surface, and the only place where
joker Indians still obtain. These fangs are good ivory—too
good. They're of common texture throughout—without a
core. There never was a tooth without a core. What did
you
whittle them out of, man, a cue ball?”
“The fangs wouldn't go with the jaws," the other
professor said, “and the jaws wouldn't go with this cow's
skull that you have here; nor would a cow's skull attach
with such neck bones as these: they're alligator's and have
Barataria Bay Louisiana Recent written all over them.
What were you ever doing in Louisiana, Indian, and how
did you come by these?”
“I used to drive that territory for the Red Dog Truck
Line,” Phoebe's uncle had said, and it was the truth, he
had.
"An altogether impossible animal,” said one of the
professors. “There ought to be a law against hoaxers. You
didn't find all these bones together."
“I by damn did find those bones all together,” Phoebe's
uncle said, "and there's hundreds of sets of them in the
68
The Reefs of Earth
roots of Misu Mound.” But the men didn't believe him.
It's true that Phoebe's uncle was an eight-ply liar who
was also an elaborate practical joker. That's all right. Some
of the greatest discoveries have been made by eight-ply
liars. How did the men know there weren't other bones like
that in Misu Mound if they didn't go and dig?
The layers of the mound differed from each other in
what was buried there. In the first layer of the mound,
every dead body had been buried with a horse. In the
second layer, every body had been buried with a lion.
These weren't tawny like the mountain lions of today; they
were black and brindled. In the next layer, each body was
buried with a bear. Still higher, each body was buried with
a buffalo. And very near the top, each body was buried
with a Puca.
Then there came a day when the mound wouldn't hold
another body. People had no more than scratched the sod
to set in one more body when all the old dead people
became very excited over the intrusion.
"Oh, go away and leave us alone,” the old dead people
grumbled, "we're full up here.” And the dead buffalo
grunted and the bears growled and the lions screamed and
the Pucas sang Bagarthachs and the unknown animals at
the bottom rumbled like buried thunder and there was hell
to
pay all around. So they hadn't buried anybody in Misu
Mound since then, except accidentally.
Much of this about the Mound was what Phoebe had
told the children, but some of it they had told themselves.
It was all true except one part: they sure never buried
Pucas with people there like you would bury horses with
them. Phoebe just put that in to rile them up because the
Dulantys were Puca people.
Phoebe was the only Earth person who knew that the
name of them was Puca—a word the children were never
to use to outsiders. And they hadn't told it to her. Phoebe
knew some things of herself.
But how was it that Veronica and Witchy had used to
tell the children similar stories about mounds back home?
Misu Mound resembled the mounds in the Puca country
in ways that Phoebe didn't know about.
There was a big room in the middle of Misu Mound.
Was Mostly That They Didn't Fit It
69
Nobody but the Dulanty children knew about that room,
fifty feet down below the top of the mound; and they were
able to go directly to it by passages unknown to others. The
Puca in their native surroundings lived as much under the
ground as on top of it. The Puca, as a matter of fact, did
not, strictly speaking, resemble goblins; it was kobolds they
looked like, but these are not so well known to Earth
people.
It was in this big room that the dead people would gather
and sit and talk when they were tired of lying in one
position. They cracked old bones to get the marrow, and
they drank com beer. It didn't take much eating and
drinking to keep them up, since they were no longer
fleshed. They didn't eat much, but they sure did smoke a
lot. It is not generally known, but dead people used
tobacco for centuries before live people stumbled onto it.
That had also been the case with the Puca. The smoke all
came out through a hole in the side of the mound, and that
caused the fog or haze.
The children learned the interior of the mound. They
could have hidden there from all pursuit, but they couldn't
have taken their rafts there. They dug all over the flanks of
the mound, and came out with bones of animals and
people. They dug out two prime skulls which they set up on
the prows of their rafts.
The children formed enduring friendships with many of
the old Indians in the middle of Misu Mound. They leamed
a lot about Earth people from them, how they are in their
essence, what are the real things that are hidden under the
daily exterior, and how it was in the old days. And they
learned the right way to cure tobacco and to make pipes
and how really to smoke up a storin.
It came to Peter always just two hours before dawn. It
came up out of the ground or out of the water like a land-
wave or a sea-wave and possessed him completely. It was
then that the Earth ambient brought it on him, too early,
too green, too rank.
And it was then that the sea-hammock itself became
evil; and he had to come out of it, trembling and sick—to
do anything, anything: to roll on the deck in the dark, or
70
The Reefs of Earth
thrash onto the shore and go crashing through the thickets,
cutting and barking himiself till he could lick the blood off
his own arms and taste it mixed with salt and the smell of
bruised weeds—to think of it instead of the passion.
The early-moming passion of a goblin child raised on a
hothouse planet is something that no Earthling will ever
know. He belonged on a world where the months and years
were different, and where balanced precocity was the rule.
But here on the gray Earth there was something that at the
same time inhibited and retarded the substance of it, while
it forced the accidentals in untimely fashion. Peter was out
of balance. He was sick with the wild surging sickness.
The children had not avoided the Earth Sickness
entirely, certainly Peter had not. And the essence of Earth
Sickness is the violent emotional revolt of interior passion
against itself, its throttling by the inhibiting Earth ambient,
and the subsequent regression into a listless lethargy as
sometimes to be fatal in the case of adults. This turmoil is
unexplained, but the Puca Anima in an Earth Matrix
suffered from violent and misdirected yeanings of all sorts,
and these were entangled with depressing frustrations,
But Peter would fight the violence with violence, going
very deep into the water (it is cooler then, a little before
dawn, than at any hour) down to the bottom and grab mud;
staying for minutes and still more minutes until even Puca
lungs were near to bursting and Peter would see red and
purple under water,
Then he'd turnioil up and break surface and violently
swim his fill, stroking for an hour or more back and forth
across the river, trying to tire himself and finding it
impossible.
Afterwards, when white moming came, he would swim
back to the lle, go aboard, dress, and start breakfast, cured
and at peace now until the next foredawn. In the daytime a
goblin can pass for human or any other harmless species.
But Peter knew that he could no longer wrestle with his
beautiful cousins Elizabeth and Helen, or dive off their
shoulders, or even go swimming or unclothed with them
until, perhaps, this thing should leave him.
In the daylight he would look closely at the others and
wonder if they had ever known the passion. Elizabeth had
Was Mostly That They Didn't Fit It
71
not; he would have known it if she had. He watched
Charles, and he knew that he had not. Dorothy hadn't, or
John. Bad John, if he had known it at all, could not by bis
nature have known it in the same way.
The Peter looked at Helen and he wasn't sure. It was
quite possible with her. She was younger than the rest, but
she was weird. And in all other ways she was precocious.
Then she looked at him the same way he was looking at
her, and they were both scared.
>
A priest came to see Henry Dulanty in his cell. He was
an old Holland Dutchman, not one of your new young
priests who doesn't know an Analect from the Anastasis.
He found Henry reading and was surprised at the book
he had.
“It's almost like a staged thing that I should find you
with that,” the old priest said, "nearly a touch of the phony
there. Where are you reading?"
"Maerens incedebam sine furore, consurgens in turba
clamabam."
“Og, from Job. It goes on 'I was the brother of dragons
and companion of ostriches. My skin is become black upon
me. My harp is turned to mourning.' I had a professor once
who called him the Majestic Cry-Baby. You aren't, are
you?”
“Yes, a little. We luxuriate in our misfortunes more than
do the people of—that is—more than-
“More than do the people of Earth, Dulanty? I guessed
you as soon as I came in. In a long life, I believed I had
encountered it twice before, but I wasn't sure. With you
I
am. You're from an alien world. But it's odd that an alien
should be reading Latin.”
"Father, our briefing was a few centuries out of date, I
believe. Latin, and three American Indian tongues (which I
cannot identify with any presently known), were the only
Earth languages I learned before I came to Earth. As to
this work, I have become quite interested in Earth
mythology. It is intimated in this that the Anointed (Fear-
ungadh-mac, as we would say in our own language) would
be bom in Coelo-Syria in a town hardly to be called a city.
In the latter part of this anthology, it is made out that he
1
72
The Reefs of Earth
has already been born. Our own teaching is that the
Anointed will be born on the meanest of worlds, hardly to
be called a world. Some have surmised that it may be
Earth, but this interpretation isn't widely held. Nor do we
believe that he has been bom yet, but you never know
about these things. Comparative mythology is interesting.”
"Sometimes I believe that you people (I've had a notion
about you people for a long time) appear in Scripture,” the
old priest said. “As 'In those days there were giants on
Earth.'
“Oh, that's us all right," Henry said. “Some of us have
been here before, small bunches quite a few times through
the millennia. But in the latter part of this there are
passages where Paul seems to be writing from our
viewpoint. 'Do you not know that we shall judge Angels?'
he writes. How do you interpret that, Father? To you it
can't make sense. Do you judge Angels?”
“Do you?”
“Yes, sometimes, when they fall within our jurisdiction.
Our contact with them, however, is nothing like what you
might imagine; they themselves are nothing like what you
might imagine. I'm surprised that Earth people have even
heard of them, but several are in this tome under their own
proper names. There are a number of other things in this
collection that make sense when applied to us, but not
when applied to you. It beats me how you can understand
this book at all."
“It beats me too, Dulanty,” the priest said. “I'd like to
talk about it longer, but I suspect that neither of us is going
to live very much longer. I'm supposed to be here to bring
you solace, but I'd rather try to study you out a little. As
far back as our seminary days we were posed the
interesting question: What if we should somewhere en-
counter intelligent aliens? Was salvation for them also?
Or only for those of the human recension? Now I've come
onto you and I don't know where to begin. I look at you
and I ask whether I can ever enter into an alien mind and
think as it thinks. Can any man ever understand any
alien?”
“I ask the same question,” Henry said. “From my
viewpoint, l'm the man, you're the alien. How weird are
1)
Was Mostly That They Didn't Fit It
73
the ways of Earth! Or as it is written, 'Can anything good
come from Earth?'"
“The jailer is banging on the bars down there, Dulanty.
He hates you and is afraid of you. He won't give you much
time with anyone. Ah, Dulanty, do Puca confess? They're
going to kill you, you know, either inside or outside the
lines.”
"Yes, we confess. Try and stop one of us sometime. As
we come to our end, we are not the Majestic Cry-Babies,
but we
are the most Bumptious Babblers you ever
encountered. We confess; if a Sagart is not available, then
to an ordinary Puca; if a Puca is not available, then to an
inhabitant of Astrobe, or to a Camiroi, or even to an
Earthman; if no cogent person is available, then to a
dromedary or a dog or a mole or a tree or a stone.'
"Begin then, my distant cousin.”
“I'll warn you, though, Father. You are an old man. It
might kill you. There are deeper and darker places in us
than in you. We do sometimes treat so loosely with-
“Tell me, and do not be afraid. I have heard everything.'
Henry Dulanty confessed to the old priest, and it did kill
him. Not immediately, but it killed him. That old man only
thought that he had heard everything. Even though the
priest suspected, in one corner of his mind that re-
mained clear, that he had fallen afoul of a master
storyteller who was having him on, yet the creature was
having him on to his death and perhaps to his damnation.
As the Dulanty reeled off his spiel, the mind of the old man
seemed to melt like wax. It was lost in a strangeness more
frightful than any evil he had ever suspected. The talking
creature was an almost-man, but he ſlicked his ears like an
animal and showed green billowing flames behind his
eyes.
Henry Dulanty wasn't mean—for a Puca. But he felt the
compulsion to confess and the black delight that it brought
him. He'd wamed the old fellow that it might kill him.
The old priest retched weakly and groaned and hung
onto the bars. The jailer led him out of the cell and out of
the building, and left him shaking and stuttering in the
street.
The priest was in too much of a turmoil to drive his car.
74
The Reefs of Earth
He hired a young fellow to drive him home. He then
phoned the bishop that he was no longer able to perform
his duties, and that he should be allowed to go to the Old
Priests' Home.
He died there a month later.
9
No Setting for the Gallant Brood
The children did not think of their parents as being any
longer of the immediate living. They considered them as
having gone through that passage that is a tighter and
darker crawl than any of the tunnels in Misu Mound, and
as having come into the Central Room itself; or, if not
having actually arrived there, as being well on the way.
“After your parents die they turn into your ancestors,"
Helen said. “They call it metamorphosis.”
Now the Dulanty children thought of their parents as
having already become their ancestors.
Veronica was already dead. Witchy was in the booby-
hatch, and she always said that she would die if she were
shut up. Maybe she'd die tonight. Maybe she was already
dead,
Henry was in jail, and everybody knew that he would be
killed. He joked about it himself, Phoebe had told them.
Frank was dying of the Earth Sickness, but not dying fast
enough; the men would still come some dark night and kill
him too before the other thing killed him.
It was like in an old Puca comedy, one person falls into
the quicksand, and then drags a second one in after him,
and then a third and a fourth, till they all disappear to their
deaths. Who could help laughing at a thing like that,
especially when the actors were of another people than the
Puca and had been given parts in the play which were real?
The children, having lived all their lives on Earth, had not
actually seen any of the traditional Puca comedies, but
they knew all about them.
So, they could consider the elder Dulantys as gone. Had
it not been for this, there would have been a problem. The
children were still committed to reducing the world to a
population of six, or seven if you count Bad John. They
couldn't stay in the nest forever. They were entitled to a
world of their own. And time was solving, had solved in
their minds, the problem for them.
75
76
The Reefs of Earth
Peter slipped off one day while the search for them was
intense. He went back into Lost Haven while the Lost
Haven kids were out looking for them in the hills and bogs
and pits. He snugged up his ears tight, and he made himself
as blank-faced as any Earth kid you'd ever seen. He even
shambled along like one of them instead of walking
brightly. He went to the Dulanty shop truck with all its
tools and jigs and lathes, and he made a gadget. He brought
it back and gave it to Charles who had thought that it might
come in handy. Peter was a better fabricator than any of
the rest of them.
were
If Sheriff Tolliver Train couldn't find the children, and if
Mr. Crocker couldn't find them with his bloodhounds, it
still didn't mean that they couldn't be found. Crocker
would rather the children should be lost forever, but he
couldn't have them popping up unexpectedly; he had to
know where they were before he could know where he was.
Crocker now used another sort of bloodhounds. He hired
blackbirders or impressors for a dollar a day to find them.
And the impressors found them on the third or fourth day.
The blackbirders
children of Lost Haven.
Children? They were as big as houses; some of them were
eleven years old. They were led by two really big boys with
shotguns. They beat the woods and prowled the streams,
and quartered and back-tracked, and really searched
systematicaily. They also employed hunch and imagina-
tion. These had been their own woods and streams before
the Dulantys had intruded, and they'd show those wogs
who was tops at this game.
The two big eleven-year-old boys were Baxter
Bushyhead and Little Sad Sam Jones (the son of Sad Sam
Jones himself). They had one middle-sized boy with them
when they struck the true trail and came onto the Dulantys.
It happened that the Dulantys had been night-owling it
around and in Misu Mound the night before, and now they
were sleeping up in the daytime. Even their watch, Doro-
thy, had gone to sleep.
The impressors worked it perfect, and they had the drop
on them: two leveled shotguns trained on them before they
knew what liad happened, and a little carbine thing held by
No Setting for the Gallant Brood
77
the middle-sized boy, Harold Harvestman, who was as
spindly as one.
The Dulantys were shamed to be taken like that, and
they had to stall while the little wheels in their heads
whirled and meshed.
“We got you cold,” Baxter Bushyhead shouted. “Come
on shore and stait marching.'
“We get a nine dollar bonus!” Little Sad Sam Jones
whooped. “That's a woolly bunch of money. And Baxter
and me each get twice as much of it as Harold because
we're leaders. I'd like to know how much that'll get me.”
"Three dollars and sixty cents," Peter said, watching for
a break in their front. “But if you knock Harold off in the
water and hold him under while he drowns you'll each get
four dollars and a half. I'll watch your guns for you while
you do it."
“Ah, we hadn't better, he's my cousin," Baxter said.
“All right now, you kids, come on shore and start
marching. We'll blast you to pieces if you don't get to
moving right now.''
“It's a pity you're imperfect,” Helen said, looking
steadily at Baxter Bushyhead.
“What do you mean, imperfect?” Baxter wanted to
know.
“I was thinking of your skull,” Helen explained. “It's
misshapen. It's a lot of work to prepare a skull, and yours
won't be a prime one when we've finished with it. It'll have
some interesting contours, but there's too many things
against it. Was your head always funny-shaped like that?”
“Say, where do you get those skulls?” Baxter snapped at
the bait. “You got any more of them?''
“Sure we have,” Helen said. “We'll trade you three of
ours for your three, and the ones we have here are already
fixed
up We get the skulls off of people. Where else? Those
two on the prows of our rafts are from the two men who
thought they had the drop on us yesterday. I worked till
late into the night fixing them up.
“What you do with them? How you fix them?” Little Sad
Sam Jones was interested too.
"Well, to start with, we first sever the head completely
from the body with our cutlasses. If the neck is too tough,
78
The Reefs of Earth
we've got a bone saw. Then we slice off the ears. Ears are a
terrible nuisance when you're fixing up a skull, and the only
things that will take them as bait are turtles.”
“What you do next?” Baxter demanded.
"Empty out the brains. Everybody says you don't have
any, Baxter, but I'm betting there'll be good solid meat we
can use in your head. I'm on your side. We use the brains
for bait, and big boys' brains are the best. You can really
catch catfish with brains if you know your business. Show
them the big catfish we caught with those last brains,
John.'
John went into the lle's cabin for them. He was the
dumbest of the boys, but Heien never suspected that he
could slip on that one. But what he brought out of the
cabin was a string of catfish, just as she'd told him. Helen
almost popped.
It was a good string of cats with several really big ones.
The string of fish weighed as much as John did. Baxter
Bushyhead and his blackbirders were impressed by it; but
John couldn't understand the look of pure hatred that
Helen tumed on him, or the sneering malevolence with
which Charles and Peter and Elizabeth regarded him. He
had done what Helen had asked him to. This was no time
to play riddles with people having the drop on you.
"You caught all those with brains?”' Baxter asked.
"We sure did,” Helen told him. “We should get twice as
many this aftemoon, what with so much fresh bait that's
walked right into our trap. Well, the next thing you do
when you make a skull is pull the eyes out and set them
aside. You remember what we always do with the eyes,
Charles?”
“I sure do," Charles said, "and I know what I'd like to
do with another pair of eyes.” But he was looking at John
rather than at Helen, and he had an icy look that scared
John.
“What do you do then?" Baxter asked, and Helen had
him hypnotized.
"Oh, then we make a bunch of incisions in just the right
places. We peel the flesh off the skull just like taking off a
pair of gloves. Then we hang the skull overboard in a net
and let the fish clean off the scraps of meat. After that, we
pull it in and wash it three times, once in salt water, once in
No Setting for the Gallant Brood
79
vinegar, and once in fresh water. Then we rub it with lime
and set it in the sun to whiten."
“And they come out like that in just one day?”
"Oh, much less. We'll have yours finished in less than an
hour, Baxter. We will keep yours for comic effect, even if it
is misshapen. Unfortunately you won't be able to see it.”
"Why won't I be able to see it?" Baxter asked.
“You won't have anything left to see it with. We'll have
your eyes in the eye jug, and you won't be in your skull
anymore.”
“Oh, I forgot." Baxter seemed a little bewildered. “But
what do you use the eyes for? You said it was something
special.”
"Eyes are the best bait of all. We catch garfish with
them. Charles, step into the cabin and get one of those
three-foot-long garlish to show theni."
Charles darted in, and he brought it out quickly. It was a
good three foot iong; but if it was a garfish it was a .30
caliber one. Charles had the drop on the blackbirders
suddenly, with the rifle at ready and ready to talk business.
Say, those big kids dropped their guns fast when they were
given the order in the proper way. Crocker's three hirelings
had been hypnotized by the honied voice of Helen, and
Charles caught them fat. The Dulantys had added two
shotguns and a carbine to their arsenal, and they had three
prisoners to dispose of.
Baxter Bushyhead and his bunch could reach pretty high
when told to reach, and they could march pretty fast when
told to march. Charles, telling Peter and Jobn that he
needed no help, marched the three prisoners back into the
woods. They were gone a very long time, and then Charles
returned alone.
“Did
you
kill them?” Elizabeth asked.
"All dead and disposed of,” Charles said. “It's no great
trick for a man. The next time I'll let one of the boys do it.”
“We didn't hear any shots,” Helen said suspiciously.
"I used a silencer."
“You don't have a silencer. Where is it now?”
“I keep it hid. It's against the law in this state to use a
silencer when you kill somebody.”
But Helen wasn't satisfied with the explanation. For one
thing, Charles was fingering some dollar bills, and Helen
9
»
80
The Reefs of Earth
knew that Crocker had been paying his blackbirders a
dollar a day to find them.
"Where did you get that money, Charles?” she de-
,
manded. “It's blood money, and we want our share of it.
If you took it off their dead bodies, part of it belongs to us.
If you took it from them as a bribe not to kill them, that's
dishonest; but we still want some of it.”
"I took some of it off them, and some of it was a bunch
of old money that I already had. Sure, part of it belongs to
each of you. I've marked it for you. But I've just made
myself treasurer of this outfit and I'll handle the money for
you all. That's because I know how to handle money better
than the rest of you."
“How'll you prove you can handle money better than I
can?” Helen asked.
“Because I'm the only one that's got any money. I
handle mine this way. Let's see how you handle yours.”
"I'm getting mighty blamed suspicious about the whole
thing,” Helen shrilled. “I think you're a crook and didn't
kill them at all. If you let them go, they'll be back with help
to get us.'
“They won't be back," Charles said.
"You just let me see that money. I can always tell
dishonest money.”
"Yeah, I know, it's green on one side. You just leave it
alone.'
Helen suspected that Charles had not killed those big
boys at all.
Well, had he? Nobody had followed to see except Bad
John, and nobody had thought to ask Bad John. But
Charles did have a silencer. Peter had made it for him in
the shop truck, and it worked better than any commercial
silencer on the market.
And Charles had something else which he showed to
John and Peter and Bad John, but not to the girls. There
were three pair of the things, and they were gory.
“You will see, Peter, that these are considerably
different from the flesh-colored pods of the Cherokee
Creeper which an unnamed child once brought back to fool
little girls,” Charles said loftily.
If those three big boys were still walking around, they
were walking around without any ears. Ears are one thing
No Setting for the Gallant Brood
81
you can't fake. These were real Earth-kid ears.
Charles had taken a major step. You can't remain a
child forever. Peter swallowed his jealousy and wryly
dubbed his cousin Charles Earl of the Ears.
“I know why Helen and Charles looked at me like that,
John said later. “I was supposed to get a gun in the cabin
and get the drop on them. They got made because I
brought out the catfish instead.”'
“I don't know why you got mad at John,” Dorothy told
them. “You told him to get the catfish. If you wanted him
to get a gun, why didn't you tell him so?”'
“Even six or seven persons may be too many in the
world,” Helen said evilly. “Shall we consider reducing our
figure by two?”
But those blackbirders never came hunting the Dulantys
again, not those three, nor any of the others who had been
hunting elsewhere.
10
In Sacred Groves of Yew or Lindens
The children woke one morning as to the sounding of a
hom off Earth. This is the hom that you hear, not with the
physical ear, but with the interior one. “It is going to rain,”
Veronica used to say when a day dawned like that. “I can
hear the tune of Bagarthach verses back home.”
There was that feeling now—that there was going to be
music. And by music, the Dulantys did not mean any such
weak thing as the Earth people mean by that word. And
lesser creatures also got the feel of the strong day.
The crows had gone crazy, staggering and hooting in the
air as though ready to pack their bags and leave that
country forever. Peter, who had been prowling around
underwater before dawn, reported that the catfish were
sealing their ears and digging into the bottom mud as
though they had gone crazy.
Henry Dulanty had once given the opinion that the birds
and animals of Earth were as tin-eared as the Earth people,
not knowing high music when they heard it. And there was
bigh music in the offing.
The actual sound that they first heard seemed like the
distant screaming of wild horses.
“It must be a forest fire,” said Charles, "and all the
horses are being burned to death. Let's get knives and go
out. Horses are good to eat. We can cut pieces off them and
they'll be already cooked.'
"It's music!” said Helen with a happy lilt. Her virginal
ears had never been much affected by Earth sounds, and
now she knew the real thing when she heard it.
Closer now, it was a man (who must have been trying to
save the wild horses) chanting the strong song from the
middle of the noise-unless one wished to believe that it
was the wild horses themselves singing the tune:
"I had a wife I loved galore,
My blessed, brindled, blond Cobina,
82
83
In Sacred Groves of Yew or Lindens
Unil my flute went out the door,
And out of bed niy concertina.”
.
“Those aren't horse noises at all,” Peter cried. “They're
sheep, and he's the docker cutting off their tails. Sheep
make a lot of fuss when you dock them, and the docker is
singing a song to amuse them.”
Then the second wave of it swept still higher:
"I played the fiddle and the fife,
The harpsichord and hootie-hoosic,
But bled inside to hear my wife:
'It's loud enough, but is it music?'”
“It's a slyclone,” said Dorothy. “It's blowing around and
breaking the trees off, and that's what part of the noise is.
And a man is singing for the slyclone to bring his house
back."
For a man was singing yet, higher and stronger and
woollier:
“I had a cow, I had a calf,
I had a pig, I had a pony.
I killed them all when they did laugh
And called my carols caco-phony."
“It's a Gypsy funeral,” said John. “They sing like that to
scare the Devil away.”
“But it's wonderful,” Helen squealed, “wonderful! Open
up your ears and hear all that jumping air."
Wonderful or not, it was nearer, and solid movement
could be seen inside that approaching cloud of dust. The
man, if he were a man, was singing still more strongly out
of that cloud of dust and noise:
"My daughter was my pride of life,
But at my tunes she was a scoſer.
I took the blinking butcher knife
And sheared the erring ears right of her.”
This was the strong happy stuff like they sang at
weddings and funerals and massacres. They were the real
84
The Reefs of Earth
tunes that the off-Earth hom had always sounded silently
to them, and the grins it always brought to every Puca face
were being grinned now—six happy, devil grins, seven if
you count Bad John's. The tune plucked at their heart-
strings, and Puca heartstrings are made from gusunka guts.
Woops, here comes another verse, higher and headier:
"I had a dog who when I played
He cringed himself and whined and howled him.
I went for him with spit and spade
And cut him up and disembow'led him.”
“Oh rapture!" cried Helen. “There can't be any happier
music than that. It would set the very frogs to dancing.”
“Oh rupture!” cried Peter. "It's moving. It's on wheels!"
Well, the Devil himself is on wheels, according to Puca
fables. He's mechanical thing that got out of hand. And
this thing, moving in the middle of a cloud of dust or wild
horses, was on four bicycle or cart wheels. It was coming
through the chosky bottoms, and in even a short dry spell
those bottoms get pretty dusty. The thing was perched
above the wheels like a crazy cat-castle of shining silver
and gold, or of brass and chrome. The castle itself, intricate
with instruments, was making the awful noise, and the man
sitting in the castle was singing the wonderful vers. s:
“I showered riches on my wife
And lived myself in durance frugal;
But she'd a fault that cost her life:
She chattered while I played the bugle."
Listen everybody, it's coming closer and getting better.
Going to have to take the very sky off to get the full tone of
it:
“My daughter never lived to wed
For all my songs she'd sore berate them,
I cut the eychalls from her head
And marinated them and ate them."
Those are the high big songs, the kind of songs the
Blessed sing in Heaven, real strong stuff in them.
He was a man all right, and he pedaled a four-wheeled
In Sacred Groves of Yew or Lindens
85
cart that hau a piano on it, and a big set of drums, and
French hors and that other kind of horns. Listen, there
were drums on top of drums and homs growing out of
horns! It bristled like a hedgehog with all the instruments.
The man had a guitar and a ukelele and a banjo slung
around his neck, and a fiddle stuck under his chin. He was
a
a slew-footed red-necked singing man, but not one of your
Earthmen. You ever hear one of them sing like this?
“I had a child, I had a wife,
I gave them all the pleasures due them;
Until one night with knout and knife
I fell upon them both and slew them."
The man came to a stop in front of the Dulantys, and
almost at once they began to know who he was. For one
thing he was a Puca; he wasn't one of those shriveled little
people they have around here. Then he gave them one last
soaring verse which in its words partly explains why Puca
song is so free and untrammeled, and which finds echoing
accord in unsuspected places:
“No longer am I dim of brow,
No longer am I wan and harried,
Nor even critics irk me now,
They all of them are dead and buried."
“Pandemonium John!" the Dulantys cried in seven
voices together.
And everybody knows who Pandemonium John is.
John Pandemonium was a high
a high Eigeas-Amhranai—
beyond anything that Earth people know. Take Homer and
Dante and Benny B-Flat and the singer of the Elder Edda
and mix them together, and you have only a hint of it. Dig
up Bill the Bard and teach him to whistle, and add him in;
catch an old-tine coon-shouter, and a trumpet player born
only yesterday, and the author of the Psalms; and Pindar
with his lyre for the string section, and a bunch of kraut-
head symphony-smiths; and the daughter of a hurdy-gurdy
who has learned opera, and a red-clay-country fiddler; add
them together. You're not coming close yet, but you're
getting the idea.
86
The Reefs of Earth
A music critic of the planet of the Cameroi once wrote
that the music and song of the Puca, compared even to that
of Earth, was simplistic, childish, monstrous, grotesque,
and monotonous. But that planet-name-dropping music
critic himself had a tin ear, to write so mistakenly of the
music of the golden-eared Pucas.
Pandemonium John was a Puca like the Dulantys, but
he had been too old when he came to Earth to leam the
trick of looking like an Earth person. If the Puca look
funny to Earth people, well, Pandemonium John looked
funny even to other Pucas. He had the pug and the mug to
excess. He was lean and crestfallen as a winter crow, and
he walked with a dangerous swooping motion as though he
were standing up in a rowboat.
As a high master of the Bagarthach, John Pandemonium
was supposed to be a pangnostic, one who knew
everything. He was supposed to be, but he had the
appearance of a rather simpleminded fellow-except for
his one great talent. Pandemonium had had a wife and
daughter of the Earth people. This should have given him a
great opportunity to observe custom. There had been
difficulties, however. Many of his verses referred to the
inability of his wife and daughter to adjust to him. There
was nothing allegorical or symbolic about these pieces.
Symbolism and allegory do not pertain to the Pucas. They
were all literal accounts of literal happenings.
The Dulanty kids and Pandemonium John rigged planks
and rolled the pandemonium (that was the name of the
fantastic rolling castle of musical instruments) onto the
deck of the Sea Bear which was bigger and better bottomed
(though less elegant) than the lle. Pandemonium John
accepted their homage. He told them that he had received a
flying Bagarthach that all was not right with their clan. He
had come to check on them and their parents.
“I have exchanged Bagarthachs at a distance with your
parents,” Pandemonium said when he had made himself
comfortable in the deck officer's chair. “Frank tells me in
verse that it is a race: which will kill him first, the Sickness,
or the alien creatures who look like people. Henry is mildly
defiant in his incarceration, but of course he does not have
any hope of living to be an old man. Witchy is sometimes
In Sacred Groves of Yew or Lindens
87
in a state where she confuses essence with accidence. The
Earth people have a humorous name for the state-
insanity. Crossing the line for her won't be very difficult or
very sudden. She'll be dead in about a week. I have already
communicated with Veronica, dead and buried, but not so
long dead and buried that she cannot receive and send back
Bagarthachs. She says for you all to do whatever must be
done at any moment, and she says that you will always
know what to do. So your parents are either all dead, or
doomed to a quick death.
"That is all right," Elizabeth said, "it saves us the
trouble.”
“Oh, oh!” Helen cried in alarm. “The advice! It's
coming. I can hear it rumbling up out of Pandemonium's
paunch already. Take cover, everybody.”
"There is no reason to take cover from any advice of
mine,” John Pandemonium said. “There is no reason,
really, for any Puca ever to take cover from anything. You
do not take cover from rain or sleet as Earthmen do, do
you? Rather you soak in them and luxuriate in them. So let
it be with my words, let them rain on you!
“There is an Earth proverb, 'If you can't be good, be
careful.' Defy this word; it is the adage of the scowling
devil. There is another Earth proverb of a later and freer
vintage, 'If you can't be careful, be good.' The latter is an
improvement on the former, but avoid it also; it is the
adage of the smiling devil. As Pucas, you do not have to be
either good or careful. The one is a concept of Earth, the
others of Hell. All you have to be is Pucas. Peoples on a
dozen different worlds say that they are the lords of
creation. We Puca do not know whether we are or not, but
we decided a long time ago to act as though we were. Then
what happens?"
"They knock our heads off every time," Helen said
simply.
“Right,” Pandemonium agreed, “they knock our heads
off every time. Well, we can grow new heads, in a manner
of speaking. You children are the new heads. Grow like
grass! Know every trick! Be direct in your dealings with the
natives! You can always mop the blood up later. Be kindly
and loving to all; and remember that whether we are the
lords or not, we will act as thouglı we were. It is better to
88
The Reefs of Earth
play a joke on someone else than to have one played on
you. We've played such jokes on several worlds, you know,
that had people wiser and stronger and more numerous
than ourselves, and (it is not necessary to add) better
looking. On Earth, the conditions are much more favorable
than in many other places. Though the Earth people are
incomparably savage, they aren't very smart."
“And now, off with the formalities, and on with the
levity,” Helen said, and they got ready to have themselves
a ball.
Pandemonium John had been traveling about Earth for
years, examining situations and leaming customs; and
supporting himself by his (to Earth ears) unsupportable
music. He worked his music-making in reverse, as a big
sign on his pandemonium proclaimed:
“I'll play the horn all night and day,
I'll play the drum around your city.
The only time I'll go away
Is when there's money in my kitty.”
)
Pandemonium made his living getting run out of towns.
People would take up collections and pay him to leave with
his, as they said, damnable musica sad commentary on
Earth culture,
Pandemonium had been arrested often, and once he had
been investigated thoroughly. It was charged then that he
was a spy for a foreign power, and that his pandemonium
was actually an electronic transmitting instrument.
They took it apart piece by piece, measured, photo-
graphed, and X-rayed every fragment of it, and then put it
together perfectly. They said that they were sorry, that they
had been victimized by a crackpot who was probably a
fascist and who saw subversives under every cubile.
Well, the pot had not been cracked, but the careful
investigators had been. Pandemonium John was a spy for a
foreign power, and his pandemonium was actually a
transmitting instrument, though not an electronic one.
Puca communication is based on cosmic resonance rather
than on the electromagnetic bit, and the pandemonium
contained a resonator by which Pandemonium could
communicate with his home world.
In Sacred Groves of Yew or Lindens
89
But now Pandemonium was oiu and tired and racked
with Earth Allergy.
“I just can't cover all the ground myself any more,” he
said. “There are towns in my nine-state area that haven't
heard the shrill of my pandemoniun for twenty years.
There are fair-sized hamlets that I never have been run out
of. If only I had a partner! But nobody is interested.”
“I'm interested,” Charles said.
They talked about it then—while the rest of the kids
were setting up a honkeroo with the various instruments -
how it wouldn't have to be a grand thing like this first
pandemonium, but a simple aggregation of no more than
forty or fifty instruments. Pandemonium said that he would
help Charles build it, that he would divide the territory with
him and license him, and that Charles could pay him one
third royalty-or cheat him out of it if he grew up to be a
true Puca.
After that, the ice having been broken, they all threw a
concert. Pucas can play instinctively any instrument
whether they have ever seen it before or not. These were
Puca instruments, though, for the purpose of deception,
they had Earth shapes. And there was something special
about several of the instruments—they were made of brass
from the Puca home world. Puca brass and Earth brass,
though chemically and mentallurgically they may seem the
same in their alloy, do not have the same tone.
The horns reached high and the strings unhitched all
Earth inhibitions; the percussions really set it to rolling.
Pandemonium John sang them hundreds of tunes from
back home, putting Earth-English words to them as he
went along. Then he gave them tunes in Puca and in High
Puca. People, you do not hear something like that every
day! They built whole mountains of Bagarthach verses
until the music was jammed up solid as high as the trees.
Pandemonium drank half the barrel of choc beer, and
then it was afternoon and evening. The honkeroo lasted the
rest of the day and well into the night. The Dulantys were
supposed to be in hiding, of course, and for all they knew
there were search parties out for them that very afternoon.
But Pucas, if they start being careful, will be no Pucas at
all.
They even gave Earth a go. Earth isn't as barren as
90
The Reefs of Earth
you'd imagine. Though Earth symphonies and concerts
and operas were laughable, yet there was the beginning of
real boondock music on Earth. Pay the pitiful piper his
penny, he has it coming.
They ran through a dozen of the great songs of Earth,
Birmingham Jail Blues, Take Me Back 10 Tulsa l'm Too
Young to Marry, Shotgun Boogie, Red River Valley, and
Rang-Dang-Doo, disdaining lesser tunes.
And after a very long time the honkeroo broke up and
they all went to bed, Pandemonium John spending the
night with them.
But Charles did not sleep at once. He lit a small candle
and leaned on one elbow and sketched. He was designing
his own pandemonium.
“Peter!” he cried out suddenly, "could you design me a
gear case that will play The Old 'Apple Tree in the Orchard
at normal speeds and Bell-Bottomed Trousers when
accelerated? And musical sails to go on one of the rafts?
I'm thinking of a seagoing pandemonium."
"Sure, I'll do it in the morning," Peter said. Peter was a
better mechanic than Charles.
At the same time, two sisters were taunting each other
with Bagarthach verses in a new and more authentic beat.
Elizabeth sang one.
“I had a little sister dear
As pretty as a springtime crocus.
I buried her without a tear,
She was a little too pre-co-cus.”
Then Helen ground one out in a fury:
“I also had a sister sweet,
I worshiped her, I idolized her,
Until I put her on to heat,
And accidentally vaporized her."
J)
11
They Found a Hold More Near Their Blood
Marshall, the prosecutor, came and talked to Henry Dulanty
in his cell, it not being a well-run jail.
“I like to come to the point," Marshall said. “You're a
dead man, Dulanty. Man, Hell! I consider you an animal,
and I'll kill you for one.”
“Do you kill all animals?" Henry asked. “And why do
you say 'You're a dead man,' then?”
"I kill all animals that look too much like men. You're a
masquerading ape to me. But I'm curious. What are you?
As to species, I mean.”
"Homo Pucalis—that is, Puca Man," Kenry told him.
"Puca man. Goblin man. So there really is such a
thing—from somewhere. I'm familiar with the hoax or
prank. It was only two years ago, and the journals are still
looking for the answer. The case with the specimen in it
appeared in the Anthropological Museum one afternoon; it
was just as the lecture-guide with some very important
people in tow came to that point. The case was there where
there hadn't been a case before. The specimen inside was
something that nobody had ever seen—something like you.
And it was labeled Fuca Man. Some jokers must have
brought the whole thing in and set it up in short minutes.”
.
“In short seconds," Henry said. “I was one of the jokers,
and we had to work fast. It was a kinsman of mine who had
died, and we considered it a rather good-natured prank to
intrude hinı there. We have more fun at our burials and
disposals than you do, and he had suggested it himself just
before he died. And it did complete the collection. We
placed it just beyond the effigy of Moderu Man—the Puca,
last and highest of tie line.
"It somewhat resembled the Neanderthal, which some-
what resembles the ape,” Marshall said.
“Both parts true," Henry agreed. “We've been here
before, Marshall, and we may have been the Neanderthals.
Much of our early history is unrecorded, or to be found
91
.)
.
92
The Reefs of Earth
only in the archaeology of alien worlds. A few of us have
always been on Earth. Soon we'll become effective. We are
small in numbers even on our home world; and there are
never more than a few hundred of us on any world that we
control. It is therefore necessary that we become the
dominant elite, or perish. To become so we often have to
be what would seem crude or cruel."
"You'll not become dominant here. We'll kill you off
like the damned dragons you are.”
“Yes, I begin to think that you will. But you won't win
by it. We've laid dragons' eggs behind us. They're hatched
and going now. You'll not know the young while they're
growing. They are a time bomb in you. Which of us is the
more primitive people is not the question. We are the more
fluid, and therefore we will dominate. If we have to alter
the world to our way, we will do it."
"You bugger, you're wrong!” Marshall said. “There was
never a more fluid man than myself, and I make myself a
one-man elite whatever I do. I'm a woollier man than any
masquerading ape. I'll tell you about it, and then I'll taunt
you, and very soon I'll kill you. I'm not giving you a handle
to grab me by. You'll be dead before you can think of a
way to use the information."
“So will you also be dead, Marshall, before you use the
information I gave you as to the Puca. You have only one
thing on your mind, and you'll die with it still incom-
pleted.”
“You fake, Dulanty. I'll tell my story nevertheless. I'm
Mandrake Marshall, a local boy. Whenever I reach out my
hand I do not bring it back empty. When I was seventeen
years old I was a powerful boy, a complete illiterate, and I
worked in the strip mines of Coalfactor Stutgard. I had not
yet come to full life or consciousness.
"Then that man Stutgard became interested in the pitiful
state of the football team at the little normal college he had
attended. He sent me to college there, I was the best tackle
they ever had; I played eight years. Eligibility was then an
informal thing in the small teachers colleges.
“I had time on my hands at the college, Dulanty. One of
the teachers, who had somewhere mastered those arts,
offered to teach me to read and write. I learned the tricks
pretty well in a month—the only real schooling I ever took
>
>
They Found a Hold More Near Their Blood
93
under a teacher. But I had caught the sickness of ambition.
I read considerable in those eight years, when I was not
goofing off in the College Inn, or playing football
. I have
total recall. I remember and understand everything I have
ever read. There is very little about History or Philosophy
or Philology of Economics or the Beautiful Letters that I
do not know. I have a contempt for the tone of this
knowledge, but I needed the repertoire.”
This Mandrake Marshall was very big. Henry Dulanty
measured him with his eye and judgment, and was unable
to decide which of them was the larger.
“After those happy days, I was selected to go to the state
legislature by the men who believed themselves to be my
masters,” Marshall continued. “I was made house whip. I
was the biggest man there, and I had the loudest voice and
the meanest disposition. I made them physically afraid of
me. I passed many bills by terrorizing my fellow members.
I do not always behave so suavely as I am doing now.”
“This is suavity, you yokel?”
“You shouldn't have called me that, Dulanty. I'm trying
you now in a court that doesn't go by that name, and your
appeal has just been denied.”
“I didn't make any,” Henry said.
"You'll appeal to murky Heaven before I'm through
with you,” Mandrake jeered. “But you're done. I have
already decided to be your Atropos. Can you field it?''
"The oldest and ugliest of the Fates. You would cut my
thread? We will see. I have, as it happens, a much more
interesting biography than you have. But you wouldn't care
to hear it.”
"No, I wouldn't. Oh, it's finished with you, Dulanty;
now let me finish my story. I spent four years in the
legislature, and during those four years I studied law
irregularly, and was admitted to the bar. I came here and
was made prosecutor. That's been two years. Now I need a
big case to bring me to wider attention. I don't know quite
what angle I'll employ, but you are that case. Whichever
form I cast the sequence in, I'll kill you in the grand
manner."
“Is it ambition only, little Master Mandrake, or have
you animosity towards me?" Henry asked.
“You're damned right I have animosity towards you,
>
94
The Reefs of Earth
Dulanty, you ape! There is enmity between our flesh from
the beginning. We fought before, in an ice cave a million
years ago, either on Earth or off it. You're an almost-amn.
You'll find the hate stronger here in the sticks than you
would in a city. I won't have you on the same world with
me! But how I will use you with the people here! You'll
serve my future at the same time. I'll make them loathe
you
for a murdering ape, and love me as the beast killer. After
all, you did murder our great noble first citizen of Lost
Haven.”
“This Stutgard, whom I didn't kill, was a pig."
"Sure he was, Dulanty, but he was my kind of pig. The
men hated him while he was alive, and so did I. Never
mind, the thing will work.”
“Why did Stutgard let the town die, Marshall? I know
minerals, and there's a lot left in Lost Haven."
“Since you'll soon be dead, and you say the same thing
about me, there's no harm in telling you. If you know
minerals, you know that coal is the cheapest of them all.
Stutgard decided to mine gold instead of coal. To do this, it
was necessary to shrink the population of the town and
tum it into a shell. He dealt with dead souls in the manner
of Pavel Ivanovitch. You know Pavel?''
“I do. I begin to recognize the device.”
“Some of Stutgard's dead souls are now in Califomia
and some in Texas; some of them are actually dead; and
some of them never lived at all. Do you know the
population of Lost Haven, Dulanty?”
“About three hundred persons, some seventy families, I
believe."
“Ah, but that is only the apparent population. Do you
know how many relief checks have been coming into Lost
Haven every month? A little more than one thousand of
them. Stutgard got the lion's share.”
“And several of you got jackals' shares?”
“Some of us drew nice prebends and livings. Fifty family
sustenance checks a month will keep a man like me in
pocket money, though not, of course, satisfied.”
“And one of the jackals (Crocker I guess him) got too
greedy? Didn't you other jackals resent it? Yes, it had to be
They Found a Hold More Near Their Blood
95
Crocker. Why not execute him properly for the murder,
since he's guilty? He'd boggle his eyes and put on a good
enough show."
"I don't want a show, I want a spectacle. I'll kill him
later and in another fashion. You are what I need—a mad
monster. Yes, I have me a real flesh and blood-
or ichor
and offal—monster to convict. How they'll blood-hate you!
How they'll love me!"
"I smell more income than the bogus relief checks,
Marshall, though that might run around sixty thousand
dollars a month."
“You're smart, for an animal, Dulanty. Oh, there's the
land in the pits, quite a few sections of it. Crop histories are
easily created by a man who controls the men who pass on
them. Stutgard got paid for not growing cotton on land that
never saw cotton, and for com where com was a stranger.
The land had always been worthless, except for the coal,
and Stutgard had orginally stolen most of it for a dollar
an acre. I expect to inherit all this, but that's several steps
ahead.'
“What you want now is a man-kill, Marshall?”
“No. À monster-kill, Dulanty. You're the monster.
Don't you get the message?”
Henry Dulanty grinned, and then he chanted in boyish
sing-song:
"Oh Mandrake man, of giants bred,
You didn't guess one singing trifle
Would ever enter in your head-
A message from a talking rifle."
"What's with you, ape, chanting verses like a kid?"
Marshall demanded.
“You never met the Bagarthach verses during your
encounter with the Beautiful Letters, Marshall?” Henry
asked. “But the Bagarthach is handy. You can milk a cow
with it, or charge a battery, or kill a man—as I have just
done. What other literary form serves so well? But I may
cheat you out of the monster-kill, Marshall.”
"You mean a break-out, Dulanty? I hope you try it. It'd
satisfy me more, emotionally, to hunt you down. I'd have
2
>
96
The Reefs of Earth
real blood out of you then, and not have to be satisfied with
the buming."
“The bulls have pawed the ground
the ground long enough,
Marshall. It is time for the weaker one to grow too
nervous, and to lunge. Two worlds have met here this
afternoon in our persons. Our talk seemed trivial, but it
was key stuff. We could not strike a modus. Now
we go to war, each world in its own fashion. You
outnumber us here a hundred million to one, but as a
betting man I don't know which I'd take. Get out of my cell
now, Marshall! Get out, you crud! Move when I tell you to
move!”
"You're in no position to tell anyone to get out, Dulanty.
You're the prisoner here. I'm as big as you, and that's big.
I've taken a hundred men tougher than any you've ever
seen, and I've never been taken. I mean it when I say that I
don't believe there's a man in the world can take me."
“But
you
don't call me a man. Have at an animal then!
That toy won't stop me, Marshall.”
The bulls had pawed the ground long enough. The
weaker bull broke and lunged. Marshall lunged at Dulanty
with a sap in his hand, hit big Henry with it but hit him
badly, and it didn't drop him. Then Henry closed before
Marshall could swing a second time.
It went hot and heavy. It was, of course, a war of the
Worlds. Travelers not known to Earthmen have argued
over various pairs, which could win in a showdown: a
Ganymede Agriothere or a Stentor Phoneus; an Arcturus
Four Fanger or a Tankersly Tiger; a Puca or an Earthman
(assuming both. to be prime fighting specimens). The
Earthmen were known to be very uneven in their abilities,
but it was thought that the most competent among them
were pretty horny.
Ah, they settled it: a Puca can whip an Earthmen, both
of them being prime specimens. Marshall would never
think to call for help, but it was near and it came to the
Toaring action.
When they got Marshall out of the cell his clothes were
mostly tom off. His face was broken, and he blew blood-
bubbles from mouth and ear with every heavy breath. But
he was a man who'd fight a panther or a Puca. He was
laughing!
They Found a Hold More Near Their Blood
97
They had to support hini on his feet, but he was
laughing.
“Wish I could have stayed for more, Dulanty,” he said.
"I'm still not convinced you can take me that way, but you
did make me look bad for a minute. You'd have killed me,
and I hardly noticed, it was so much fun. But I can take
you more ways than you'd imagine, and you've multiplied
my coming pleasure by this antic."
12
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
Fulbert Fronsac and a lawyer came to see the children. The
lawyer does not want his name used. He is still practicing
law in T-Town, and he does not consider his part in this
case a successful one.
The children scanned their coming from a long way off
with three or four senses. They would not be slipped up on
again by anyone. But Catherine de Medici was lively with
recognition, so the children knew that it was Fulbert
coming with someone who might almost be trusted.
Trusted maybe, but put on the defensive at the start.
They could see that man with Fulbert now and they knew
what he was. With one of them, you state your maximum
claim first. You can give ground gracefully later if you've
got more of that ground grabbed off.
“You'll never get the lle back, you old Fulbert you!”
Helen called out in a ringing voice while the two men were
still some distance off, “and that crooked lawyer can't help
you get it. We got an instrument signed by yourself for a
start, and a start is all we need."
“That lawyer'd have to get a writ and a mandamus and
all that stuff,” Peter challenged. “And we'd all lie and stick
together on it and make holographic depositions and holler
persecution. We'd make you wish you'd never taken this
case, you lawyer."
"I've not come for the Ile," Fulbert said when he was
nearer, “except for a sentimental visit of a few minutes.
Yes, this gentleman is a lawyer, but I don't know how
Helen and Peter recognized him as one.”
“How did you, Helen?” the lawyer asked.
“Oh, when we were little our folks taught us to recognize
simple objects,” Helen said. “Like you say—“That is a
stone---that is a horse--that is an Osage orange tree- that
is a road apple—that is a lawyer.' What does he look like
to you, Fulbert, a humpbacked Jersey cow?"
“Your logic is perfect until it turns the comer, little
98
>
.
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
99
girl,” the lawyer said. “Do you discem me as to sub-
species?”
“Sure, you're a T-Town lawyer," Peter cut in.
“We could modify it in more detail, but you'd probably
take offense,” Helen said.
We don't say that the Dulanty children did not have
preternatural powers. In some things they seemed to have,
but there was nothing preternatural about this. About two
weeks before this, about a week before the Dulantys' real
troubles began, that lawyer had been in Lost Haven. “That
man over there is a lawyer for T-Town," Henry Dulanty
had said to his brother Frank (and Helen and Peter had
been present). “I may get him to check a few titles and
quitclaim deeds,” Henry had added to Frank, “it's impossi-
ble that there's a legal basis for everything that's going on in
Lost Haven.”
You hear something like that and you remember it. And
you work it in lefthandedly when the time comes, and you
score an early point.
“I am counsel for your father-and-uncle Henry Dulan-
ty," the lawyer said to the children. “I believe, from
some things that Mr. Fronsac here has told me, that you
have information that may save Henry's life. But it is in
such an odd form that we will have to extract it carefully,
and then perhaps it will give us corroborative proof.”
“He means," said Fulbert, "that your information may
point to fuller proof which-
“Please,” said Helen, “it is boorish to talk down to
people. Now then, gentlemen, you just come with me to the
captain's wardroom, and do not pay any attention to these
little children here. I will have one of my girls make tea,
and afterwards I will give you all the information which I
believe it is wise for you to have. This way, please, onto
our flagship.”
Helen was smart there. She knew that if two grown men
got into the boathouse of the Ile, there would be just barely
room left for her to squeeze in, and no room for the other
children.
But Fulbert knew the limitations of the Ile, so he
arranged for the parliament to be held on the deck of the
roomier Sea Bear. All the other children gathered there
too, except Dorothy who stayed on the Ile to make tea.
3
100
The Reefs of Earth
“Now then,” the lawyer said, "let's get on with what you
all saw the night Mr. Stutgard was killed."
“Please!” said Helen. "In the best society, one first
speaks at length of everything else except the subject
directly on the mind. Then, when the subject does come up,
it is as though it came up quite by accident."
"Oh great green grapefruit!” swore the lawyer who was
a pious man. But he sighed and made the effort.
"That's a queer-looking little mountain there," he
offered.
"We love it!” Helen sparkled. “It's full of murdered
Indians.”
“How do you mean, full of them?”'
"Full up full solid with them, is what I mean,” Helen
said. “I estimate there's about thirty thousand of them in it,
figuring cubic capacity and the settling of the mass through
the centuries, and the coefficient of traverse lay (the old
bodies aren't stacked in as neatly as they might be), and
deducting for the tunnels and big rooms and lounges that
are inside the mound. I believe that the last Indians buried
there were the Caddos, about the time of the breakup of
their confederation. Phoebe Jane says that the Shawnees
were the last ones buried there, but that is impossible. One
of the old dead Indians I talked to in the mound agrees that
it's impossible. He says that he never saw those Johnny-
come-lately Shawnees in his life, or since. It's only a
hundred and fifty years since the Shawnees came into this
part of the country. Phoebe is wrong. Did you know that
the Indians today are woefully ignorant of Indian history?”
“No, I didn't know that,” the lawyer said.
Then they talked about the blackberries, that it should
be a good crop next year; about the plenitude of fine fish
still in the rivers in spite of the depredations of the Fabers
and other evil folk; about how will you know how long to
milk a goat, and when it is time to breed her again, and is
that what is making Catherine de Medici so cranky that
you can hardly say a word to her without her flying off the
handle?
In this manner Helen skillfully steered the conversation
into every sort of channel, until Dorothy sounded the old
squeeze-bulb automobile hom that was the distress signal
on the Ile de France.
>
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
101
“Go see what is the matter, John," said Helen. “And if
Peter or Charles or Elizabeth has set something afoot
through misguided humor, I will settle with them later."
"Dorothy can create her own situations,” Peter said.
“These children are sometimes almost more than I can
manage,” Helen complained to the men. And something in
the comer of the lawyer's mind was nudging his main
mind. “She is the youngest of them just as she is the
smallest, isn't she?” the thing in the corner of his mind
asked. “She is only six years old, isn't she? You saw the
papers that were drawn up to commit the bunch of them to
a home if they should ever be found.”
John had gone on boar the lle, and he was back almost
immediately.
"Dorothy built the fire too big and it caught the
curtains," John said. "She's afraid it will set fire to the
whole boat unless we put some water on it.”
"Well, why doesn't she—why don't you both put water
on it?” Helen asked patiently.
“She says that if she uses the drinking water to put out
the fire, then she'll have to use river water to make the tea,
and she's afraid our guests will notice that it tastes rotten.
“Tell her to use river water to put out the fire, and the
drinking water to make tea,” Helen settled it. “And you
help her, John.
Once more they talked about everything, as why are
crows' eggs smaller than hens' eggs, and then a crow will
grow bigger than a chicken will. But almost immediately
John came back to them with more bad news from the Ile.
“Dorothy says that she doesn't remember how to make
tea,” he announced. "She just remembered that she never
did know how. She never made tea in her life. She says will
onion
soup do just as good? She remembers part of the way
you make onion soup.",
“I must do everything," said Helen, "everything." But
she left the parliament on the Sea Bear and went onto the
Ile to make tea.
All this time the lawyer had been having, down in a left-
hand comer of his mind, a waking dream. He was an
intelligent man—though he doesn't always seem so here in
an unusual environment—and he was accustomed to
analyze. He knew quite a bit about weighing evidence. He
1
Or
102
The Reefs of Earth
would weigh the evidence brought to him by his waking
dream.
The dream was that the voices of the children did not
always accord with their expressions
with the
movements of their lips and throats. Often a child would.
say half a dozen words clearly before he began to move bis
lips; indeed, it seemed that he moved his lips only when he
remembered that he should not be caught talking without
the outward sign. And sometimes the lip movement would
come like an afterthought when the spoken phrase had
already been completed.
Again, one of the small speakers would be just a little
out of phase, or would speak loudly and clearly with no lip
or throat movement at all, like a ventriloquist, when the
lawyer was not looking directly at him, or ususally her.
“They don't speak as other persons do," the dream
hinted to the lawyer. “They think out loud when they wish
to do so, and vocal cords (if such they have) have nothing
to do with it. And then—as they almost always remember
to do they fake the appearance of regular speech.
And there was another thing running through that
waking dream of the lawyer. Out of the comer of his
eye he seemed to see, for instance, a veritable gargoyle—
incredible in ear and crine and scruff, nightmarish in lip
and snout, bulbous and cubistic-futurist in eye. But the
lawyer would look directly at the place where the gargoyle
had been detected, and would see one of the children,
rather funny-looking in the case of several of them, but not
a gargoyle, not a monster. And then the lawyer would
almost—but not quite—catch another of them in the
strange act of metamorphosis.
These were odd things to dream of those chattering
children, especially when one was nine parts awake. And it
was an even odder recognition that went through his mind;
“These are Poltergeister made visible.”
Enough of that; he tried to rouse himself to fuller
wakefulness, but he had been quite wide awake.
“You'd better start the questioning now," Charles told
the lawyer. “You'll never get it over with if Helen's in it."
“Briefly then," said the lawyer, “Henry Dulanty, the
father of some of you and the uncle of the rest, goes on trial
tomorrow for the murder of Mr. Stutgard. Due taah-a
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
103
peculiarity of appearance and manner that Henry shares
with the rest of you, it is pretty certain that prejudice will
find him guilty. A hate show is scheduled, and it will take
honest evidence clearly presented. to offset this.
“Mr. Fronsac says that you as a group have information
that will prove Henry innocent and another man guilty, but
that the information is in a strange form. But if you will tell
me what really happened and who is guilty, then we will
know where we are. Now then, do you really know who
killed Mr. Stutgard?”
“Yes. It was Mr. Crocker," Peter said.
“Did one of you actually see it done?”
"Yes, Bad John here saw it all."
“Did you see it clearly, John?” the lawyer asked John.
"No. I didn't see it at all,” John said. “I didn't see Mr.
Crocker there. He must have left just as I climbed up to the
window. The door was still moving shut as if someone had
just left the room. But I saw Mr. Stutgard, and the blood
was still thumping out of him in thumps.
“But your brother Peter just said that you actually saw it
all.”
“No. He said that Bad John saw it all. I’m John, not Bad
John. This is Bad John beside me here, the one that looks
just like me only dirtier and scrawnier.'
“Ah yes. I see, but not with eyes. Bad John is the ghost
child?”
“Don't you dare call him that, you itchy-nosed lawyer!"
Elizabeth said. "He's no more a ghost than you are. He's
scaredest of all of us of ghosts because he can see them
oftenest, and they can punch him like they can't do it to us.
Bad John is just different because he died when he was a
baby. A lot of people are different from other people.”
“I agree with you there, Elizabeth,” the lawyer said.
“Can Bad John hear me talking?"
“Of course he can,” Peter said. “There's nothing the
matter with his ears. If you can't hear him, you're the one
there's something the matter with.”
"I'm sorry that I can't hear you, Bad John," the lawyer
said. “Things would be simpler if I could, if everybody
could. Going into court with an unbodied voice would be
fantastic; but when that voice is mute to all except the
elect, that tastes of madness. Mr. Fronsac here has given
19
104
The Reefs of Earth
me a statement; he says he will go into court with it and
swear that he has heard Bad John and that the account was
given him by Bad John. But would Mr. Fronsac be
believed?”
“I sure do doubt it,” Elizabeth said. “Everybody knows
that he's the worst liar in Lost Haven.'
Helen came back with happy geen fire in her eyes, and
with the tea in glasses on an old plank board for a tray. The
lawyer and Fronsac each took one at the same instant, and
bumed themselves howlingly.
"Judas Prêtre!" Fronsac swore. He, of all Earthmen,
should have known better. He was familiar with this
bunch. And the glasses were so hot as to be almost
incandescent.
“Ung ung ung hoo hoo!" the lawyer moaned.
"I always wanted to find someone dumb enough to do
that to,” Helen chontled. "Burned the living fingers off you,
didn't it? I wanted to see if you were paying attention, and
you weren't. The ambient heat should have warned you
when your hands were still a half inch from the glasses.
Lemon or persimmon with your tea?”
“Persimmon,” said Fulbert sadly, for he had been over
this road before.
“Why, lemon, Helen, please,” the lawyer said,
“What a rude thing to say!” Helen exploded. "How
would people who live on rafts have lemons? You could
have spared my feelings at least. How'd you get to be a
lawyer if you don't understand people any better than
that?”
“Ah, persimmon then," said the lawyer, “or anything,
even koneion.
You think that stopped Helen? Nobody can know it all;
but if you have a cousin like Peter who can send you the
answers silently, then you're hard to stop. He sent it, and
she caught it with a fick of her head.
“You lead a Socrates, and I'll see you with the koneion,"
she bantered the lawyer. "We'd do him in all over again,
the silly fruit. And just how sure are you that it isn't
hemlock I've given you?"
After it had cooled a little, the lawyer and Fronsac
drank the tea with persimmon squeezings. The taste
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
105
startled them. It was a new thing. Indeed, those persons
who commonly take tea with persimmon—and there are
fewer than two of them in the world—uniformly agree that
there is no drink like it.
“I assume that you have been asking questions in my
absence,” Helen said when they had drunk together enough
to satisfy the rite, "and I assume that the questioning has
been fruitless. Where are we?”
“I have covered part of the ground with the other
children,” the lawyer said, “but I have missed the salient
point, if there is one."
“I
guess an axe is about as salient a point as there is, in
the true meaning of the words," Helen offered. “Let's talk
about axes."
“ “All right,” the lawyer said. "Yes, there is some
confusion there. A small axe, a child's axe was found in the
room. It was honed as sharp as a razor and had no mark on
it. It could not have done the job, the blade being not a
quarter the length of those long wounds. It was as though
the small axe was left as an indication that the murder was
committed with an axe, but not with that one. It was a sort
of a signature. Can any of you tell me about it?”
“It was my axe. I left it there,” John said. “I was scared
when I saw that Mr. Stutgard was axed. I bolted out the
window and left my are behind me.”
“Did you come out of the window empty-handed, John?"
"No. I picked up the big axe with the blood and the hand
smudges on it and brought it along instead. I thought that it
seemed a lot heavier. I was mixed up for a minute there.”
“Lightning just struck,” the lawyer said. “Where's the
big axe now?”
“Silly Elizabeth put it in a potato sack and hid it,” Helen
said bitterly. “She said she would keep it back till it seemed
like the right moment to tell about it. A whole ocean went
by her while she was waiting for just one bucket of water to
come along. If I'd had it, I'd have transmitted the prints
and had this case wrapped up three days ago.
“And Helen would have got herself killed, and worse,
us,” Elizabeth protested. “The axe is available and in good
condition, though it's begun to rust around the edge of the
blood. We were careful not to smudge it, and all the marks
106
The Reefs of Earth
on it are Crocker's. And it's got the big C burned into the
haft
. Everybody in Lost Haven would recognize it as
Crocker's axe."
“Why would Crocker have left such a damaging thing
behind him?" the lawyer wondered to them.
“Bad John's trying to tell you if you'd only listen," Peter
said. “He's saying that Mr. Crocker almost had a fit when
he saw him in the room. They scared each other. Mr.
Crocker was able to see Bad John then. A lot of people
can't. But it startles a lot of people when they can see
someone and see through him at the same time. Bad John
said that Mr. Crocker jumped like he had seen a real ghost.
He dropped the axe, or threw it at Bad John, and ran out of
the room. Then John climbed up through the window and
took Crocker's axe, so it wasn't there if Ms. Crocker canie
back looking for it.”
“We will certainly look into this aspect of the matter,
and today,” the lawyer said. (Elizabeth had told him where
she had hidden the potato sack with the axe in it.) “Ah-
there is one other thing, children, that you might cast some
light on before we leave you for a while. Three children of
Lost Haven have been lost for two days. It is believed that
they were playing along this stream, or looking for
somebody here. They were probably looking for you for
Crocker. You haven't seen any trace of them, have you?
We don't want to complicate things with another happen-
ing."
“We haven't seen any children," Dorothy said (with
Helen and Peter sending thought-waves at her like
sledgehamniers, “Shut your silly speech, let the ones with
brains handle this!"), “but there were two big boys and one
middle-sized boy who thought they had the hop on us.
Helen honey-talked them till Charles got the jump on them
with the big rifle. Then he marched them back in the woods
and killed them and cut off their ears.
"What, what are you saying, little girl?” the, lawyer
asked boggle-eyed.
“Mere childhood fantasy,” Fulbert cut in hastily.
"Dorothy here has a vivid imagination. I have traded tall
stories with her by the hour.”
>
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
107
“Oh, ha, ha, of course," the lawyer agreed. “I don't
know what makes me so jumpy. Imagine me entertaining
the thought that,
"We'll leave you now, kids," Fulbert said. “Stay quiet
and stay hidden. We see now that Crocker would kill you
to shut you up. But don't worry. Remember, we're on your
side.”
“The most damnable equivocation I've ever heard,”
Helen muttered.
9
The lawyer was thoughtful as he walked back through
the bottoms with Fronsac.
"That youngest girl, Helen, it is hard to believe that she
is only six years old,” he said, “though from appearance
she would not even be that. She's as eerie as their Bad
John, and as comical.”
“Yes. But when I have left them, I always carry away
the impression that it is they who are the real people, and
that the real people are a little less," Fulbert said.
"Real people, Fronsac? Is there some doubt of it?”
“What do you think the ruckus is all about? You're a
city man. The smalltowners can sense these things a little
sharper. You've just had a brush with a multiplex alien
mind. You've hardly noticed the effect yet, but you'll never
be the same again.”
“They are so rapid and intelligent for their ages, that
they might-ah-almost be dangerous,” the lawyer said.
“Do you—ah-really believe so?” Fulbert asked the
lawyer with an odd twinkle.
))
2
Fulbert and the lawyer got the death axe from the potato
sack where Elizabeth had hidden it. They saw that there
were very good prints, both in blood and in excitement-
staining sweat. They went to Frank Dulanty and talked
with him. They all agreed that the Crocker case might be
built solidly enough to overcome the animosity against
Henry. After all, there was plenty of animosity against
Crocker in Lost Haven also. A lot of evidence against
Crocker quickly gathered itself.
They tapped four men of the town who said that they
would testify on various aspects if a case could really be
108
The Reefs of Earth
made against Crocker; but if a case could not be made,
they would speak no word to their own injury. The lawyer
convinced them that the case could be made.
The prints would tie Crocker to his axe, and the axe
would tie itself to Stutgard's body and its clear hack marks.
The lawyer knew prints. He telegraphed the index of these.
The news of a change of status travels rapidly. The tide
had tuned for Henry Dulanty, and all the creatures of that
particular littoral knew it. Mandrake Marshall got the feel
of it like a dismal but certain wave when he was off fishing
at some distance. Earthmen are able to receive such
premonitions in ways that other persons cannot under-
stand. Marshall gathered up his gear at once and began his
return to stop this monsense. He knew that his very swift
intervention was indeed to keep the plan from falling apart.
Crocker got the feel of the new situation when he was
sitting at his supper—the meanest supper in town, though
he was now the richest man in town. He got in his car and
fled to Marshall for protection, knowing instinctively on
what road to meet him. He fled to Marshall, who intended
to kill him eventually, for protection against the new
,
circumstance that threatened to kill him sooner.
Pheobe Jane Lanyard got the feel of it down in her
shack in the strip pits. She had a very close feel for the
whole Dulanty case.
Witchy got it in the ward in the hospital where she lived,
and smiled in green-eyed benevolence like the good witch
she was. Then she didn't smile any more, for a new
premonition swept over her. She foresaw that the fortunate
pendulum would swing back again, and like a scimitar.
But Henry Dulanty didn't feel it at all—the change in his
own status. His Earth Sickness prevented him from
receiving either Earth or Puca precognizance.
One of the jailers, who had hated Henry and been
frightened of him, looked in at him kindly that evening.
The jailer had received the psychic hint, and he had also
overheard words about the thing. The monster already
convicted would become a man cleared, and one to be
neither feared nor hated.
“I never believed that you did it, Mr. Dulanty,” that
jailer said. “I always said that you were an honest and
>
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
109
decent man. I guess that you will be leaving us pretty soon
now.'
“Who knows? My trial begins tomorrow,” Henry said.
The jailer looked at Henry archly.
“There is some talk in the last several hours that there
might not be any trial, for you, Mr. Dulanty. In fact, I
wouldn't be at all surprised if they came and got you out of
jail before this night is over."
“Thank you for whatever you are trying to tell me,"
Henry said,
The jailer meant that he had heard and sensed that the
finger was being put on Crocker now, and that Henry
Dulanty would probably be released without more ado. But
Earth Sickness had dulled Henry's intuition and com-
munication. Had he been in his full powers he would
have known more what the man meant than the man
himself knew.
But Henry, in his stultification and listlessness, thought
that the jailer was trying to say that the lynchers were
coming for him that night.
He decided to act now. He had already set up his pattern
for it. Since he had been in, he had been very rambunctious
and troublesome once or twice every twenty-four hours,
and had followed every tirade with a long period of
peacefulness.
He put on the show now. He shook the jail and shouted
himself hoarse for half an hour. Then he subsided
suddenly. They had grown to expect it of him.
"He'll be quiet for the rest of the night,” the guards said.
There were two ways Henry Dulanty could get out of his
cell. He could unlock the cell door with a Bagarthach, or
with a key.
He raised his head, and the Bagarthach came to him in
this form:
“Unlikely lock, unlucky lock,
I'll batter you ka-zow ka-zammy
The
way the chopper chopped the block,
And bust you with a mummy-whammy!”
It wasn't a very good Bagarthach. He felt like a silly kid
making up a rime like that, and a Puca in his full powers
110
The Reefs of Earth
cannot let himself feel foolish. A Bagarthach is not
effective unless chanted with confidence and Henry had
lost his. He doubted if the verse, recited in his present state
of mind, would cause the lock to fall apart.
The key had come to him in this manner:
One of Phoebe Jane's cousins, up for stealing three
black calves (you'd have stolen them yourself if you'd seen
how pretty they were), was a trusty in this very jail, he
having been here before and knowing the folks.
Now, on his first coming to the jail, Henry had been
curious when the jailer had locked him in.
“There are sixteen different cells, and only four different
keys,” he said to the jailer, “Why is that?”
“What's the matter with you?” the jailer asked him.
''
“There are sixteen different keys that I have on my ring
there.'
“No, there are only four different keys,” Henry said.
One day, when Phoebe's cousin was shooting the moose
with him through the door, Henry told him what to do.
“In the orderly room or somewhere accessible to you,
you will know the place better than I do, there will be a
board with duplicate keys to some of the cells hanging on
it. Mine will not be there, since I am in for murder, but the
keys for either cell seven or nine or thirteen should be
there. Make a tracing of any of them, they are the same,
and give it to Phoebe Jane the next time she comes. Also
make a note of the thickness of the key. Tell her to have my
brother Frank make a key like that.”
It was done, and Frank Dulanty made the key and sent it
back to the jail by Phoebe Jane, and her cousin passed it in
to Henry. It was a stubby key so as not to be conspicuous,
and with so short a cross-piece that only a person with
great strength of thumb and finger (which Henry had) could
make it work. But you can't make a very accurate key from
a tracing.
It wasn't a very good key. It wasn't a very good
Bagarthach. Henry recited the verse in a low voice and a
halfhearted manner, and put the key in the old warded lock.
It wasn't a very good lock either. Almost any verse or any
key would have opened it.
At five minutes before nine o'clock, Henry Dulanty
unlocked the door of his cell and walked out. The inmates
A Mountainful of Murdered Indians
111
had all been fed long before and were smoking in their
bunks and listening to their radios. Henry passed as though
invisible.
He met the jailer in a little closed corridor. The jailer
was surprised to see Henry out of his cell.
“I haven't received any orders to release you yet, Mr.
Dulanty,” he said. “Did the sheriff or somebody else come
with a writ to release you? I didn't see anybody come in.
I'm sure it's all right, but I'd better go check. You might
have to sign something before you go.
“I took the liberty to take my liberty,” Henry said. “I
will have to put you out of the way for a little while.”
Henry clamped onto the jailer something that was very
like the Japanese Sleep Hold. In fact it was the Puca Sleep
Hold. He throttled the jailer very gently and stretched him
out to sleep on the floor.
He lifted the block key and the passage key from the
jailer's ring
He left the jail sector, the building, and the town in quiet
haste.
а
13
In Brazen Clash of Helm and Greave
When Mandrake Marshall and Sheriff Train arrived, it was
too late. Dulanty had got away clean; and nobody knew in
what direction, nor whether on foot or in car. But Marshall
didn't waste too much time treating of the ineptitude of the
jailers. The situation was made to order for him. The
jailbreak was a break for him too.
He began to give orders, and he was good at it.
“Get on the air and put out an alert that the Mad Killer
is loose, and to take him dead or alive before he kills
again," Marshall ordered everybody.
“I am still the sheriff,” Sheriff Train protested. “The
man obviously feared a lynching, and with reason. There is
now pretty clear evidence that he's innocent and that,
ugh—Crocker is guilty.”
"Shut up, Train!" Marshall snapped. “I don't want to
hear any more about a case against Crocker. Shall I draw it
out for you? It would be effective to make it that Dulanty
killed the sheriff when he fled. Do you want me to stage
that one? Dulanty has broken and fled. That's confession
enough of guilt for anyone. And for his second crime he
has left the jailer dying here on the floor. Unless you want
to be the one dying on the floor, Train."
“But Sam is no more dying than you are," Sheriff Train
protested. “He's just a little scared and the wind squeezed
out of him. He'll be able to walk home when he settles
down a little.'
“He shouldn't be walking at all,” Marshall said evenly.
“Damn you, Sam, do you want me to fix it so you can't
walk at all? Make him lie down, Train. Lie down, damn
you, Sam! I'm calling the tune here. Ring for the wagon
and get poor Sam here to the hospital. And if anyone asks,
he's at the point of death."
“Marshall, I'm not going to let you tear up the whole
region and kill an innocent man with one of your
manhunts," Sheriff Train insisted.
112
>
In Brazen Clash of Helm and Greave
113
Marshall felled Train with an openhanded blow that
would have killed a colt, stunned him stupid, picked him
up and shook the remaining manhood out of him; then he
fung him into a comer.
“A few of the boys will be in,” Marshall said to Train
who was now no more than a lump on hands and knees.
“Deputize them without any delay or I'll kill you."
And Train would do it. Marshall had a little private
amy of about twenty men, ready to be deputized any time
an unauthorized cock crowed. Most of them were already
on the move.
Then Marshall quickly set the affair going with his
broadcasts and his hot-line phone calls. He knew that
many of the men in that country loved a manhunt. They
were night hunters by instinct. Then Marshall left the jail,
picked up Crocker where he had cached him, collected the
hounds, and started on the live hunt.
"He isn't armed, Crocker,” Marshall said. (They were
hunting cronies now, though they both understood that one
of them would eventually have to kill the other by their
ethic.) “The jailer was armed, and Dulanty didn't even lift
it off of him when he laid him out. That makes it mighty
handy for me, because I did lift it off of him. And the
Dulanty didn't go by car. None's been stolen. There were
no confederates around; there never have been any. The
brother is still with the T-Town lawyer and the drunk in
Lost Haven. We'd better get him too, though. You're his
patsy, from the comical stories I hear. I don't want that
other Dulanty killing you before I get around to it. You
were my patsy first.
"I'll put out another alert that the Mad Brother is on his
way to meet the Mad Killer, and that both are armed and
deadly. I'll get the whole brood.”
Marshall's car was a regular command-station with
transmitter and phones.
“There's a roadblock
a roadblock on everything down to
cowpath,” Marshall said after he'd put out the latest alert,
"and Henry bedamned Dulanty doesn't know this country
except just around Lost Haven. I think he's headed for his
wife at old Wan-Wit on the Neosho, and he's got to cross
plenty of roads to get there. I've got it all planned out. It'll
be better than a bear-kill.'
a
>
114
The Reefs of Earth
“What's to plan out?" Crocker asked sulkily. “It's just to
catch him and kill him and plant the jailer's gun in his
hand, with a couple of shots fired from it."
"Where's the artist in you, Crocker? Must you always be
the philistine? We need climax and agony, and a strong and
legal swashbucker (me) standing boot-deep in brains and
gore. One shot won't stop him, Crocker, not if I get him
just in the flank. The next one won't quite drop him either
if I can put it where I want to, but it'll hurt him bad. And
then a little gut-shot rather riles up a bear, or the bear in a
man. There's a lot of bear in him, you know. I like to see
one of them gnash.
"He'll keep coming after I put eight or nine shots into
him, Crocker. I believe I can put them just where I want
them. I'm the best shot in this country, and I know my
anatomy. And he'll still be able to talk, or at least to hear
me, after he's stretched out at full length—if monsters do
uncoil to full length when they come to die. What do you
think he'll say when I put the gun to his head, and him too
blood-spent to move? Will he beg, do you think?”
“No, Marshall, that man won't beg. You wouldn't want
him to. It'd spoil a good hunt. But he'd bite through a boot
you set to his mouth. I'm a better artist than you, though.
You should bring in the blood-animals to kill an animal.
There's nothing like getting a man with the dogs. Mine
aren't bloodhounds, though the ignorant call them that.
They're part mastiff and Great Pyrenees and part
staghound. You remember that little escapee about two
years ago? Why, Marshall, they had him half eaten before
we got to him. They tore four- and six-pound hunks of meat
right out of him. They tore out hunks of meat with bones in
it. A man is mighty loud when you do that to him. You can
have any other sort of poetry. A coon doesn't scream like
that when you kill him. A badger doesn't. Even a big cat
doesn't. A man-kill is best—for the very noise he makes. I
like a man to scream that way."
"This one won't scream that way, Crocker. I don't think
so. He's a bear or a bugger or a monster, but not a man. We
may, however, hear a howling and roaring such as hasn't
been heard on Earth since the primordial days. He says that
they've been here before. You hunt your way and I'll hunt
In Brazen Clash of Helm and Greave
115
mine, and we'll see who latches onto him first. But
remember, I get to finish him.”
They hadn't just been talking. They had been bisecting
the country again and again, going on the dirt and gravel
section lines, taking the huge hounds out of the panel-car at
favorable points to try to cut the Dulanty trail. They'd have
that mad killer. They'd be onto him any minute. ,
And they had a dozen other crews out looking for Henry
Dulanty; and there were roadblocks on everything from a
lane to a deer trail.
Henry Dulanty came to himself in a dark wood where
the straight way was lost. He either heard or imagined that
he heard the distant sounding of hounds. There is an
ancient antipathy between Pucas and every sort of dogs,
but especially the great hounds. Henry would have
welcomed the conflict with a pack of them, were they not to
be backed up by men with guns. He could smash them as
well as the biggest bear could. He'd be well-blooded in
doing it, of course, but he believed that that was just what
he needed. A bloody life battle might cleanse his humors
from the Earth Sickness and make him a full Puca again.
Henry was content to remain lost. He believed that there
was no one near him, and that he could shamble along till
full strength and intelligence might retum to him for a
while.
Then, in a glimmer of starlight, he saw a man or a
demiurage growing out of the ground. It winked at him. It
seemed a deeper thing than the regular people, but it was
not a Puca.
“It would be easier to use the path,” the apparition said.
"You've been going through some pretty hard brush and
making a hellish noise."
“I imagined I was moving in perfect silence,” Henry
said, “but my powers are at low ebb. I'd use a path if I
could find one, and if it were going where I wanted to go-
something I'm not sure of. And if they don't have
roadblocks on it yet.”
"It's too slight a path for them to know to block, the
creature said. (It was as big as Henry, and rough-hewn.)
“There is only one place to go. I'll go with you and show
2)
116
The Reefs of Earth
you the way. We'd better start along. It's less than three
hours till they close.”
"Whatever are the gates that close in three hours, they
might not be those I intend to enter," Henry said. But he
was going with the man. (It was a man after all. He may
have had a little bark on him, but he was not actually
growing out of the ground.)
“What is Crocker out hunting?” the rough-hewn man
asked as they followed the slight path. “He usually doesn't
come this far from his base.”
“He's hunting me," Henry said. "Can you hear the
hounds? I wasn't sure that I could, and I've been listening."
"I can't hear them yet, and neither can you. I can smell
them, though. A creature that can't smell them farther than
he can hear them deserves to be taken.”
“He doesn't deserve to be taken on all counts,” Henry
said. “What are you called?''
“John Lewis Grew," said the preternatural creature.
“I thought I knew all the demiurges, Greek, Roman,
Hindu, and primordial, but I don't place your name among
them.'
“I'm a Quapaw. They all call me John Loose Screw after
the sound of my name. I don't like it, but I can't stop it.
You'll be doing it, too, after five minutes. I tell you though,
I have no more loose screws than the rest of them have.'
They walked. It was brighter now and the trees thinned
out. The man was wearing a shaggy jacket and he had a
certain roughness in his finish, but it wasn't bark growing
on him.
“What closes in three hours?” Henry asked as they came
to a dimly neoned shanty. “I wouldn't walk into a trap, but
I need a shelter."
“The Lost Moon Bar, of course,” said John Loose
,
Screw. “It has to close at one o'clock. We're going to have
to drink pretty fast. We have less than three hours.
It seemed to be a very local place, and it might be safe
for a while. They went in. It was a small barroom full of
big Indians. John Loose Screw made a sign to the man
behind the bar, and that man began to draw forth and fill
various types of glasses.
These were Henry's kind of people. He knew them in the
brazenness of the tactic. It isn't pulled on just anybody,
>
9
In Brazen Clash of Helm and Greave
117
only on the visiting chieftain thus challenged to stand and
produce. Henry admired the ease and assurance of its
execution.
It was the tactic of the Presumptive Assumption which
has its roots midway between the Pragmatic Sanction and
the Categorical Imperative. They knew Henry instantly,
and he knew them.
“I have counted the house," John Loose Screw told
Henry when the thing was already in motion in the little
crossroads Indian tavern. “For four dollars and thirty cents
you can set them up. I would do it if I had four dollars and
thirty cents.”
So Henry Dulanty set up beer and drinks for the timeless
Indians in the Lost Moon Bar, and so doing he stored up
merit for himself in Heaven.
“Where have you guys been?” the man behind the bar
asked Henry
“You mean John Loose Screw and myself?”
“No. I mean you and your people,” the barman said.
“We waited for you and you didn't come. Quite a while
back, one of you said that a bunch of you would be along,
and you'd help us set up a system. But you didn't show.'
“No. Our home camp was raided several times and our
plans partly lost,” Henry.said. “Then, when we were ready
to undertake things again, our information was jumbled.
I'm not the sort of being who should have been sent to this
country in this century. I should have been sent to a place
where the people still live a little nearer the ground.”
"Up to a thousand years ago we could have made this
half of the apple a pretty good place,” the barman said.
"We could have held it for our own increase and built it up
in all proper time. Up to a hundred and fifty years ago we
might still have pulled it off—jack-jumped the White Eyes
and chased them into the sea. But even then it would have
been pretty tricky and would have left hard feelings. Now
it's too late."
“I didn't realize you'd recognize me,” Henry said.
“Oh, you're in the Grandmother Stories of most of the
tribes.'
Well, they were a reserved but friendly bunch here. You
had better have those men for your friends, or stay out of
their den. Henry saw that he might not be able to master
>
a
a
118
The Reefs of Earth
things here in a showdown; he wouldn't have been able to
do it even if he had been well. Henry could take a dozen
men of a certain sort even now. But John Loose Screw, the
man behind the bar, and a long young man in a sports coat
were men of another sort. They were homed-bull men all!
And the rest of the men there were the biggest, most
bulging, sly-gninning, sleepy-eyed men he had ever seen in
one room at one time. It would have been like coming
against one dozen Mandrake Marshalls, and without the
moment of full strength that was granted to Henry when he
tangled with Marshall that time.
“I won't be able to stay very long, John Loose Screw,"
Henry said, raising his head and apprehending. "They'll
close me up long before one o'clock. In just three minutes
there will be a great baying, and a meute of hounds and
mastiffs will be onto my trail here. They will be baying for
me. I can't hear them or smell them, but I have my own
sensing.”
"How do you know then?” the long young man in the
sports coat asked. “What kind of crystal ball do you
have?”
"A sixteen-inch one, friend, half meter rade size,"
Henry answered, “Venetian depth glass, panoramic viewer,
futuristic correlator, cosmic filter, not real fancy.”
“What's the cosmic filter for?” the young man asked.
"It gets rid of all that side talk from outer space."
“You're kidding," the young man said seriously. “But
are you the one? Are they coming with the dogs for you?”
“Yes. Pretty quickly now. I know how Crocker trains
them. They're pretty savage. So is he and whoever will be
with him. They have my scent now. I hear them going
crazy where they cut my trail. I need a break.”
"I'd just as soon become involved,” that long young man
said. “I like to get involved in things. You're the Mad
Killer, are you? There's some pretty good rewards out for
you, and they get bigger as the night goes on. Crocker and
Marshall have each offered a thousand dollars for you. Of
course neither of them would pay, but they've posted it.
“But Joe Coon behind the bar there wouldn't like it if
anybody here took money for a man. John Loose Screw
wouldn't like it. I wouldn't like it either. If the three of us
don't like a thing, nobody here's going to do it. I see an ear
a
>
66
In Brazen Clash of Helm and Greave
119
twitch here and there, but they're not going to inform.
“I've seen you before. I watched your kids one day and
talked to them. It was a circus. I don't know what kind of
things you are, but I like you better than the White Eyes
around this country. Let's go.”
That young man was big, and he moved like a lion to the
door.
“All right,” Henry said, “but where?”
“I got a car outside that will do a hundred and thirty-
nine miles an hour, real speed,” the young man said. “The
speedometer's the only thing in it not set fast. I can go
through any roadblock they set up. I got a chrome-plated
dozer blade on the front of my bus, and a vertical slicer.
It's the sportiest-looking front in the world, and it'll kindle
any block. It can run away and leave the world standing
still.”
(There is belief that the Indians had fast cars before the
Flood. They remembered them more than did other people
when mankind was reconstituted, and more than other
people they know what to do with them.)
-and look what it will do from a standing start!” the
young man cried ten seconds later. Henry was now in the
fast car with the sports-coated young man. “I have thrown
gravel a measured two hundred feet on takeoff,” the young
man continued, "and I have bumed rubber for ninety-
seven feet on the pavement. This car is steel-looped and
cross-looped. It can roll over and come up still running
wide open. It has armored body, shot-proof glass, self-
sealing tires, astatic cigarette trays,
cigarette trays, flame-retarding
neoprene-sealed gas tank, auxiliary boosters, all-bands
radio, and a telephone—with unlisted number."
"Have you considered a gyroscopic stabilizer to put it on
automatic pilot if you black out? Or a bank-angle analyzer
to permit it to take turns on automatic?” Henry asked, very
much interested.
“Considered it? Man, I've got it,” the young man said.
“Built everything myself. I'm a mechanical engineer,
Oklahoma State '63. It's got a photoelectric control to
make it swerve to miss cows and hogs in the road when it's
on automatic, and it embodies a prediction factor to detect
which way a hog will break. That's important when
you're driving on automatic at night.”
a
120
The Reefs of Earth
They went through a roadblock at high speed. The
young man had been right. That chrome slicer on front
would kindle any block. They were shot at from both front
and back with some high-powered stuff. It did have
shotproof glass, and not only to tum little pop-pistol shot
as the dealers will show you sometimes. It did have a self-
sealing gas tank with flame-retarding neoprene sheath. It
had better have!
It was an interesting but rather rough ride, and they
talked of other devices that would really jazz up a car. But
when they came to a stop, the trouble wasn't that the car
wouldn't do a full roll easily, it was that it would do a roll
and a half easier. The car slid a hundred and ninety feet on
its top before it came to a stop against an embankment. It
was a well-built car, but it wouldn't be running any more
that night.
The young man told Henry to go ahead and leave him;
that all he had was a broken collarbone; that he broke it
every time he turned the car over; that he was, in fact,
collarbone-broke prone.
And the blood on him was nothing, he insisted. He
always got a lot of blood on him.
“But it was an interesting talk,” the young man said. “I
love to talk to anybody who is mechanically inclined. I'm
going to put in an automatic pressurizer and a standby
oxygen supply in case I ever end up upside down in the
bottom of a lake. I'm going to put a scanner-pilot on it
also. Just put a checkmark on a road-map where you want
to go, and feed the map into its gullet. It'll take you there
by the most direct route, and even pick the roadside stops
with the best meals. If they don't kill you tonight, come
around again. I'd like to know you better. .
“Say, you'd better take off! They'll have us picked up
with headlights in a matter of seconds. Oh Hell yes, I'm all
right. This happens to me all the time.”
So Henry Dulanty crawled out of the upside-down car
and was on his way again, more lost than ever.
>
The young man's name is Sammy Bluefield. You might
meet him sometinie, and then you'll know who he is.
14
Fit Subject for Heroic Chantey
So Big Henry Dulanty was in the woods again, but a dozen
miles away from the other woods. It might be some time
before they got hounds on his new trail. But someone
would know what region he was in. Sammy Bluefield might
flub the men with the story that he had been alone in the
car—that he had been off on a frolic of his own. But Henry
was certain that the men at the crashed roadblock had
lighted them up good enough with their spotlights to see
that there had been two men in the car.
Every car would be stopped on every road. And every
road down to the meanest section line was being picked out
with headlights. Every bridge and almost every culvert was
manned. It is hard to travel any distance without crossing
either over or under some road. In theory, Henry Dulanty
would be boxed into one of the gridded sections of land,
and could be tracked down there as soon as the dogs could
cut his trail again.
But that country was not as even as the theory might
indicate. Much of it was hilly, the roads following the
contours of the land and not the straight section lines; and
headlights, picking out the roads, could reach no further
than the crest of the next hill. It was a strategy game
between Henry Dulanty and quite a few hunting men,
played out for the Dulanty life.
But all the men of the country were not out on the hunt.
The majority cowered in their homes in town and country
and listened to radios or TV while the Mad Killer stalked
their region.
There was quite a bit of terror that night in the rolling
bluestem country; and the dogs caught the fright from their
masters, and whined and carried on.
The dogs, but not the Dogs yet.
There are some dogs that pay no attention to the Puca at
all, indeed seem not to see them or sense them in any way.
Many dogs hate the Puca. Others go crazy with fear of
121
122
The Reefs of Earth
them. Henry had to be careful in his choice of a farm and
dog. He wanted a reasonable man who would agree to hide
him for several days until the vigilance relaxed.
Henry sampled half a dozen farmsteads and left them
alone. He had, under the window of one of them, heard the
broadcast of his own activities as the Mad Killer. There
were stony and unseeing dogs, there were furious dogs,
there were terrified dogs guarding the various farmsteads.
Then he came to a farmhouse that had a finely bred,
strongly built, slightly stupid dog who barked only a little
and stood on bristling formality.
“The man will be of the same sort,” Henry told himself,
"middling good, hard to scare, and a little stupid. No dog
ever differs much from his master, and no bad dog ever had
a good master. I'll go in and take my chances if the man is
at home. If he isn't home, I'll take my chances anyhow.”
The house was dark. There was no answer to the low
hallow, so Henry attempted the place. The front door was
unlocked. Henry opened it noiselessly—knowing at once,
however, that someone was standing and watching him
from the darkness. “Good evening," Henry said in the
direction of the invisible man.
Then Henry was hit in the face by a ball of light.
“Raise your hands very high," said the man of the
house. He had a five-cell flashlight in one hand and a .45 in
the other. With what must have been a third hand, or
perhaps an elbow, he flicked on the main lights of the
a
room.
)
It was a good-sized man of full middle-age, probably
scared—as believing the Mad Killer bit—but steady.
"Stand over there against the wall with your back to
me,” the man said to Henry.
On the Sands of Hesitation-
Henry still had his Puca speed. He could have struck
before the man could have reacted with his gun. He could
have made the man a prisoner and stayed on there
awkwardly. Or he could bind or disable the man and leave,
and try his luck somewhere else. He could go on felling
men all night, and keep moving till he was caught.
But he wanted to negotiate a refuge. He wanted a man to
hide him in an inner upper room where his scent might be
Fit Subject for Heroic Chantey
123
masked, a man who would lie for him and swear to all
comers that the Mad Killer had indeed come to the door,
but had then talked incoherently, and had gone back the
way he had come.
Henry could quickly instruct the man in little things,
how his scent over the threshold and inside the house might
be disguised by wheat bran or shorts sprinkled lightly and
swept up again, or by a dozen things to be found around
any Earther house.
Henry Dulanty, as he should have been, could have
dominated almost any man with words. But the Earthsick
Henry had become almost fumbling in his speech and
thoughts. He would have to gamble time and wait for the
next temporary retum of his powers. He stood over there
against the wall with his back to the man.
“Do not try anything,” the man said nervously.
“I will try anything, even reason,” Henry answered.
“Are you Henry Dulanty?”
“I am a stranger lost.”
“I am placing you under citizen's arrest.
“Let me see proof of your citizenship.”
.
"You're Henry Dulanty all right. It's been said that
you're an incurable scoffer."
"And the Mad Killer at the same time?”
“That's right. A scoffing sort of cunning might go with
madness.”
The man patted Henry over his pockets and under his
armpits and on the inside of his legs and all such places.
On the Sands of Hesitation,
"What did you do with it?" the man asked.
"Explicitness is a forgotten virtue,” Henry said.
“There you go smarting off again. What did you do with
the gun you took off the jailer?”
Broached and Breached the Craft Dulanty-
“I took no gun,” Henry said.
"The alert
you took it,” the man insisted, “and
that you are a Mad Man, armed and dangerous." He was a
fair-sized man, fifty years and a day old, a leading citizen
you would say at once, and a fool.
Panged by Pygmies, Irked by Earthman-
"If you believe that I took the gun, then you're dead
3
says that
3
a
>
124
The Reefs of Earth
already,” Henry said. “The two things tie together.”
“Do not threaten me," said the man. “Take off your
pants and shirt! Do it now!”
He the Monster, by the Midgets-
“To be closeted with a fool!" Henry muttered, but he did
as he was told. He took off his pants and shirt. The man
was not green. He could use the gun.
On a Farmstead Near Catoosa-
“Toss them across the room here," the man ordered,
"and make no false move." Henry tossed the stuff over.
The man went through it carefully, and then examined the
shaggy-bare Henry Dulanty. “That's peculiar," the man
said. “You didn't have a gun after all. What did you do
with it?”
In a Trap, Who'd Ambled Planets-
“If
you believe that I had a gun, then you believe it to
your death,” Henry said sadly.
“Don't give me riddles, Dulanty. Lie down on the floor
with your head in the comer while I phone the authorities
to conie for you.”
Finding Time Beshorn of Forelock-
Henry Dulanty, wondering at himself in his sickness, lay
down on the floor. He would have to convince this fool.
“Tell them one thing, for your own sake," Henry said
carefully. “To send the sheriff, and nobody else, or only
those of his group. Tell them to contact the sheriff by
phone and not over the air. Marshall and Crocker are likely
to pick up anything that goes to the sheriff over the air.
Have them notify the sheriff only, if you have the telephone
disease. On no account have them notify Crocker or
Marshall.”
De Profundis in Patinam-
“Shut up, Dulanty. They will send who they will send."
,
The man was on the phone. He talked to somebody, and
was satisfied. “Everybody knows where my place is,” he
kept saying. “It's been called the Butterfield place for a
hundred years. Get somebody out here quick.” He was
satisfied when he hung up. “Somebody will be here pretty
quick,” he said to the room and to Henry Dulanty,
“whichever of them is driving nearest when they get the
information by radio.”
Stewed in Stifling Introspection-
>
Fit Subject for Heroic Chantey
125
"Have you a name?” Henry Dulanty asked the man.
"Thomas Butterfield. It's an old name here.'
“Thomas, let me explain. If you let me go, or hide me
and say that I have gone, you can save your own life. If you
do not let me go, you cannot save your own life, not if
Marshall gets here first."
Stream of Thought—the Earthen Sickness-
“How is my life in any danger, Dulanty? It isn't from
you.”
“I haven't the time to be impatient with you, Butterfield.
If it was announced that I took the gun from the jailer, then
it was announced for a reason. It was Marshall himself
giving the broadcasts when I listened. Likely Marshall took
the gun himself from the jailer to plant it on me. If he is the
one who comes for me, he'll kill me here. He's eaten up
with lust for it."
Lost the Swiftness of the Puca-
"You will see him do it, Thomas,” Henry continued,
“and you will know that I was unarmed and that it was
unnecessary to kill me. He can't leave you alive to give
testimony against him. He will stage it neatly to make it
seem that I killed you with the jailer's gun, which he will
plant in my hand when it is still warm.
Stranded Like a Fool, Dulanty-
“I know Marshall quite well,” Butterfield said. “He's a
fine man, and your whole story is a ridiculous fabrication.”
“Does it irritate you, Butterfield, when somebody tells
you how a story or a play will end?”'
On the Reefs of Earth—Untimely—
“It does. Why?”
“I have just told you how your story will end. Well,
enough of that, Butterfield. I have to leave you in a hurry
now. It may already be too late."
Henry Dulanty rose from the iloor and began to put on
his clothes.
“Dulanty, I tell you I'll kill you right now,” Butterfield
said. “I'm not afraid."
"I am, a little bit, but not of you."
“Dulanty, I swear to God, you leave me no choice!"
Passed the Final Fatal Moment-
“Don't intend to. If you're going to shoot, do it now. I'm
in a hurry.”
a
>
126
The Reefs of Earth
“Dulanty, you drive me to it!"
But Thomas Butterfield, like Henry Dulanty himself,
had waited too long. And he didn't know how fast Henry
Dulanty could move. Henry slapped the .45 out of his hand
and then felled him with a stunning blow.
“I've got a chance," Henry said. “It's coming back to
me. I'm going to have another moment of strength. In just
an instant I'll know what to do again.
“No my chance just melted. I know his footsteps in the
yard. I hadn't even heard the dogs, I was so listless. He's a
fool for luck. He must have been driving very near when he
got the call. It comes back to me, birt not fast enough.
Henry started for the .45 which had slid under a sofa,
and at the same time he started for a little door to gain the
interior of the house. It was his last indecision, for
Mandrake Marshall was already in the room.
Piger Tempus Edax Rerum-
Henry Dulanty pitched forward onto his face when the
first of Marshall's shots caught him high in the shoulder
from behind. That laughing man Marshall filled the whole
doorway, and there was no question which man was mad.
Marshall fairly bristled with the bloodlust in him.
“Get up, Dulanty!" Marshall barked, like one of the
chorus of hounds still held leashed by Crocker. “A shot
like that doesn't hurt a man like you! You've got a dozen
more coming."
“You shouldn't have shot him in the back, Marshall,”
Crocker panted, still holding the dogs. "Shots in the back
are always hard to explain as self-defense.'
"Shut up, Crocker! Hello, Butterfield. If that's not the
suit you want to die in, you have time to go change. You do
want to look nice, don't you? Come get me, Dulanty! You
old animal, let's see how you charge."
Door of Time Against the Puca-
Henry Dulanty came up on his feet. His Puca strength
had returned, but only in time for him to die in it. He
charged dumbly and in pain, and went down from a groin
shot by Marshall. Marshall shot very fast. Crocker had tied
the dogs to a porch pillar, and now held a rifle in readiness.
“Marshall," said Thomas Butterfield, coming out of his
daze. “That man is not armed. You can confine him
without shooting.”
>
Fit Subject for Heroic Chantey
127
"Shut up, Butterfield. Those your death duds, are they?
Come on, Dulanty! You disappoint me. Up we come! Onto
your feet once more! Here I am! Come get mel"
Ensorceled Earth-a Bomb Inside You-
Henry Dulanty was on his feet again, and then down
once more, gut-shot by Marshall.
“Too many shots are hard to explain,” Crocker said
dryly. "You're excited, Marshall. Finish him off this time,
and then change guns for Butterfield here."
“In my own way, Crocker,” Marshall panted. “Come on
Dulanty! One more time! Come get a piece of me—you
Think!”
Dragons' Children Hatching, Growing-
Henry was up again, but wobbly. He knew that he was
dying, but he had a sudden humor to spook his killer in
dying. He moved three steps almost too fast to follow, then
stumbled and grappled into Marshall, falling, and sending
a sudden wave of fear through that man. Marshall
screamed, but Crocker shot Dulanty in the face. Crocker
was cool as ice when there was killing to be done. Henry
Dulanty fell and lny still,
"What's a goblin like inside, Dulanty?" Marshall
shouted, quickly recovering from one insanity into another.
"Let's spill you out a little more and see.'
"That's enough,” said Crocker. "He's dead. Don't mark
him up any more. This much will be hard enough to
explain."
Come the Green-Eyes, Come Requiting-
Henry's shot face had become somewhat unhuman in
repose, but not less than human. The Dulantys could
manage to look like regular people, till they had to laugh,
»)
or die.
“That's enough, Marshall,” Crocker repeated. “The
dogs have been done out of their due. I'd as soon put them
on you as him. Take Butterfield now.”
Nil de Monstris Nisi Bonum.
Thomas Butterfield was sickened by the way Marshall
had killed Henry Dulanty, but he still couldn't understand
that it would tum out fatally for himself. He wondered how
Marshall would explain the killing of an unarmed man to
the world, but he simply gazed.
Then Marshall changed guns. He held the jailer's
128
The Reefs of Earth
handgun now. When the realization came to Butterfield, it
was like ice.
"You can't kill me,” he said seriously. “I voted for you
>
once.'
Mandrake Marshall laughed and shot. It was the
predictable end of the Butterfield story.
One. And two. Marshall had had a good night. He
looked at Crocker. Should he try for three?
15
The Battle Joined That Could But Leave
Crocker was delirious. He couldn't sleep after he had been
dropped off at his place by Marshall, and his dogs couldn't
sleep. There was something worrying and unsatisfied in
them all. Crocker was still apprehensive about what the
lawyer from T-Town and Frank Dulanty and the drunk
Fronsac had turned up.
Marshall hadn't followed through the previous night as
to taking care of Frank Dulanty. The broadcasts on the
Mad Brother of the Mad Killer had died out when
Marshall became temporarily sated of the killing.
But there wasn't any very good way that Crocker and
Frank Dulanty could both keep living in the world. One of
them plainly would have to die. But Crocker, between the
noose of Frank and the legal threat of murder trial, still
wasn't whipped.
Those several men who had almost been persuaded to
give evidence against Crocker yesterday could never be
persuaded again. Henry Dulanty, who had been given to
the popular mind as the killer of Thomas Butterfield, must
also be left undisturbed in that mind as the killer of
Coalfactor Stutgard. The neatness of tying everything to
Henry Dulanty the Mad Killer could hardly be challenged,
Low that he was dead.
But there was always the worry over Mandrake
Marshall. This was another of those mutually exclusive
deals: either Marshall or Crocker had to die, and they both
knew it. There could not be a double inheritance to the
realm of Coalfactor Stutgard. And this ultimatum worried
Crocker more than it did Marshall.
Crocker was also in terror of three Dulantys. Had not
Henry, after his face was broken and he looked at them
through a red glaze, said, 'You haven't seen the last of me,
I'll be back,' or had Crocker only imagined it? Crocker was
usually cool during a killing, but the aftermath produced
illusions of things both present and past. In the dying face
129
130
The Reefs of Earth
of Henry Dulanty, tuming unhuman as he died, there had
been the impression of great powers that could perhaps
transcend these barriers.
And there was still Frank Dulanty in his first threat-
that of the noose he had put around Crocker's neck. The
noose remained there invisible. And Crocker still had the
noose itself on his bedpost, and it stared at him.
And there was the small Dulanty boy who had looked in
at him in Stutgard's upstairs room. It is disquieting to look
up from the business of murder and find yourself observed.
But it hadn't been that which made his hair absolutely
stand on end and which still haunted him now.
Crocker hadn't simply seen the little boy; he had seen
through him at the same time. In his delirium Crocker saw
it all again. That little boy had been standing on air, and he
had been transparent. He was not made out of flesh. He
was made out of whatever deliriums are made of.
A bedlam of such things paced up and down in
Crocker's head, while his hounds also paced and grumbled
at being done out of their part of the murders. So Crocker
hit the old panther, and got what sleep he could out of it.
In the morning, Crocker rose very early and drunkenly.
He dressed, though awkwardly and with mismatched
boots. He gathered his seven dogs, took along a rifle and
the noose and a bottle of the old cat-creature, and went out
to find and kill the transparent little boy so he could sleep
nights.
Crocker knew generally where those Dulanty kids were
hiding out. At least he knew what sector his impressors had
not returned from. And he had clothing of the smallest of
the Dulanty boys that he had taken from the Big Shanty on
the night of the attempted lynching of Frank Dulanty. His
hounds were worrying the rags, and knew who they were to
find.
“There is a man sitting on top of Misu Mound,”
Dorothy said. "He has branches growing out of the top of
his head. I never saw anything like that before."
“Oh, it's Fulbert,” Helen explained. "He comes there
lots of days, and I'm always the only one alert enough to
notice it. He never had branches growing out of the top of
3
The Battle Joined That Could But Leave
131
his head before, though. It's something to think about. Do
you suppose that's what alcoholism does in its last stages,
Peter?''
“No. He's wearing them for camouflage. He's acting as
lookout for us. Maybe he doesn't understand that we
already have one of those old dead Indians acting as
lookout.”
“Maybe he'll get so drunk that he'll roll down off the
mountain and into the river," said John. "Then we'll vote
on whether to hold him under water and drown him or drag
him out and save him. I vote we drown him.”
“No. He's used to being that way,” Peter said. “You
never see an experienced drunk fall off a mountain. You
can hear Crocker's dogs now. He's out hunting us early.”
5)
The three mastiffs of Crocker were named Bell, Book,
and Candle. The four hounds, smaller than the mastiffs but
still large, were Luke, John, Barnabas, and Timothy. What
had happened to the earlier Matthew and Mark is two
other bloody stories (one of an old boar coon, one of a
young fast bear); but the younger dogs, Barnabas and
Timothy, were good ones.
The dogs had the scent of that smallest boy again, but it
led into boggy ground that would not support even the
lightest of the dogs.
"He is quite a small boy,” Crocker said, “but not that
small. He cannot be weightless. If a hound would go down
here, a boy would go down here too. Well, they've picked
up his spoor on the other side of the morass now, but then
it heads into even softer places.”
Crocker, though he didn't know there were two of them,
was tracking Bad John and not John. He was after his
proper prey, but he didn't understand its nature. So he
worked that morning with his dogs on the trail of the small
boy he had to kill.
Now and then, after Crocker and his hounds had circled
onto fim ground and once more picked up the trail
beyond, the eight hunters would sit down to rest. Then
Crocker would console himself with Spirits of Panther
(called Horse Whisky by the vulgar); and sometimes he
slept.
Once, when he had slept for a minute and wakened with
a
132
The Reefs of Earth
a start, he saw the small boy standing and watching him
not thirty yards away. There was something at once
wretched and appealing and defiant about that little
Dulanty boy. Crocker fired quickly, and the boy dis-
appeared. He didn't fall; he thinned out to nothingness.
“I'm coming apart,” Crocker said. “I'm firing at ghosts.
But I see everything else clear, and I saw him transparent.
But still he pushed on with his seven restive dogs,
circling deeper and deeper into the bogs after a prey who
followed a rambling and impossible course.
“Old Crocker is lost,” Fronsac said as he watched from
the top of Misu Mound. “In another hour or two he'll be in
where he can never get out. Then I'll go down and claim
one of the dogs.”
"Is Candle the one you want?" the old dead Indian
asked.
“Yes, Candle. I never saw such an animal. He blazes at
night.”
“I'd like to own him myself, if I were not beyond the
state of owning,” the old Indian said. “Crocker hunts his
prey which he cannot come up to. But another hunts
Crocker. You know?”
“I know.”
"And another follows the man who follows Crocker.
And a fourth hunter waits in ambush for the third. You
believe you have it figured out, but you have missed one of
the persons entirely. I wonder if you would pour me a little
of that, Fronsac, no more than an acorn-full. I no longer
have the equipment to handle it, but I love the taste. Ah,
White Lightning, that splits the skull and encourages the
body and the sentiments!”
“It is my pleasure,” said Fronsac. “I never liked to drink
alone. My little urchins on the rafts will drift away tonight,
and Witchy may be with them. Do you think the world is
safe from them?”
“I don't know, Fronsac. I wouldn't care if they roughed
up the old orb a little. They're an intriguing bunch. That
Helen had an argument with one of our ladies (and damned
if it doesn't seem that she used to be one of my wives)
about a thighbone. 'It's just barely fastened on,' Helen
insisted, 'you're allowed to take them if they're just barely
>
,
The Battle Joined That Could But Leave
133
fastened on.' 'No, no,' my old wife howled, 'it's part of me.
I've lost so many bones that I want to keep that one. Go
away, little girl. But I want to make an artifact out of it,'
Helen said, 'it's just the right size. Here, I'll give you a
buffalo thighbone in place of it.' She did, and I tell you that
my old wife hobbles around pretty grotesquely now with
that buffalo thighbone, and everybody laughs at her. We
laugh at things like that now. We haven't much else.”
There are those who say that Fulbert couldn't talk to the
old dead Indians in Misu Mound at all; that he was a
degenerate drunk who went up on the mountain and talked
to himself and had fantasies because he was a rummy.
But if you're going to call everybody a rummy who talks
to dead Indians you're going to defame a lot of very good
people.
After a while, Fulbert made a signal that only one of the
six Dulantys saw and interpreted. And Charles Dulanty
slipped off from the rest of them to play his hand.
Puca dramas differ in pace and climax from the dramas
of Earth people. In the high classic form, there is always a
scene (very near the end) where all the bloody stuff is
heaped together for the greater enjoyment and convenience
of all. It is extravagant and outré. It is both tragic and
comic in the tall burlesque of it. It thrills the liver and
entrails and heart of the Pucas. And to Earth people it
would seem rather crude and excessive.
Be you not offended! Through a miracle of circum-
stance, we now live for short moments through the outré
scene of a classic Puca drama. A suddenly hooded sun gave
a garish light for the scene. It is always so.
The next time that Crocker sat down to rest and sleep,
he was unaccountably chilly. He was on a bank above the
worst of the bogs, one impossible either to cross or to
circuit. Yet here the scent of the small boy led straight
ahead. He was under an old sycamore tree that had lost
most of its hide and showed only stark white branches.
He slept once and met Stutgard; he forced himself awake
barely in time to escape him. That man would have killed
him in his sleep.
One of the hounds, Bamabas, trailed away and left
134
The Reefs of Earth
Crocker for good. Dogs will abandon a disintegrating man
SO.
When Crocker slept again he met Marshall, lusting for a
Crocker-kill. Crocker waked in panic to avoid him. Each
time it became more difficult to wake up, and more
necessary to do so. Death might attend the sleeping for
only an extra second. The other three hounds trailed off,
and only the mastiffs were left. Crocker noticed for the first
time that his boots were not matched.
"Here I am, either two different men, or I have one foot
each of two different men,” he said. “I knew I was coming
apart, but I didn't imagine it would be like this.”
In his next sleep, Crocker saw the small boy who floated
over the bogs. He woke with extreme effort, and was
soaked in clammy sweat. But when awake he still saw the
boy. This caused him to doubt whether he was asleep or
awake, and this doubt remained with him for the short
scrap of his life that was left.
Crocker slept again and dreamed of Frank Dulanty. He
was even colder than he had been before. Then an unseen
hand came and wrapped a scarf around his neck.
“Thank you for your unintended kindness," Crocker
said. “There is more here than meets the eye or touches the
neck, but I cannot fathom it. I'd have frozen to death
without it.”
It fit snugly and smelled hempen and had not the feel of
an ordinary scarf. Crocker wakened into a shallower sleep
and knew that it was Frank Dulanty behind him. It was the
noose around his neck, and no scarf. The line of it went
over one of the bone-white branches of the sycamore.
“What do you intend to do, Dulanty?” Crocker asked
rationally without looking around.
“Kill you, and then find the children," Frank said as
evenly. “They'll have received the blood message by now,
and may have some thought of revenge. I must instruct
them to deal gently with the world. During my tour of
Earth, I have decided that perhaps we ourselves are a little
ruthless. I'll advise them to look for a broader way than I
have found. Now rouse yourself, Crocker, and walk down
into the bog. I'll leave you just enough slack for it.”
Book and Bell trailed off, and only Candle was left.
The Battle Joined That Could But Leave
135
“This is murder," Crocker said, “ironic as it seenus,
coming from me.
“No. Into the bog, I say, Crocker. The court that was to
sit today did not sit, and I have supplied its lack. The men
who will be afraid to testify in open court have already
testified privately to me. You killed Stutgard and, more
important, you killed my brother."
“No, not him. Marshall killed Henry. I only watched.”
“Marshall? I've missed part of this. It seemed too direct
and massive a thing for you to pull. How does Marshall
come to be killing people he hardly knows? It worries me
that I may have underestimated him in other ways. So, my
.
work is only half done when I kill you.”
Crocker was up to his loins in the bog. His anns
trembled, and his hands slipped on the rope.
“There's one thing you've overlooked, Dulanty," he said
thickly. “I can wake up and make you go away.
"It's worth a try, Crocker. Go ahead."
But Crocker couldn't. Frank tightened the rope for the
last time, and Crocker pulled himself up a little from the
bog on very weary arms.
9)
A lion can move more quietly than a jackal, especially
one who has just graduated into the role of local lion. He
can move more quietly than a hound, and soundless to an
intent man. Mandrake Marshall, the man underestimated
by Frank Dulanty, chewed on a stem of weed and looked
thoughtful.
“The show drags a little,” he said to himself. “We'd
better run the curtain down before the audience becomes
restive. I am the audience.'
Then his calmness exploded, and he became a madman
at the new opportunity.
Marshall hit Frank Dulanty a terrific blow on the back
of the head with his rifle butt. The blow was one of the
really colossal things. He may have killed Frank with the
one blow.
“I never felt strong against you as I did your brother,"
Marshall said as he looked down at Frank, calm and
satisfied again. That man turned madness on and off like a
tap. “It never seemed like you had as much of the beast in
136
The Reefs of Earth
you. Ah, but you're one of them too. You get the look
more when you're dead. You're a loose end, Frank. I
couldn't leave you lying around.”
The line had slipped from Frank's hand and whipped
like a snake over the sycamore limb. Every foot of it was
gobbled up by the fast-disappearing Crocker. Marshall
made no move to save his partner in crime, and Crocker
went down wide-eyed and frozen.
"You should have screamed, you devil,” Marshall
complained to the disappeared Crocker. “You cheated me
there."
“We'll just roll you down this bank, Dulanty,” Marshall
continued. "I liked to roll down banks when I was a little
boy. Things like this bring out the boy in me.”
He rolled Frank down the bank and into the bog,
pushing him out a ways into it as he sank.
"Hello, Candle,” Marshall greeted the last dog. “You're
a good animal and I meant to have you a long time ago.
You belong to me now. I'd like to have the boy too, but I'm
not sure I can swing that one. We'll see.”
The boy was shooting at Marshall from a distance and
running as he shot.
“The first thing I'd teach him would be not to fire blindly
while running across the country like that, not to fire
without aiming, and not to fire before coming into range,”
Marshall lectured himself. "He's the son of one of them.
Hey, the species does stand out on them when they're
angry! I doubt if I could own him like a dog, but it'd be fun
to kill the father and then take his pup. Like to raise that
Puca my way. They've a lot of juice in them. Admit it,
Mandrake, you were jealous that they had more animal in
them than you did.
“He should have two shots left, and he's going to save
them till he's in range. He's no fool.”
Charles Dulanty had learned, possibly in the direct way
that Puca leam things, possibly from Fulbert Fronsac, that
Crocker would be out hunting the wraith child Bad John
(whom he could never catch); that Frank Dulanty would be
hunting Crocker (but slowly, as to allow him to come to his
physical breakup first); and that another man would be
trailing Frank. Fulbert and Charles had set up the signal
>
The Battle Joined That Could But Leave
137
together, and Fulbert from his lookout was to wam when
Frank's hunter appeared,
What neither of them knew was how fast Marshall
moved. He came at a pace that was neither a stride nor a
trot, topping crest after crest with silent speed, killing
Frank before either
either waming could be raised or
counterattack launched. Charles had seen the end of
Crocker and of Frank. Now he was running in a fury, but
he thought coolly at the same time. He'd kill Marshall with
a little luck. It was his to do. He had become, at eight years
old, the patriarch of the Dulanty clan. It would never have
occurred to his cousin Peter to challenge him. The leader
moves naturally into leadership when the time comes.
"He's serious," Marshall said, half reading the thoughts
of the running boy. “And he knows what he's doing. He's a
hard target running through the reeds; but when he takes
the next crest I'll have him. The rifle's too heavy for him.
He's betting he can hit the ground in time when I level. It'd
be a good bet with any man but me. He doesn't know how
fast I can level."
Charles had half taken the crest. Watch! It's fast-like
three snakes striking at once! Marshall leveled, aimed, and
fired with one motion. It was a curious blast—like three
instantaneous shots in one. Check the bodies. See who's
down.
Charles had used his next to last shot just before he hit
the ground. It rang in his ears much louder than it should
have—with an authority that had no counterpart in the
recoil. It didn't feel like a good shot. But Marshall had
jerked upward curiously in the act of firing; and now he
was down. And he was dead.
Charles came forward cautiously, shaking his head and
scattering leaves and fronds. He had at first believed that
Marshall's shot had scotched him in the head; but it had
only split fragments from a small boulder and then rattled
into a small tree, showering Charles with various light
debris.
"I'm a better shot than I thought,” Charles said as he
sidled up and examined the last dead man. “A lot better. It
seemed like I hit him an instant before I pulled the trigger.
And the funniest thing about it is that he was hit by a thirty
2
138
The Reefs of Earth
long, from the way it tore into him, and I was shooting
shorts.”
Charles examined the body with great curiosity, having
never seen a dead adult of the Earth species before.
“Say, that tore into his head and mighty near exploded
there, and came out ten times as big as it went in. I wonder
if brains are really good for catfish bait, or was Helen just
jiving those boys the other day? If I had a scoop I'd
SCOOP
it full of them.
Charles made a pry from an old branch and rolled
Marshall over and over down the bank and into the bog.
And he watched the big man sink.
“It's going to be getting a little bit crowded in that bog,"
Charles said, "and there aren't any of them very friendly to
each other."
At the same time, and not thirty yards away, Phoebe
Jane Lanyard ejected a shell from her rifle. She was smiling
a quivering smile that turned inward at the comers, and
then inward again. Did you know that Indians have an
expression very like Pucas when they have just killed
someone? It's near the same look.
She wasn't free from bloodlust herself. She'd never liked
Marshall at all.
"Now I'll go home and get out the old car and go up to
Vinita,” she said to herself, “and shuck Witchy over the
wall of that booby-hatch after dark, and bring her to join
the children. Then they'll be gone.
»
a
19
The afternoon sun came out clear again. The aerach, the
outr scene of the classic Puca drama, was over with.
16
Or Altered World or Dead Dulanty
a
"We will cast off at moonrise, or at another rising a few
seconds later," Charles announced late that afternoon.
"See to all the battenings and lashings. It will be a long
voyage. Phoebe Jane says she will bring us some other
things in a boat just after dark. You, first and second mate
(that was Elizabeth and Peter, but Helen was navigator),
please make a detailed inspection and report to me on the
bridge if anything is amiss."
Charles was captain. He had matured in one afternoon.
Elizabeth and Peter and Helen were showier, but Charles
became the steady one. They acknowledged him.
“Won't we wait for Mama?” Helen asked. “Did I only
imagine that she would be with us when we left?”
“I think she will be with us, for a while," Charles said.
“Phoebe Jane says for us to cast off at moonrise. I believe
she knows of the other rising at about the same time, but
she doesn't know the name of it. So we will go at moonrise,
and Witchy will be with us at almost the same time."
They were all sure of that now. They knew many things
by illumination.
They had a pretty good time of it that afternoon,
celebrating all the accumulated deaths. They made happy
Bagarthach verses with the very blood dripping out of
them, and drank choc beer till they were all tipsy as a lilt of
larks.
And in a peculiar rite they now shed their Earth names
and assumed the Puca equivalents. This had to come of
themselves. The group was now of an age to devise
intuitively the names that were destined for them. Puca
children are always given nicknames first, or in the case of
the Puca of the Eisimirce (the Dispersal), native names of
the place. They must, when the time comes, guess their real
names, and they will do so if they are true Pucas. It is their
Epiphany, their opening out.
Elizabeth realized herself as Coisreacan-Dia.
139
140
The Reefs of Earth
Charles assumed Laidir.
Peter was translated literally into Carraig.
Dorothy naturally was Feirin-De.
Helen was rekindled as Lochrann.
John was made manifest as Dia-Ta-Caomh,
And Bad John, of course, was to be called Ionujn.
They all realized Bad John's name now, but where was
he himself?
“I think that Ionuin Bad John has gone too,” Elizabeth
said. “We haven't seen him for several hours.'
“I believe he's gone for good,” Carraig Peter said. So
they made another bloody Bagarthach verse to celebrate
the termination of Bad John as they had known him.
)
>
>
Just after dark, Phoebe Jane Lanyard came silently as a
breeze and provisioned them.
“Leave at moonrise," she told them again. “I will have
Witchy near, and she will join you as you move.” Then
Phoebe was gone.
“We should have a black sail," Lochrann Helen said.
“Then we would be invisible at night.”
Laidir Charles climbed the highest tree that overhung
the river and began his moon-vigil
. The rest of them waited
below, and everything was shipshape.
When Charles saw the moon rising—no, actually when
he saw a faint body considerably to the south of it rise at
near the same time—he dived from the top of the tree and
cut the black water. He swam effortlessly to the lle and
boarded it.
“Cast off!” he ordered. “Sound the ship’s hom. Damn
the noise, this is symbolic."
They unlashed from the trees and poled themselves into
the stream, with the Ile in the lead and the Sea Bear in tow.
They headed perfectly and took the current. Then, before
they were out of the region of perpetual fog around Misu
Mound, and just where the current drags in very near the
left bank, Witchy was onto the craft as weightless as a
ghost.
“We are together now for a while,” she said. “You have
a very long way to go, and I only a short one. I will tell you
a little if I can find the right words; but my head is in the
hockshop of this world, and I haven't the coin to redeem it.
a
Or Altered World or Dead Dulanty
141
“There is on this world a most peculiar and remarkable
ethic. The people of this world fail it by not taking it
literally enough. Ourselves, if we try it, will fail it by taking
it too literally. A cousin of mine did this. He was charmed
by this ethic, and he resolved to follow it. He did so for half
a day.
'If
your right hand offend you, hack it off,' said the
ethic. It wasn't two minutes till his right hand offended, and
he hacked it off, 'If your eye offend, pluck it out.' I tell you,
his eye offended every time he blinked. It went through the
whole alphabet of his members and body. He wasn't a bad
fellow, for a Puca, but offensive he was in the real sense.
He offended from the crine of his head to the metatarsus of
his foot, and he hacked off every offending part. I will spare
you the unglorious details. In two hours there was nothing
left of him but the torso, and that was pretty well hacked
up.
'If I'm going to Hell in a handbasket, it looks like I'm
in a pretty good shape to start,' my cousin said. “That's
enough for one day. If I feel better I may try it again
tomorrow.' I say it is a fine thing, but it was not given to us,
and they to whom it was given have not taken it. I am not
scoffing in this. We Pucas have so much going against us
that we can never afford the bad manners of scoffing.
“Ourselves, we live by a more primitive ethic. We do not
deny that it is primitive, but it is the only ethic that the
Giver has given us yet. We will live that primitive ethic all
the way. Be swift, and be sudden! That is our secret. You
can chop down those wiser and more powerful than
yourself while they are meting out their wisdom and power.
They are the many fat rats. We are the few shrews. Well,
let us be good at it since it's our role. I believe that the one
who gives the Parting Admonition is also supposed to
mention something about the responsibility attached to the
thing, but my mind begins to wander."
“Mama,” Lochrann Helen said, “Ionuin Bad John isn't
with us. He isn't on either of the rafts. Is he gone?”
"Oh, he's gone with his father Frank. With us, small
children are allowed to linger for a few years after they
have died; but it isn't the custom on Earth. He was looking
bad; I don't believe that the atmosphere here is very
nourishing; now he'll be all right.”
142
The Reefs of Earth
They were sliding down Green River in the slanting
darkness, and they found it pleasant. Earth has a beauty
even for the Pucas—at night, with the dog-elm and the
crooked-neck cedar trees giving their smell to the setting
and leaning out over the water, with the moon coming up
over the shaggy little river, and the night cicadas talking-
it is especially beautiful when seen through green eyes.
“Where will we go, Mama?” Lochrann Helen asked. (We
will gradually grow accustomed to the new names; it takes
a while.)
“Why, for a while you can go where the rivers go,”
Briochtog Witchy said. “The Green River flows into the
Arkansas, and the Arkansas flows into the Mississippi, the
biggest river in the world. All the other rivers run into it,
the Red, the Missouri, the Nile."
"No, Mama, not the Nile, that's in Egypt.” Lochrann
Helen said.
“Of course, dear. We lived up there one year. We used
to call it Little Egypt. The Nile rolls into the Mississippi
along about at Paducah, Kentucky. You'll find Cairo and
Thebes and Shawneetown and a lot of other Egyptian
places along there. I'm almost sure it's the Nile. If I'm
wrong you have to make allowances for me; I've been
officially classified as a filbert for a week now.
“You will have ten nights of moonlight to hatch your
thoughts, and all the days will be sunny while you travel. .
Please understand that you can go anywhere you want to in
this world. It all belongs to you now. I'd have loved such a
trip myself.”
“Won't you be with us?” Lochrann Helen asked.
"Oh no. The Earth Sickness has caught me,” Briochtog
Witchy said. “But it won't catch you. You were bom on
Earth and built up immunity early. Wasn't that clever of
you? I will die tonight.”
“That will be nice, Mama," Coisreacan-Dia Elizabeth
said. “It's fun to bury people at early dawn on a river bank,
and we'll have time to make up funny Bagarthach verses
about it beforehand. I wish I had a red dress for the
funeral. Mama, you look more and more like Aunt
Veronica."
“Old potato face and all,” Witchy Briochtog laughed. “I
know. This is how it should be. You know the banter line,
>
Or Altered World or Dead Dulanty
143
‘Do you really look like that, or you just kidding? Why,
I've been kidding ever since I came to Earth. We all have
been, to a degree. Let us all look like ourselves now and let
the world be damned. Wouldn't it be funny if we became a
fad and the World people tried to look like us?”
“Aunt Briochtog,” Peter Carraig said (for Witchy had
had her Puca name for longer than the children were old,
and they were now permitted to call her by it), “I can see
we're going to have quite a battle with it. Somebody better
tell us when it's time to take the gloves off and handle this
thing barehanded.”
“It's time now, Carraig. For years we studied custom
and tried to devise ways to live in accord with this World
without changing it too much. We used up Gracious
.
Understanding by the gallon and Patience by the long ton.
But when you're sick and tired you run out of patience.
This isn't just a personal thing; it is the condition that this
World imposes on us seeders. I was already mad at this
place when they killed my Henry. Forget it, forget it,'
someone might say, but one element of the Earth Sickness
is the inability to forget these trifles.
“There isn't any way to live in accord with this World as
it is, children. You will have to chance it here and there,
and sometimes you will have to excise elements that seem
important to Earth people. It's a stubbom and worthless
old animal the way it is. Break it..
“But your first idea of killing all the people, though it
was perhaps in the right direction, was like something little
children would think up. Now you will leave off being
children, save for a while in appearance. Kill them when
you feel the need of it, of course; but mostly you will
control and alter till you see if something cannot be made
of the place.
“There isn't going to be any real gentle way to do it,”
Laidir Charles said. “I've got some pretty good ideas,
though.”
“Remember, you must be, in a real sense, the Salt of
the Earth,” Briochtog Witchy admonished them.
“Boy, I bet this was an insipid place before we came
here," Lochrann Helen said. “If it weren't for us, I don't
see how we could stand it at all."
“Let the World take its chances with you!" Briochtog
1
144
The Reefs of Earth
Witchy cried. “We can protect it from you no longer. I
break the egg! I tum you loose! Oh, my own Dragons'
Seed!”
“I know that's an Earth phrase, mama,” Lochrann
Helen said, “but how did they know about us, that we
would come?"
“I guess they just had a sneaky premonition of it,”
Witchy laughed. “And there's another phrase they have—'a
plague of demons.' You aren't, but to them you will seem
so. There's a tagline in an old joke, 'Pardon me, I gotta go
die now.' Myself, I come to the joke literally.”
"It's all right, Mama, go ahead and do it. Don't give it
another thought,” Coisreacan-Dia Elizabeth said.
Six little pair of goblin eyes glowing green in the dark;
and a seventh older pair nictitated by death slumber to a
fainter green.
And opposed to them, only the defenseless World!
THE END
