ace
double
H-562604
R.A. LAFFERTY
SPACE
CHANTEY
ODOB
First Book Publication
THE ODYSSEY OF SPACE CAPTAIN ROADSTRUM
The Lay of Road-Storm from the ancient Chronicles
We give you here, Good Spheres and Cool-Boy
Conicals,
And perils pinnacled and parts impossible
And every word of it the sworn-on Gosipel.
Lend ear while things incredible we bring about
And Spacemen dead and deathless yet we sing
about:
And some were weak and wan, and some were strong
enough,
And some got home, but damn it took them long
enough!
RAPHAEL ALOYSIUS LAFFERTY was born in Iowa, moved to
Oklahoma when four years old, and has been there ever
since except for travel and four and one-half years in the
army. Now in his fifties, Lafferty describes himself as "a
correspondence school electrical engineer" who has worked
for electrical jobbers most of his life. He says, "I was a
heavy drinker till about eight years ago at which time I cut
down on it, beginning my writing attempts about the same
time to fill up a certain void." Since then he has published
scores of stories both in the science fiction magazines and
such journals as New Mexico Quarterly, Literary Review, etc.,
and has been reprinted with increasing frequency in best-of-
the-year anthologies.
R. A. LAFFERTY
SPACE
CHANTEY
ACE BOOKS, INC.
1120 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY. 10036
SPACE CHANTEY
Copyright ©, 1968, by R. A. Lafferty
An Ace Book. All Rights Reserved.
Cover and interior sketches by Vaughn Bode.
Also available from this author:
PAST MASTER (H-54/604)
PITY ABOUT EARTH
Copyright ©, 1968, by Emest Hill
Printed in U.S.A.
Hd
He
CHAPTER ONE
The Lay of Road-Storm from the ancient Chronicles
We give you here, Good Spheres and Cool-Boy Conicals,
And perils pinnacled and parts impossible
And every word of it the swortron Gosipel.
Lend eat while things incredible we bring about
And Spacemen dead and deathless yet we sing about:-
And some were weak and won, and some were strong
enough,
And some got home, but damn it took them long enough!
NEW SPACE CHANTEYS,
Living Tapes, Sykestown, A.A. 301
WILL THENE BE a mythology in the future, they used to ask,
after all has become science? Will high deeds be told in epic,
or only in computer code?
And after the questing spirit od gone into overdrive
during the early Space Decades, after the great Captains
had appeared, there did grow up a mythos through which
to view the deeds. This myth filter was necessary. The ship
logs could not tell it rightly nor could any flatfooted prose.
And the deeds were too bright to be viewed direct. They
could only be sung by a bard gone blind from viewing
suns that were suns,
5
Here trumpets blare. Here the high kerigma of heralds
rises in silvery gibberish. Here it begins.
The war was finished. It had lasted ten equivalent years
and taken ten million lives. Thus it was neither of long
duration nor of serious attrition. It hadn't any great signi-
ficance; it was not intended to have. It did not prove a
point, since all points had long ago been proved. What it
did, perhaps, was to emphasize an aspect, sharpen a con-
cept, underline a trend.
On the whole it was a successful operation. Economically
and ecologically it was of healthy effect, and who should
grumble?
And, after wars, men go home. No, no, men start for
home. It's not the same.
There were six of them there, Captains of homets, those
Small craft that could go anywhere, six of them mustered
out with their crews and with travel orders optional. And
there wasn't an ordinary man among them. They were six
full crews of the saltiest, most sulfurous men who could
be combed out of the skies,
Roadstrum, one of the Captains, was as plain a man as
ever lived, and now he spoke out plainly:
"I would say let us go directly home. We were boys when
this began, and we are not boys now. We should go home,
but I could be talked into something else.
“Dammit, I said I could be talked into something elsel"
"A day or two on Lotophage might be worth it,” said
Captain Puckett. "We'll never be this close to it again and
there must be something behind all those stories of the soft
life there. They say it is Fiddler's Green and Theleme
rolled together. They say that it may be Maybe Jones City
itself. If we don't like it we can leave at any time.
."
"The Captains Roadstrun and Puckett are from World,
are you not?" Captain Dempster asked. "In that case it is
not at all in your direction home.”
"We are from World,” said Roadstrum, "and we know
the direction home.”
“Lotophage is supposito be a bums' world,” said Demp-
ster, "and if you stay there long enough you turn into a bum."
"If you're afraid of it we'll mark you off,” said Captain
Silkey, and perhaps you have less a way to go to be a bum
than we others. But I see that you are afraid."
Silkey knew how to put the needle into Dempster. The
only thing that Dempster was afraid of was being called
afraid.
6
9
"Look at it this way,” said Captain Kitterman. "We can't
get flight clearance to World or to anything in that Am for
three days, but we can go to Lotophage immediately.
We can spend an equivalent day there, we can spend two,
and still be home without loss of time. I suggest that we do
it."
"For myself," said the sixth Captain, "it is imperative
that I get home. There may bave been changes there.
My wife is faithful within limits, but I do not lonow whether
ten years transcends those limits. My children should have
reached an interesting age. Besides, nobody ever stops on
Lotophage for only a day or two."
"What think you, Crewmen?' Roadstrum asked loudly
of the splendid array. These men were the salt of the skies,
the one out of ten who had determinedly stayed alive
through the whole war, very often hurt, absolutely refusing
to be killed. Never had there been so many great fine
men assembled. They were the tall ones.
"Td give the very ears off my head to go to Lotophage
and enjoy it," said Crewman Birdsong, "but the ears on
my head and other shapeless things about me will be the
obstruction. They have a regulation on Lotophage, you
know; only beautiful persons are allowed the enjoyments."
"They bend the regulation," said Captain Silkey. “They
"
use the wide idea of beauty. All the fine surging things
they count beautiful, even though they be a little rough in
texture. They don't bar one man in a thousand."
"I'm the man in a thousand in that,” said Birdsong, but 11
go; I'll try it. There's no world rd visit so gladly.”
They put it to the vote of their crews. Most of the men
were for the side trip to Lotophage, the pleasure planet.
Only enough men for one homet crew wanted to go home
directly. The sixth Captain (he shall be nameless, he shall
be nameless forever) assembled the cravens and they went
to their ready barracks to wait for flight clearance home.
The other five crews tumbled into their hornets to go to
Lotophage.
"I have shucked a skin like a yearly snake,” said Captain
Roadstrum. "I'm an onion and or, outer layer is sluffed off
me, that of Young Soldier the First Time. But I be bigger
and ranker for losing the layer. All who go home in the
wrong direction, we fly!"
a
Where fiddlers scree'd and Rabelaistans loped, it was,
And Maybe Jones had walked the streets and hoped it was.
So glad a land, you'd never find a grouser there.
7
They said a man could really throw a rouser therel
Ah well, 'twas good enough for Lotophagians,
But how about the horny hopping shaggy uns?
How turned the bright-eyed crew to sleepy gooney guys?
How have a high old night with afternooney guys?
Lotophage was beautiful at planet-fall, subdued gold,
afternoon color. Roadstrum, who captained the lead hornet,
intended to take the planet from moming side as he always
did, but somehow he failed. He came down in an aftemoon
world. Then remembered that it was always afternoon on
Lotophage.
You could have shipped home whole boat-loads of sugar
from the sweetness of their welcome. These people really
made you feel wanted. They were even kind with Crewmen
Birdsong and Fairfeather when they took them into custody.
"It is that only beautiful people are allowed at large
bere,” the Lotophagians told these unfortunates. “We bend
a point, we break a point, but you two are beyond the
point entirely. It's into the dungeons below the light that the
two of you go."
"But look at Captain Roadstrum with that broken nose
on him," Crewman Birdsong protested angrily.
"We bend a point there,” said a Lotophagian. “What's
a broken nose? He's a beautiful man withall.”
a
“Look at Captain Puckett with a muzzle on him like a
coon,” howled Crewman Fairfeather with much heat.
"We break a point there," said the Lotophagian. “Take
him from the rear, or in no more than one-eighth profile.
Is he not beautiful? But we cannot in heart say the same
thing about you. It's the dungeon for you two.”
"For how long?"
"Until you die. Or until we need the room for two more
uglier than yourselves, which is not likely. You two just
fill it up."
"Sorry, boys,” said Captain Roadstrum. "Sorry, boys,"
said Captain Puckett 20d Dempster and Silkey and Kitterman.
And the Captains and the crewsen went about the business
of enjoying Lotophage.
As with all low-gravity planets there was a lassitude about
everything. The indolence was reflected even in the subtropi-
cal flora. And no other life but the lazy one would have been
possible there, due to the thin atmosphere. It was because
of this that one could get high there so quickly. The air
was almost entirely oxygen with no nitrogen filler, but it
8
n
n
a
was still very thin. But for those who love the lazy life,
it was automatically induced.
Most flopped down where they were without even going
to the nearest building. Why go further? Everything was
available everywhere. They fell center-first into the slothful
life. They slept hugely. It was hours later before any of them
came to awareness again. Then they reclined Roman-
fashion on the grass, and the sod rose and formed into con-
tours to accomodate them.
"We used to lie on the roof at home when I was a boy
and dream of this,” said Cowper, one of Dempster's crewmen.
"We'd dream how we would live on an island or planet,
and the bananas would fall off the trees beside us. The
coconuts would drop with a hole already in them for drinking;
and after they were drained they would fall apart for eating.
There would be a waterfall that turned a paddle-wheel that
worked a music box, and you had only to whistle the key
notes and it would take up any tune you wanted to hear.
There would be cigarette vines dangling just above you,
and you could snap one off and it would be already lit when
you snapped it.
"It was big turtles, as I remember the daydream, who were
taught to walk by with varieties of food on their backs.
It was monkeys who were taught to prepare these foods."
“Ah well,” said Captain Roadstrum, “when we travel we
find how greatly our boyhood dreams are outstripped by
reality."
Roadstrum had a four-foot-long pseudo-banyan fruit, actu-
ally a giant banana. He had been eating on it for many
hours. He had a jug of rum-mix which he sucked with an
attachment. The mix was under slight pressure so that he
didn't have to suck very hard. At his side was a control
panel of great selectivity. The invisible speaker, heard only
by himself, would give him music or song, news or comment,
drama and weird humor tales, gem-like repartee, or dirty
stories.
He could squeeze a bulb in his hand and he would be
flopped over into the warm water of the ocean pool where
he could roll and float and dive. He could squeeze the
bulb again and he would be transported back onto the
grass by an ingenious lift. It was handy, and it was easy
on the body.
In only one case did the panel fail him in information.
That was when he asked it, “What day is this?"
"That answer we cannot give," the panel said. “It is ruled
that, if you will not rise and see, it really does not matter
9
>
a
to you. Besides, here there are not days. Here it is always
afternoon."
The only clock available to Roadstrum without rising was
the whisker clock. He felt by his beard that many days had
gone by. He did not want too many days to have gone by.
"Can you shave me?" he asked the panel. “Oh, sure," and
the panel did it that quick. And this set the clock back to
the beginning.
It was an easy life on Lotophage, and there was a whisper
about the houris. The houris were among the things supposed
to make the time pass so quickly on Lotophage. In particular
Roadstrum had heard the whisper of an houri named Mar-
garet, and now he rose to find her.
He stopped only to inquire of the health of crewman
Sortel. Sorrel, one of Puckett's crewmen, had thus far been
their only casualty. He had put his jaw out of place while
yawning. He seemed all right now but he would take it
easy for a while.
Generally an houri would come on signal, even a thought
signal, and swoop a man up in her anns and carry him off
to pleasure. Roadstrum, however, being unaccountably en-
ergetic, was already on his feet when Margaret came to his
unvoiced signal. He suggested that they go to the Sleepy
Sailor a full hundred feet across the lawn.
Margaret offered to carry him on her twinkling shoulders,
but Roadstrum was a bundle of energy even on this soft
world and he walked on his own two feet.
In the barroom of the Sleepy Sailor there were many patrons
sleeping or lounging on couches. But there were others of
more hardy breed who sat bolt upright ("What's that mean,
anyhow" asked Margaret; "It means downright upright,
said Roadstrum), and even some who stood with toe on rail.
Some of the patrons were familiar to Roadstrumn. There was
Maybe Jones himself.
“Is this the place, Maybe?" Roadstrum asked him.
“No it is not," said Maybe, “though it fools me for a
"
while every time I come. Ill stay here a while till I get a tip
on a likelier place. This is very like the Place Itself as it is
in the early afternoon, when things are beginning to ristle
and make starting noises. But it never blossoms out as does
the place; it never really gets into it. 'Things will start
hopping along about sundown,' I always say, but here there
isn't any sundown. "
“I have heard about a place,” said Roadstrum, "if you
have ten thousand Chancels d'or for the tip.”
“Always, always,” said Maybe Jones, who always paid well
for tips that might lead him to the Place Itself. “Here it is.
10
any other
Now if you will mark down the rough coordinates here and
whisper me a brief description of it I will be off to see.
And Roadstrum gave it to him.
"I know a place that might be the place, Maybe,” Margaret
the houri said.
"Margaret, Margaret," said Maybe Jones, "you have given
me ten thousand wrong leads, and yet I believe you could
give me the right lead if you wished." And Maybe Jones
was gone. He traveled forever looking for the lost pleasure
place, and spacemen had begun to call it Maybe Jones City.
"Everybody loves it here," said Margaret the houri. “On
Lotophage the law does not restrict. Elsewhere many things
are illegal, as are we ourselves. We are forbidden to live
anywhere else, and the penalty for disobeying that law
is death. Where does that leave you if you happen to be
inmortal
“I have heard about you houris," said Roadstrum, but
the stories are confusing. It is said that you are older than
people and that you will live forever.”
"I sure hope so. I wouldn't want it
way:
But we change. I remember when I used to call myself
Dolores and wore a rose in my hair and carried on like
that. I remember when I was Debra and had a lot of style.
I remember once when I was a Frenchie. Boy, it sure is
fun being a Frenchiel But I don't remember very far
back, only a couple of years. It seems like I always did
have a lot of boyfriends."
"They say that you are timeless, which I do not under-
stand," said Roadstrum.
" 'He moves a mighty turban on the timeless houri's knees,'
as the poet says. I don't understand it either, Roadstrum,
but you use a timeless device on your own ships when you
make the big instant jumps. Who needs shipsi
Roadstrum sat on the timeless houri's knees and found
it pleasant.
"The report is that you are completely immoral,” he said.
"Shouldn't wonder if I am," Margaret answered.
"That you are not bom, do not generate, and never die."
"No, I don't remember ever doing any of those things.
"In Earth legend, it is said that you are older than Eve."
"You don't understand women, Roadstrim. Never tell one
that she is older than Eve. No, no, she was twenty-one years
old when she was bom; and I'm not one to whisper such
things, but it wasn't a normal birth. I'm eternally nineteen.
Sure, I remember her. She was the first of those fat house-
cats."
11
n
n
a
"You have always had a bad name among good people,”
said Roadstrum.
"It's those fat house-cats who give us a bad name.
I don't care for them either."
"It is even said that you do not live at all, that you are
only a tall story that wandering men tell."
"There are worse places to live than in tall stories,” said
Margaret. “But you are in them yourself, Roadstrun, in
all the jokes and stories of the shaggy-people cycles."
"Margaret, it is all wonderfully pleasant on Lotophage,
but does it not seem as if they forgot to put the salt in?"
"You can add as much salt as you wish, mighty Road-
strum, but the water will not boil as quickly."
"What, Margaret?"
"To boil a lobster, one takes first a lobster-
A Lotophagian citizen came in.
"The men who have died, mighty Roadstrum, how do you
want them disposed of?"
“Died? How many of our men died here?"
"Only a dozen or so. You'd be proud of them, such happy
lazy smiles on their faces when they went!"
"Well, do they bury here, or bum?"
"Oh no, neither. We use. One does not bury nor burn the
essence of ecstasy. They provide the distillation of all
pleasure. Those bar-snacks that you eat so avidly, are they
not fine?""
"They are fine,” said Roadstrum. “I wondered what they
are."
.
"From men off the packet ship The Yellow Duxart," said
the Lotophagian. "Those men really ate and drank and rois-
tered while they were here, day and night, I mean deep into
the afternoon. They stuffed themselves and they spread
themselves. They built themselves up while they were tear-
ing themselves down. When they finally gave out there was
nothing left of them but bellies and nerves. It's the jangled
nerves, the fevered psychic leavings imbedded in the sweet
fat that gives the particular flavor."
"The taste is powerful and tantalizing," said Roadstrum,
but the origin leaves a rameless doubt in me.”
"-to boil a lobster, one takes first a lobster,” said Mar-
garet.
“Your own men should have an even more unique flavor,"
said the Lotophagian. "We will call the product 'Lazy Man
Ectasy Chips.' Give the word and we will have some of
them for you quite shortly.”
“All right,” said Roadstrum, "go ahead. I don't know why
12
1
1)
1
a
I
gave it a second thought but there are a crowd of second
thoughts hovering over my shoulder this afternoon.'
"_and one puts it in a bucket of cold water," said Mar-
garet. "Then one very very slowly brings it to a boil-"
A little shabby man was singing Show Me The Way To
Go Home, an ancient folk melody.
"What are you called?" Roadstrum asked him.
“John Profundus Vagabundus,” said the little man. “Deep
John the Vagabon'. I'm the original old-time hobo. I've been
wandering these thousands of years and I can't get home.
I just can't make it."
"Why can you not?" Roadstrum asked him. “You are
from World, according to your speech, and we go to World.
We will take you when we go.”
"But you will not go,” said Deep John. "And if you do,
I cannot go with you unless you compel me to. I have passed
the last possible moment here and I am not able to leave."
"Why should you want to, Vagabond? Is this not the end
of the road that every vagabond has looked for? It is the
world of every complete pleasure without pain. And they
are so glad to have us here. See, they have already made
plaque 'Great Roadstrum loused around here,' and they
have set it into my favorite spot at the bar. What other
place so welcomes visitors? This is Fiddler's Green, this
is Theleme, it is the land of the Lotus Eaters, it is Maybe
Jones City-(no, belay that last; Maybe says he isn't sure
that it is)-it is Utopia, it is Hy-Brasail, it is the Hesperides.
It is the end of every road."
"It's the end of the road, all right,” the hobo said, “but
I didn't want it to end. That's Fiddler screeing on his
instrument in the next room, but he says he doesn't believe
that this is the Green at all. And Frankie-Boy is in there
too. He eats and drinks, and he carries on as even a red-nosed
priest should not; he talks philosophy and he tells those
whoppers; but he says that he begins to doubt that this
is Theleme, after all."
“IV just have a couple of words with those fellows and
convince them again how wonderful it is,” said Roadstrum.
Crewmen Crabgrass and Oldfellow and Bramble came in-
to the Sleepy Sailor. Bramble blew a note on a pitch pipe and
then he recited:
a
1
All lusty liquor with a crystal cask for tt,
Whatever wished one only has to ask for it.
Tall pleasures piled in infinite variety,
13
Raw rolling gluttony without satiety:
And under sheen than all things else is awesomer
A golden worm that gnows and gnaws and gnaws some more.
D
"Whence the doggerel, good Bramble?" Roadstrum asked.
"It's a popular epic composing itself these days,” said
Bramble. “It's called the Lay of Road-Storm, and it's about
yourself."
"I understand now,” said Roadstrum; "certain low fellows
have been making cracks about the 'lay of Roadstrum' every
time I set my hands seriously upon a woman here. But what
is the 'golden worm' bit?”
"It's the way we feel,” the crewmen shouted. “The golden
worm is gnawing at our entrails. There is too much of it
here, and it doesn't move along at a seemly pace. Captain
Roadstrum, we are tired of lying around and going on little
benders and jazzing these little girls here. We want to go
on big benders. We want to find the big girls."
"What's to stop you, good men?" Roadstrum asked them.
"It seems that everything is available here. It surely is here
in the Sleepy Sailor. Can you think of any pleasure not to be
found here?"
“No, we can't, Captain," said Crewman Crabgrass, "and
it bugs us. How do we know this is everything, just because
we can't think of anything else? We can't even get into places
like Shanghai Sue's of the After Dark Club of the Haystack
or the Rowdy-Dow. They all have signs on them, “Open
at twenty-one o'clock. '
"There is surely plenty to do till then,” said Roadstrum.
"Till then? Captain Roadstrum, there isn't any twenty-one
o'clock here. It's always afternoon."
"Oh, those are only false fronts and signs that some of the
boys from the tramp ship Muley Cow put up for fun,
said Deep John the hobo. "They sure were good fellows
from the Cow. I can taste them yet.
“False fronts or not,” said Crewman Oldfellow, "they've
sowed the seeds of doubt in us. If we sink back into it again
now we'll be like the man who was drowning and didn't care.
"Good thing he didn't," said Roadstrum "or he'd have
worried himself to death.”
"-passed the last possible moment,” said Deep John the
Vagabond
4-heat the water very very slowly,” said Margaret, "and
the lobster will not stir till he is irrevocably boiled.”
"Get your hot ‘Lazy Man Ecstasy Chips, called the Loto-
phagian coming in with a great basket of them. They all
14
.
a
began to eat great gobs of them, and they were the finest
ecstasy chips anyone ever ate.
"These in particular,” said Crewman Oldfellow. “I never
in my life ate anything with so fine a flavor. I wish that
Crewman Bigbender were here to taste them. Somehow
they remind me of him.”
“Let me see the tag on that bunch," said the Lotophagian,
"Ah yes, they are Crewmen Bigbender.”
They ate variously. It was all good. They drank. It was
very good. They dozed. It was perfect.
"I don't care if I never wake up,” Roadstrum murmured
as he drifted under.
"-passed the last possible moment- breathed Deep
John the hobo.
"They are like all the others," said Margaret the hourl.
"Why did I think they might be different? I wanted to go
back to World with them. I used to have a lot of fun
on World. I'll wait me the centuries yet, and I'll yet find
a man able to leave here after he comes. But he'll have to
be a man in a million."
"I am a man in a million,” said Roadstrum out of his
shallow sleep.
"It is too late,” said Deep John. "On the tomorrow we will
eat ‘Mighty Roadstrum Ecstasy Chips' and I'm sure they will
have a mighty flavor. But I want to go home.
"I have the feeling that my life is in great danger," Road-
strum croaked nervously in his thin sleep.
"Never in your life will you be in such danger as you are
at this moment,” said Deep John. "You go under now and
you can never come up again. And you have gone under.'
"I never trusted a one-sided coin," Roadstrum mumbled
in his sleep. “I never trusted a too-easy pleasure."
Roadstrum reared up suddenly like a great bear coming out
of hiberation on Saint Casimir's Day.
“I have to go home at once," he said ponderously.
"They all say that but none of them do,” Margaret told
him.
"I am in great danger,” said Roadstrun.
"Of course you are,” said Deep John. "If you live through
this, you will be in other dangers where your life is worth
nothing; you will be in jams that will scare the very hair off
your head. But you will never be in such danger as you are
now here on Lotophage."
Bellowing like a bull, Roadstrum, the one man in a million,
ran out of the Sleepy Sailor and began to kick the men awake.
Most of them fought to get back to sleep or to death. Some
of them really wished to leave Lotophage, and they said
15
n
so with great sorrow but with no hope. And some of them
tumed over on their faces and hung on, swearing that
nothing could ever tear them away from this soft world.
There were handles in the grass provided for hanging on.
Lotophage was a jealous world and did not give up her
victims willingly. Some of these men had befouled them-
selves, being unwilling to stir for anything at all, even to
give their panels instructions to care for them.
Roadstrum rushed to the dungeon. "I'll get those two if
I have to smash the place,” he swore. "They, at least, will
not be in love with it here. They will help me with the others.
He went to the dungeon and (thing beyond believing)
Crewmen Birdsong and Fairfeather had just been released.
Two men even uglier than they had amived on Lotophage,
and the hornet men were released to make room for them.
Two men uglier than Birdsong and Fairfeather? Are you
sure? That is what the authorities on Lotophage decided.
Two men from the Smiling Skink were put in the dungeon
in place of Birdsong and Fairfeather, and they are still
there.
In a frenzy now, Roadstrun fired up two of the homet
ships. He got Captain Puckett onto his feet and aware of
the great danger of remaining. He promised to take Margaret
back to World, where she had not been for several thous-
and years. He called to Deep John the Vagabond to come
along if he was coming.
Roadstrum and Puckett and Birdsong and Fairfeather,
Margaret and Deep John, jerked up those men who clung
to the grass less tightly. They canied them, sniffling and
sobbing, to the homet crafts.
They enskied, they were in free space, and the most terri-
ble of all dangers was behind them.
On Lotophage, as they left it, it was still afternoon of the
same day and not perceptibly later than when they had
arrived.
16
to
CHAPTER TWO
One needs for picture of the Laestrygonians
Al hump-backed cuss-words and vile polyphonions.
"We'll cry a warning here though we be hung for itſ”
The fact is, not a crewmon had the tongue for it.
Those boys are rough, nor steel nor steinn can stay with them;
You'd better have viscéral blood to play with them.
That human meat and mind should ever rout the things!
It scares us silly just to think about the things.
We trim to decent measure these giganticals
And couch the tale in shaggy-people canticles.
Ibid
BOTH HORNETS were near inoperative. Somehow they had
never shaken off the lassitude they had acquired on Loto-
phage, and they had been slugah for the whole trip since.
Puckett's homet had to come down for an overhaul, and that
of Roadstrum was nearly as bad.
"A planet, a planet,” Puckett hollered over the communica-
tor. “Find us a planet quickly, Roadstrum."
“The only one we can possibly make is Lamos," Roadstrum
called to him.
“Lamos of the Laestrygons? But that's a primitive world.
There will be no facilities for overhaul there. Pick another.
17
"I can't, Puckett. My craft won't hold, and you say yours
is worse. Make ready for it. Do you still have your psych
library and your tapes?"
"Oh bell no. We pitched them out long ago. Is there
a people on this world? Is there a language?"
"Puckett, there's information here that I don't trust. A lot
of these things were filled in by jokers for the fun of it,
figuring nobody would ever get to such a world anyhow.
The inhabitants are giant-like and primitive, it says, believed
to be a species of Groll's Trolls."
"We've tangled with those big fellows before. They
don't worry me
"These are much bigger than ordinary, it says. They
worry me a little. But their language, and this is the joker
part of it, is given as something between Old Norse and
Icelandic of Earth. How would primitive Troll people have
Earth languages? And how such odd ones?”
"Try it, Roadstrum, try it, since you have psych tapes.
We've at least fifteen minutes before our hard or easy
crash. That's time enough for your men to leam any subject
by psych. We shouldn't have pitched ours out, but we have
a Norwegian on craft, Oldfellow. Did you know he was
a square-head? We'll plug him into the brain-buster and
then all plug in on him. Maybe modern Norwegian will
bring us close enough. It's something to pass the last fifteen
minutes and keep the men from getting nervous. It's all a
joke anyhow. And we already know six basic dialects of
the Grolls Trolls language. We'll probably encounter some
variations of them here."
They came down on Lamos with their retrogrades shrieking.
It was a heavy-gravity planet and their power was almost
completely shot.
“We'd never make it if it wasn't all downhill," Roadstrum
complained. “All right, men, into your pumpkin-picking
cradles! We're going to hit hard!"
Ah, it was a hard crash for both the hornets. It knocked
everybody out, cracked ribs and clavicles, ruptured lungs
and diaphragms, and filled everybody with blood in mouth,
nose, and ear. It was sucating pain riding up through
their unconsciousness, quite a long unconsciousness.
“I could open one eye if I could raise a hand to it to
uncake the blood,” Roadstrum groaned much later. “I could
raise one hand if I could find the other hand to raise it with.
I could stand on my feet if I weren't broken in the middle
and hinder parts and if I hadn't suddenly doubled in weight.
But all these things I will do yet. I am the mighty Roadstrum
and I will perform the heroic feat of sitting up and prying
18
my eyes open, and even of raising my voice in exhortation.
He did so. He rose, not only to a sitting position, but
onto his feet indeed. And he howled to his men to arise
and encounter and defend. He got CrewIDen Fairfeather
and Birdsong up. He got the great Captain Puckett up and
moving. He got the valiant Di Prima and Boniface, and
Bramble and Crabgrass and Eseldon up and going, and the
others had begin to stir. They had been hurt before often, and
they knew how to rise above it.
They were out of their crafts. They were on a rock-strewn
scarp with a little short sedge growing out of it. They were
under a green-gray sky on a very heavy world, and they
were surrounded by grinning giants or ogres, the largest
sort of Groll's Trolls ever seen.
Listen, none of the men would head up to the navels of
any of these creatures, and the men from the homets were
all fine tall men. These giants were splayfooted and thick
as tree-trunks. They had shoulders two meters wide, humps
on the back of their forward necks like bull humps, and
heads that were howlingly huge. The ears on them were
like nine-liter jugs, and their mouths were wider than their
wide faces in defiance of all rules.
Margaret the houri was bubbling around, unabashed and
unhurt, and was talking at a great rate to the grinning giants.
And the language they were using was something between
Old Norse and Icelandic of Earth. There wouldn't be much
difficulty there then, but it was surely a peculiar business.
"I am Bjorn,” said the leader of the Trolls in a voice that
sounded as though he had great boulders grinding around
in his gizzard. "The others of us have names which you may
leam if you live long enough into this day. Come to break-
fast now. Boys, you really better eat a big breakfastl You're
going to need it.
“No, no," Roadstrum protested. “We must see to our
crafts first. We must assess the damage and the possibility
of repair. And then we have our own rations to serve us
until we have made a study of the produce here."
"Little boy-men, you'd better forget about your crafts or
boats or globes,” Bjom told them. "My little boy will fix
your boats for you. He's mechanically inclined. And you had
'
better forget your rations. If they produce such puny types
as you they will not serve you for this day. We look at you.
We look at us. We laugh. Come eat what we eat. You will
have to eat the big breakfast of our sort because you are
going to fight the big fight afterwards and we want you to
be up for it."
"Wait, Bjom," Roadstrum howled. “Don't let that big
19
2
fellow into the hornet craft with those seven big stone ham-
mers. He'll smash things. He'll ruin us forever. I'll just stop
htm"
But Roadstrum's feet were spinning in the air and Bjorn
was holding him high and clear by the scruff of his neck.
"There is no big fellow going into your craft, good Road-
strum,” Bjorn assured him. “That is my little boy Hondstarfer.
I told you that he is mechanically inclined. He will fix
whatever is wrong with your boats. In the meanwhile you
will eat the big breakfast of your lives and then you will
fight the big fight to your deaths."
“But he'll break up all the instrumentation with those big
stone hammers," Roadstrum protested again, still flailing his
feet in the air.
"Have you not trust in mepoo the boy Hondstarfer called
"
as he entered the first of the homets. "Have you not noticed?
One of my stone hammers has buckskin laced over it. I use
that for the fine work. Do not worry, I will fix your boats,
or else I will fail to fix them. This is the high logic. I am the
best and only mechanic on Valhal, which is called Lamos
by the ignorant."
A boy? He must have been a meter taller than big Road-
strum.
"Somebody stop that young fooll" Roadstrum called, still
beating the air in the grasp of Bjom. "If he meddles with
the craft we're stuck here forever. Kill him or something,
but stop him anyhowl"
"He who kills before breakfast will have bad luck all
the forenoon,” Bjom gave them the proverb. “I would take
it unfavorably if anyone killed him. He is my little boy
and
you
will let him do what he wants. I am sure he will
fix your boats. Nobody can chip stone or dress leather so
finely as my boy; nobody can fit a balk or a beam so well.
He is the best mechanic anywhere. And call him not a
fool! You think we have no feelings just because we are
slobs? Here comes the cars. Now we will go to eat the big
breakfast. Try to play the men at the bord whether or
not you will be able to play it in the field.”
Here come the cars, Bjon had said. Cars? What were
those things sliding in through the low sky, skimming in not
ten meters above the land, silently and flatly and raggedly?
Wait a minute now. It is camouflage of some sort. They can-
not be big flat slabs of stone sliding about in the air with giant
Trolls standing on them. But they sure did look like big
slabs of stone, some of them twenty meters in diameter, some
of them only a tenth as wide. There were ten-man and five-
man and one-man slabs sliding along flatly above the ground.
20
2
2)
And when they came down they still looked like stone slabs,
and they were.
Well, how do stone slabs as heavy as these (and the
smallest of them were so heavy that twelve men could not
budge them at all on the ground) cruise about above the
land with no mechanism wbatsoever.
"Crewman Bramble, bow is that possible?" Captain Road-
strum asked.
"It isn't. Our wits are scrambled, our eyes fail us; it is not
possible at all."
"I see that you have never encountered a science as ad-
vanced as ours," the boy Hondstarfer said as he came out
of one of the homels to enlighten them. “This is so far be-
yond you that I am not sure I can explain it to you. You your-
selves are caught in the electromagnetic dead-end, so you
are hardly able to imagine a thing like this and you doubt
your eyes. We are fortunate. We have no surface metal
on our world, or perhaps we would have been caught in the
same dead-end. Is this not much neater? Our cars operate
naturally on the static-repulsion principle.”
"How can that be?" asked Crewman Bramble, who knew
the theory of everything. "The static-repulsion principle can
move nothing heavier than feathers."
'What do you use for feathers on World?" the boy Hond-
starfer asked in amazement. "Here it will move stone slabs
of a pretty good size, and it would move mountains if they
weren't rooted so deeply into the land. This is a dry world
and one without metals in its surface. It is mostly of pure
flint. So we take slabs of chert or impure flint from the
mountains, and there is sufficient static-repulsion between
the slabs and the surface flint to enable the slabs to glide
and fly."
"It is impossible,” said Crewman Bramble.
"Shall I tell you the supreme scientific law of the universes?"
"
Hondstarfer asked. “Hold onto your ears or they may fall
off at the magnitude of the disclosure. It is all scientific
laws crushed into one. Like charges repel. Think about it.”
"Where do the slabs get their charges, Hondstarfer?"
"I don't know.”
"Why don't all the slabs fly about all the time?"
"I don't know."
“Why do they fly so lightly in the air and then sink so
heavily to the ground?”
"I don't know.”
“Will it work for anything besides flint and chert?"
"I don't know. There isn't anything else on our world."
"Well, how do you steer the things?”
21
"It's all in the way you rub your feet on them. But you
will have to put felt boots over those metaled things you're
wearing. Here, the women come with small children's boots
for you to slip on. Anything else would burden you so that
you couldn't move.
Women? Dame elephants rather. They were very large,
though not so large as their men-folks, and broad and almost
shapeless. They were smiling and mysterious and ineffably
wild, unbeautiful, ogresses, giantesses. But Crewmen Fair-
feather and Birdsong and others went for them. Being some-
what grosser in their choices than the other crewmen, they
were completely taken by these great creatures.
"I bave never been so humiliated in my life” said Margaret
the houri. “The giants all say, 'Go away, little girl, go away
to your mother. Eat the big breakfast and someday you will
grow up to be a real woman.' Real woman) Fellows, if there
was ever tenth-rate competition, this is it. And I can't com-
pete."
You go now with my father and the others," the boy
Hondstarfer said, “to eat the big breakfast and then to die
the big death. And I go to get a bigger stone hammer and
still a bigger one. It is fun to work on your flying boats.
There are so many things in them that I will bave to change
or throw out completely. It is no wonder that they break
down, they are so primitive."
"Come, come, little boy-men," big Bjorn called. “Mount
on the two stone slabs set aside for you there and come
to the breakfast hall. Follow us. Oh, you must all put on
the little felt boots over your metaled ones. Were you not
told? We go now. You follow."
"How do you get these blimy things off the ground?” stone
slab Captains Roadstrum and Puckett called out to the
giants after they had assembled their men on the slabs.
"Rub your feet, little boy-men, rub your feetl” laughed
Bjorn and Hross and Hjortun and Fjall and Kubbur and all
those shaggy giants. "Were there ever such dolts? How
do you get your own flying boats off the ground? Rub your
feet, little things, rub your feet."
The Captains and creumen rubbed their feet on the big
chert slabs, drew hot sparks; and then the slabs jolted and
rose from the ground and glided crazily along. They learned
the tricks of steering and gaining height quickly. These were
really easy vehicles to operate,
And now they had the impression of great height when
they were no more than five hundred meters in the air, an
impression that they never had in the hornets. It was all sheer
down-drop in the windy air, and these things had no side-
22
rails of any sort on them, and they tipped and swerved.
"The magic carpetl" said Crewman Bramble. "We have
evidence now that the medieval Arabs of Earth really
used such. They worked only over the very dry rock deserts,
flint and chert deserts; and they were not carpets only, but
thin slabs of stone covered with carpeting. Antiquarians have
assured us that the evidence is overwhelming that such
things were really used. I didn't believe it. I don't know how
they could have worked. I don't know how these can
work."
They came to the face of a sheer mountain. They hovered
in the air in front of a black hole in the face of that rock.
"Come in to the breakfast," Bjom called. The ogres
drifted into the black interior on their stone slabs, and the
men followed them in. And came down hard. The static-
repulsion principle seemed to fail when they were in the
heart of the stone here.
"Clumsy!” taunted Bjorn "Clumsyl” taunted Blath and
Hrekkur and the other ogies.
"You are the new guests here," said Bjom in the cave
darkness. "Tell the sun to come in, little Roadstrum."
"I'd as well tell the wind to lie down and the waves to be
quiet,” said Roadstrum. "I don't know what you mean."
.
"You are a boy-brained blockhead," said Bjom. "What
words do you use to order the sun when you are on World?
Here it is simple to recite the words. You say, The sun, come
you in,' and the sun comes in.
"The sun, come you in," Roadstrum said valiantly, won-
WOD-
dering at himself. And the sun came in.
It was not, of course, the big sun of Lamos, but the little
sun, the little boy of the big sun. It came in through the
doorway of the cave, a hot yellow ball three meters in
diameter, and it rose up to the roof of the cave and shone
there. It was bright and hot, and the cave had been very
cold. Water began to run down the walls, and globs of
ice to fall.
“What is it?" asked Roadstrum of Crewman Bramble.
"It is the little sun, the little boy of the big sun," Bjom
interrupted. “Does not the sun of World have little boys
also?
“What is it really" Roadstrum asked Bramble.
“Some type of ball lightning," said the crewman. “But no,
I see that it is a glowing stone. It must be a very small
asteroid captured in the queer ambient of this nonmetallic
world. It will glide around as the other rocks, and it
should burn up if it is the proper texture. I don't know by
what means it obeys voice commands. It bums but it does
23
D
not burn up. I haven't worked out a theory on it yet. I
suppose that Bjorn's hypothesis is the best one; it is the
little boy of the big sun.
"We have roast bull first," said Bjom, as a big bull was
driven to them from some inner space of the cave. “Roadstrum,
you are the high guest; skin the bull.”
“I would need first a long steel knife to kill it,” great
Roadstrum said. “And then skinning knives and tongs and an
A-frame and a block and tackle to handle it. Give us the
equipment, Bjom, and myself and five or six of my men will
have it killed and skinned within the hour.
"You are really the great Road-storm?" Bjom asked in
wonder. "Little boy-men, you don't know how to skin a bull.
Fjall, skin the bull.”
Fjall broke the homs off the bull and threw them away.
Then he put his fingers in the hom holes and broke a girdle
out of the skull
. He peeled all the skin off the skull. He broke
the front hooves off the animal and peeled the skin up the
legs; then he did the same thing with the back quarters. With
his great thumbnail he then slit the skin up the belly. He
rolled the hide back over the bump and shoulders. Then,
going around behind the unhappy animal, he caught the
bull by the tail and jerked the entire skin off in one piece,
leaving the bull bawling and bare.
"See how easy it is when you know how," Bjom said.
"Now, Roadstrim, spear the bull on that pike and raise it
up to the sun in the roof and roast it. At least you can do
that."
"I cannot raise the bull on that pike," said Roadstrum.
"I cannot even raise that pike.”
"Ob helvedel Spear the bull and raise it up, Hrekkur,
Bjom said, and Hrekkur did it. That little boy of the sun
roasted it thoroughly and quickly with a great dripping
of burning wonderful grease and a powerful aroma. They
ran other bulls through then, skinned them like gloves, and
roasted them whole on spits held high in the small sun.
"Let us not get ahead of the count,” said Bjom. "I doubt
me a little whether the boy-men can eat a bull each. We will
see. Why do you hesitate, Roadstrum? That first bull is
yours. Take it, take it in both hands if need be, and eat it
up valiantly."
But Bjom was right. The boy-men from the homet crafts
could not eat a whole bull each. It took three, and sometimes
four of them, to devour a whole bull. And they ate pretty
heavily too.
Hey, they brought oat-cakes bigger in diameter than a
man is bigh. They brought onions as big as the head of
24
»
2)
>
Burpy, and he had the biggest head of all the crewmen.
They brought in honey-mead in casks large enough to make
houses out of. And the breakfast beer! They knocked a bung
out of the cave wall itself and the beer flowed, black and
strong as Irish porter, in a great stream. It was a mountainful
of beer they had there.
You think that was all? They had pork pies with a full-
grown boar in each of them.
“Roadstrum, Roadstrum,” Bjom chided. “Do not throw
away the tusks. One eats them too. They will make a man
of you. It is the same with the teeth and the hooves of the
stallions that we come to in the next course."
"And the antlers of the stag too, big Bjom?” Roadstrum
"
asked, for he would not let the huge fellow out-talk him in
any case,
"Oh certainly, little Roadstrum. The accepted way is to
swallow them without crumpling them or abridging them,
but I see that you have neither the mouth nor the gullet
for that."
Well, the boy-men from the hornet crafts acquitted them-
selves pretty well after they had gotten into it. They were
slow starters is all. The mightier of them ordered another
round of bulls and ate them with only two men to a bull.
They ate those little baked whole foxes as though they were
peanuts, and the baked rams as though they were cashews.
They devoured the beavers, as was the custom, pelts and
all. They developed a taste for whole roast wolf and nearly
ran the Laestrygonians out of that commodity. And they
found eagle stuffed with meadow mice to be a really
different tidbit.
They found also that there is this about honey-mead: the
second gallon that one drinks is better than the first, and
the third is better and more intoxicating than the second.
They got as high as om-eagles, and as stuffed as pigs on
acomS.
"Tell me in truth, little Roadstrum, was it not a great
breakfast?" Bjom asked.
"It was a great breakfast, Bjom," Roadstrum said in all
honesty. “In all my life I have live: eaten a more filling
one.
“And now, Roadstriun and all your small things, we
fight,” Bjom announced. "We fight the great fight to the
great death. You'll like this part of it, for I begin to see that
you are really good fellows and men after all.”
"With what do we fight, and for how long?" Captain
Puckett asked.
"We fight with the stone-tipped spears and pikes and
25
n
with stone battle-axes," Bjorn said. "We have little boy-
sized ones that you will be able to lift if you wish to use them.
.
Or, if you have weapons of your own, you may use those;
and we fight till everybody is dead. How else is a fight?”
"Can we use our hand blasters?" Captain Roadstrum asked.
"We do not know what are hand blasters,” said Bjom, 'but
if they are weapons, you may use them, of course. Now,
Roadstrum, dismiss the sun and we will go out. Say only,
'The sun, go you out.'
"The sun, go you out,” said Roadstrum, and the little
sun unhooked itself from the ceiling of the cave and
glanced brilliantly out of the gaping door.
They all mounted their stone slabs, rubbed their feet,
and zoomed out of the cave entrance into the sunlight, that
of the father sun, not of the little-boy sun who had been
in the cave. They landed in a great meadow. Captain
Puckett sent Crewman Birdsong back to the homet crafts
to get a hand blaster for each man.
“Do you want one, Deep John?" Captain Roadstrum
"
asked the vagabond.
"No, I always use a piece of coal-car coal swung in a ban-
danna," said the hobo.
"We do not know what is coal-car coal or bandanna,
said Bjom, but use them if they are weapons.
"A good solid rock will do for the piece of coal," said
Deep John, "and a little sling I have here to swing it in.
And I believe a little stone slab I have my eye on could
be used both for vehicle and weapon. "
“You are sure you want to use those little things, boys?"
Bjom asked when the hand blasters were brought to the
crewmen and passed around. “They are so short and light,
how will you kill one of us with one of them? Better take
the stone-tipped spears and then we will have real sport
You boy-men are small but you seem to be fast. With the
stone spears you will kill some of us, at least, and we will
have sport."
"No, we will use our blasters," Roadstrum said. “And I will
tell you, Bjom, that it will be strictly no fight. I do not
understand your custorp in this, but we do not intend to
fight till all of us are dead. We desire very much that none
of us be dead. And we will fight till all of you are dead
only if it is absolutely necessary.
“Spoilsportsl” called Hross and Kubbur, the big giants.
Dog-warriors,” Fjall jibed. "Little-girl men,” Hrekkur de
rided, "you are not men for a fight. You are not men at
n
all."
“We arę men,” said Roadstrum, “and we are masters of
26
men. Bjom, bring a pig or a sheep and I will show you
how easily and at what a distance one of these blasters can
kill."
"Do you not insult us!” Bjom cried angrily. "Pig-soldiersi
Sheep-soldiers! Let us see you kill one of our men with one
of your blasters. Then we will know whether they are
weapons for men.
"No, no, I could not kill a living man or-ah-ogre for
demonstration,” Roadstrum said,
"I could,” said Crewman Fairfeather. Fairfeather had al.
ways been something of a blow-top, but there was some-
thing different about him now. He had a grin on him that
was almost like the grins of the Laestrygonians. He seemed
to grow larger. He looked like-well, he had always been the
ugliest of the crewmen, now he was nearly as ugly as the
Laestrygonians themselves-he looked like one of the giants,
that same happy insane look in the eyes.
Fairfeather shot big Hrekkur with his blaster. He tore a
big hole in the giant and killed him.
“Now you've tom it!" said Roadstrum angrily. “We'll
"
probably have to kill them all. Watch for their moves.”
But all the giant Laestrygonians were whooping with
laughter.
"Killed him! Killed himl" they whooped and roared.
“Man, he did look funny when you killed him so easily.”
"Look at his face, the side of it that's left. He still
doesn't believe it."
"Hey, the boy-men got a real weapon going."
"Show us again."
"Kill me."
"Kill me. Hey, little fellows, kill me with one."
"Easy fellows,” big Bjom said. "We can't use all our fun
up in one moment. Youll all get killed this day. We don't
want to have our sport over too early; and remember, we
have to kill the boy-men also. Are we ready? Onto your
stone slabs all and into the air for battle!"
"Must we fight on those things in the airp” Roadstrum
asked.
"There are no rules. We do whatever seems the most
fun," Bjom said. “Fight where you will. We like to come
,
zooming at each other on the stone slabs and transfix each
other with our spears as we crash together. Fight on the
ground if you wish, but we will zoom down and spear you
on the ground."
"We willtry it both ways,” said Roadstrum.
Both men and ogres got on their stone slabs and, rubbing
their feet on them, lurched up into the air. They fought
27
)
»
with two or three men or ogres on a slab, or with only
one on a slab. The men could not steer or maneuver as
well as the ogres could, but they learned rapidly since
their lives depended on it. And it is very hard to kill with
a blaster when riding one of those stone broncos in the sky
and shooting at a fluttering evasive target.
Crewmen Fairfeather and Birdsong and Crabgrass were
speared with stone-headed spears and killed, but each of
them took an ogre with him. These crewmen died with
curious whoops of laughter, quite unmanlike, quite ogre-
like.
Crewmen Di Prima and Kolonymous were knocked off
their slabs and killed in their fall to the ground. Crewman
Oldfellow was cloven from crown to crotch with a stone
battle-ax, and he died in the both parts of him. And every
blaster shot by every man had missed. Only Fairfeather
and Birdsong and Crabgrass had killed ogres, and only
these had taken stone spears after the unsuccess of their
blasters,
"To ground, to ground,” Roadstrum ordered. And all the
homet craft men 'grounded their slabs. "The low air is the
element of the ogres and we can't get them there," Road-
strum explained. “We'll stay on the ground where we can
take steady aim, for we cannot do it on those wobbly
slabs in flight. And they'll have to come down to our level
to try to spear us. Here, here, let's form in rings of about
five men each, and one can blast them front-on from wbicb-
ever direction they come.”
They formed so. The Laestrygonian ogres swooped around
on their slabs in the low air and devised tactics. And then
a large stone slab hung in the air directly over every five-
man group.
"Blast up,” Roadstrum ordered.
All blasted up, and they tore some holes in the stone
slabs. But they could not tell whether they killed any
ogres. And not one blast in five went all the way through
its slab. Those were good stones,
"We wait them out,” said Roadstrum. "They cannot spear
us unless they expose themselves, and we have them out-
ranged. We wait while the poor giants make up their slow
minds. I wonder what signal they use for sun'ender?"
"Whup! Whup! Whruuupp!!! It was like an earth-blast
shaking the very ground under all of them. One of the stone
slabs had dropped suddenly in dead-fall and had smashed
and killed all five men stationed under it. Blood running in
little rivulets from under the edges of the stone slab, and
wild hooting laughter from the low skies!
28
n
02
"Scatter," roared Captain Roadstrum. "Scatter," roared
Captain Puckett. And the men all scattered pretty nimbly.
"Crewman Bramble, go up on a small slab and scout,
Roadstrum ordered. “Find us an open-face cave or a haven
of some kind under an overhang where they must come in
to us and cannot drop on us.'
Crewman Bramble scraped his feet on a small stone slab
and was airborne, followed by whooping giants with stone-
tipped spears.
"Up and fly at random," Roadstrum ordered them all.
"Stall and evade and blast. We will leam the low-air tricks.
We have them outranged, and there is no excuse for letting
them kill us so easily."
So they were all up in the air.
But the only one who was doing any good was Deep
John the Vagabond, called by Captain Roadstrum their
native light-horse auxiliary. The old hobo had a very thin,
very small stone slab, with a sharp cutting edge which he
made to be the forward edge. He was able to attain very
rapid flight on this and come in behind the flying giants.
At first he used his handy rock in its swinging sling,
washing it into what should have been the brain-base of the
giants, but he could attain nothing against their bull-bumps.
Then he used his slab itself for a weapon, swooping in
beyond them at a very high speed and calculated height, ,
and just plain slicing their heads off with the forward
cutting edge of his slab. Their heads hit the ground with
thunderous thumps, and the crewmen could keep track of
the kills of their ally.
But say, those giants did have a happy time of it, no
matter that a few of them were beheaded. They swooped in
on the men on their flying stones, fluttering and banking
and using their slabs like shields, and then suddenly struck
with their long spears and spitted the men. There was
laughter that made the low skies ring like bells whenever
they did this. There was even louder laughter on the part
of the giants when one of their own folk was killed and
blown apart by a blaster. It seemed to be the funniest thing
they had ever seen.
And in truth it was funny to see one of them blown apart
and come down in huge bleeding hunks, the great head
usually broken free and landing with a brain-spewing crash.
There was never a folk who took such delight in bloody
slaughter as did the Laestrygonians.
After a long while, Crewman Bramble came sailing back
to the men, a spear quite through his shoulder giving him
a rakish and almost heroic appearance.
29
"Follow, follow," Bramble called. "It isn't much, but I
have found something."
They followed him to a huge stone platform under an
overhanging ledge, and all the remaining men landed on
this. It was at the end of a .pocket, the smaller bit of a
wedge, and it could be defended. It had a natural parapet,
breast-high, and all were behind it with their blasters. There
weren't many of them left though, six or seven, and more
than twenty had been killed by the giants. How many giants
were left they did not know. The men had never counted
them, and they did not know them all. The giants all
looked very much alike to the men. Here the giants could
come at them only one at a time, and they would be fair
shot for every blaster.
One of them swooped in on his slab and was blasted
to bits very close. His slab staggered away and crashed
into the cliff-side very near the haven. The men were
covered with a rubble of broken stone and were drenched
with the giant's blood.
Another came in, and another. One came in all the way,
leaped from his slab, and killed both Crewmen Burpy and
Fracas with a single spear-thrust, and was then blasted to
death by Captain Puckett. But the shattered bulk of the
giant near crowded them out of their haven and left them
knee-deep in blood behind their parapet.
.
Still could be heard the idiot ear-rupturing laughter and
hooting of Vetur and Fjall and many nameless giants in
the low sky. Still could be heard the happy strong voice of
Bjom.
"Little boy-men, did you ever have so much fun a fight
as this? Hey, it's a rousing thing, is it not? We always like
to show our guests a good time."
Quite a few hours had gone by in all this. It wasn't
swift. It had been all the tedious maneuvering of battle that
is not done in an instant. But the men were all soldiers and
they began to enjoy it. And still they were incomparably
weary.
“One-hour the break,” came the big voice of Bjom from
the swooping low sky. It is the noon. Come out and
-"
loosen up, and the women bring the water."
"Is it a trick?” asked Captain Puckett.
“No, they are not capable of tricks,” said Captain Road-
strum. “Let's get out of here for a while."
They got onto their stone slabs, rubbed their feet, and
lurched out into the sunny soft air. The big women of the
Laestrygonians were rising on stone slabs with huge jars of
30
»
2
water for the giants, and Margaret the houri came with a
pretty fair sized jug for the men.
"I will not let those cows bring water to you,” she an-
nounced. “I bring the water to you myself. Hey, I've been
killing some of those cow-women, one at a time, and un-
beknownst to the others. Bjorn is right. This killing can be
a lot of fun."
"So far this is the oddest day I've ever half spent,"
growled mighty Roadstrum, as he took his noontime ease
on a stone floating in the low sky. "I don't understand the
setup here at all. There is neither rime nor reason to it.”
"I bring rime,” Bjorn called in his loud voice. "Who needs
reason
The grinning Bjom slid his slab near to that of Roadstrum.
Then he blew a solid note on a jug Aute that he had
between his legs. And then he declaimed:
"The little bug has got the glitter eyes of him,
You can't go by the pepper-picking size of him.
We look and hoot, 'That must be only half of him.'
We laugh at him and laugh at him and laugh at him.
He be tall eater and a taller topian,
No mind the little fellow's microscopion.
We pitch a party, sling the dangest dangeroo.
Whoop, whoop and hollerl He's a hero-hangerool"
"What in hound-dog heaven is come over you, Bjom?"
Roadstrum asked in wonder. “Is that Laestrygonian verseph
"Sure is not, little Roadstrum. That is Road-Storm verse,
your own high epic. We make verses of it here also, as
do folks everywhere. It is so long a time since we have had
a certified hero in our place. You think we be so nice to
you if we do not know who you are?" "
The grinning giant dripped rivers of sweat onto the earth
below, and his voice was full of thunder. Roadstrum re-
membered an old mythology where the first rain was the
sweat of such a deity-hero," and the first thunder was such
a voice. But now Bjom changed and became all business,
"The noon is overl" he cried in a voice that made big
cracks in a high cloud. “All back and make ready for the
fight. Scoot, little men, back to your haven. Last one there
gets killed!"
The last one back to the haven was Crewman Ursley, and
he was killed at the very entrance of it.
31
a
Now came the rocks thrown by the slab-hands of the
giants, rocks near as big as the men themselves. This was
the mortar attack from cover. Crewman Mundmark was
struck by such a rock. His limbs were unstrung, he burst
asunder, and he died. Crewman Snow was similarly slain,
but in louder fashion. The rock didn't strike him full but
it sheared near half of him away. He howled and roared
and screamed. Crewman Snow was very reluctant about the
dying business, but he died nevertheless.
And yet the men were killing possibly two for one. They
blasted arms off the giants that were reared back to throw.
They blasted every one dead who ventured into the open.
And there hadn't been many giank, or men.
"How many of us left?" Captain Roadstrum asked as though
he were counting patrols and batteries and battalions.
"I see myself. I see you,” said Captain Puckett. “I do
not see any others."
“How many of you dog-hearted giants are left?” Roadstrum
called loudly.
"Only myself,” came the strong voice of Bjom. "Come
out the two of you and we will see who is dog-hearted."
“I go," said big Captain Puckett. “I always did want to
die a hero's death.'
Puckett went out with his blaster blasting. He smashed
rocks open as though they were eggs. He knocked an arm
and shoulder off of Bjom when he had only half a shot at
him, and the happy laughter of Bjom over it was one of
the great things.
"I will show you a hero, a hero," Captain Puckett swore.
“Dead hero, dead hero, come to me,” Bjom jibed. They
were out of Roadstrum's sight now. The sun was in his eyes
as he peered, and it would soon be dusk
There were a dozen more blasts, a dozen more hooting
laughs almost too big even for a giant, and then a last
blood-clabbering scream.
"The little boy-man was a hero after all,” Bjom called
"Shall I toss your dead hero to you, Roadstrum?"
I
“Toss him," Roadstrum called. And the body of Puckett,
impaled on the great spear, came sailing in. Roadstrum
caught him somewhat, stretched him out, and gave him the
hero's salute.
"Hurryl” Bjom called with some urgency. The sun sets,
and we two are left."
“What is the hurry?” Roadstrum called. "I fight well in the
dark.”
“No, nol” the giant cried. “Be you not difficult! All must
32
M
be dead before the sun goes down. Hurry out and be the
hero too."
“A hero I am not, Bjom,” Roadstrum blared. “Alive I will
bide a while, and it is now my brain against yours.”
But Roadstrum lied, hardly realizing it. Some time before,
in the time of the ten-year war, Roadstrum had caught the
heroes' disease during one of the campaigns. It is infectious,
and it stays with one to some degree forever. It usually
took him every third day along about sundown, coming
with a sudden chill and a quick steep fever. Always he
had taken precautions so that he would do nothing rash
while the heroic fever was upon him. But this was the
third day at sundown and the fever came suddenly; and this
time Roadstrum had not taken precautions.
He jerked Bjom's great spear out of the body of Cap-
tain Puckett. He selected a stone slab, rubbed his feet on
it, and veered out of the haven.
“Up and at it, Bjom of the dog-liver\” he called boldly.
"We fight your way to the death.”
"Have we time the giant cried. “Thunder! Have we time?
The sun goes down."
"In the high air it shines yet," Roadstrum called. “Up and
at it, Bjom.”
There were two giants laughing in the skyl Roadstrum
had turned himself into a giant with as boisterous and
happy a laugh as the best ogre of them all. Now they
came at each other on wild pitching stone slabs, the most
rampaging stallions ever. Bjom had his second spear, shorter
but heavier than the first, and Roadstrum had found the
strength to heft and haft the great spear itself. A pass,
and both were slashed and gouged, and each left a hunk
of meat on the other's spear.
"Higher,” Bjor called, "the sun fails. Faster, the final
sortie. Up, up, Roadstrum, the sun must catch both our
spears."
They went up very high. The sun was on the bloody
points of both their spears, and all the world below was
dark. Then they charged, each on his snorting stone slab
that neighed and surged and had come alive. Roadstrum
caught big Bjorn in the middle of the belly, where it is
mortal to an ogre. To swerve then, in the millionth of a
secondl But there was not time to swerve. Bjor's eyes
laughed at Roadstrum as he died, and his heavy spear
had the man through the center breast. Roadstrum's slab
was the higher, and it sliced Bjom through at the groin.
The two beroes came together in death, transfixed on each
33
other's spears, and fell a very very great way to the ground
that was now in night darkness.
“Ah, well, I died a hero and a giant," Roadstrum said,
for every man is allowed one sentence after death.
So now all were dead on both sides. It had been close,
though. For a while it seemed that they were not going to
make it. The giants had told the men that the fun is all
spilled out and lost if all are not dead by the fall of
night.
Dead and splattered. Gathered up and carried. By what?
By whom?
But even in dreams they are not. They are on the other
side of dreams. It was incredible enough that one of them
could carry Roadstrum, a giant among men. But how could
one carry Bjorn, who was a giant among giants?
Death is for a long time. Those of shallow thought say
that it is forever. There is, at least, a long night of it. There
is the forgetfulness and the loss of identity. The spirit,
even as the body, is unstrung and burst and scattered. One
goes down to the death, and it leaves a mark on one forever.
"Come to the breakfast!" boomed a voice so vast that it
shook the world and all the void between the worlds.
"Come to the breakfastl"
And there was another voice rilling on in saucy silver,
that of Margaret the houri.
"I see that I am going to have to make some changes
here,” Margaret was shrilling angrily. “You eat, you fight,
"
you die, you sleep, you wake up, and you eat again. But
where does that leave the women? You are going to have
to find an hour every day for them."
“Yes, yes,” said Skel and Mus and Fleyta and Belja and
Toa and Glethi and Vinna and Ull and Raetha, and all
those other Laestrygonian dames with the more difficult
names, “you are going to have to find one hour in the day
“I think for a long time there is something missing,” big
Bjom was saying, “but there is no time for anything else.
We breakfast, and then we fight till all are killed, and
then it is night. We are dead all the night, and then we
sleep for a very little while at first sun. Then is it time for
breakfast again. Look yourself at the sundial, little witch-
child. Can you see any time for anything else on the sun-
dial?"
Margaret the houri lifted a boulder larger than herself
and smashed the sundial.
34
for us.
“I will make a new dial," she said. “I will make it different
and with an extra hour. There has to be time for the women.
And now I will instruct the women on what they will do in
that hour.”
“How did I get back here, Maggy?” Roadstrum asked
the houri. "Was I not dead?"
"Of course you were. And I was Valkyrie last night
(the others showed me how to be one) and I carried you
back from the battlefield. Sprained a shoulder doing it.”
"But how was I dead and now I am alive?" Roadstrup
persisted.
"Do you not understand yet, little Roadstrum?” Crewman
Birdsong asked him. "Hey, it was a rollick, wasn't it?"
Little Roadstrum? From Crewman Birdsong? Roadstrum
was not little, he was a giant of a man, he topped Crewman
Birdsong by a head.
No he didn't. He didn't come up to the nether ribs of
Birdsong. Crewman Birdsong had become a giant, as had
Crewman Fairfeather.
“Why has it happened to you two, and not to great
Roadstrum and to great Myself?" Captain Puckett asked,
for now he was alive and awake again.
"Some have it and some do not,” said Crewman Birdsong.
"You two, and the most of you, must have had mental
reservations when you went into the thing. I thought all
along that you fellows weren't as joyous and wholehearted
in the battle as you might have been. If
you
let yourselves
go completely today and enter into it with a happy howling
heart, then I believe you can make it."
“But what is it? How does it happen? Where are we
really?” Roadstrum asked.
"No? You really don't know? Valhalla, of course. Here
the heroes fight to the death every day in glorious and
cloud-capping battle. And every moming they are reborn
to fight and die again. I can see where it's going to be a lot
of fun.”
“Doesn't it become kind of tireseme after a while, Bjom?"
Roadstrum asked the giant of giants.
“Why no, not really, Roadstrum. You know how it is with
everything. They all pall a little after the centuries begin
to mount. But this is better than most things. Stay with
us; you will be a mighty fighter yet.”
“We have a choice to make, Captain Puckett," said
Roadstrum.
“Let us first go see if we do have a choice, Captain
Roadstrum,” said Puckett.
They gathered their men, except Crewmen Birdsong and
35
Fairfeather, who had already become giants and who would
remain in any case. They went down to their homet crafts
to see if anything at all could be done to repair them on
this world, to see if the mad boy Hondstarfer had left
anything of them.
Well, at least the shells of the homets were still there,
but there was a great amount of the works scattered
around on the rocky ground.
"I couldn't see any use for a lot of that stuff so I left
it out,” said the boy Hondstarfer. "They will both fly now,
but one of them will break down again after a little while.
This one here is perfect and will fly forever. On the other
one I made a lot of mistakes. You'll have more room in
them now if you ever use them. Those long things I took
out were what was taking up all the room."
"Those are the main drives,” said Crewman Boniface.
*Ah well, the ships are fixed," the boy said, "but one of
them will break down again."
“They will fly?” asked Crewman Humphrey. “Men, men,
let's go thenl I've had enough of this place where they stuff
you full of bull and then hunt you down and kill you every
day.”
"No, of course they won't fly,” said Roadstrum. "How
could they fly without their main drives?”
"Oh, they'll fly," the boy Hondstarfer said. “I fixed the
clumsy things. Did my father Bjom not tell you that I was
mechanically inclined?"
"However could you fix such intricate machinery with
nothing but those seven stone hammers there?” Captain
Puckett asked.
"I didn't, I couldn't, I only thought that I could. I had
to go get that."
They hadn't noticed it before. They'd thought it was a
tree. Hondstarfer hadn't fixed their hornets with those seven
little stone hammers. He'd used a big stone hammer. Was it
ever big!
"Hey, I want to be a habo,” Hondstarfer cried as Deep
John the Vagabond fluttered down on his favorite slab.
"How do I go about it, Deep John'.
"It isn't like it used to be,” said Deep John. "It all
seems much smaller and narrower since we took to the skies.
The spacious days of it were on World in the old railroad
time. But you'd need a time machine to get back there,
Hondstarter.”
"Oh, I've got a time machine," the boy said, "also a
space-racer. I think I'll go to World and turn myself back
and be an old-time railroad hobo."
36
>
a
"Well, what is the choice?" Puckett asked. “Do we try
to fly in something that can't possibly fy? Or do we stay
to be killed again and again and again?"
"Wait, wait,” called Margaret the houri. “I'm going with
you. Those giants aren't as much fun as I thought they'd be.
You get tired of them after a while."
"That's true, that's true,” said Roadstrum. “We have our
choice. Let's make it. I was a giant for my moment. I can
be one again if I'm called on to be. Shall we say that
Hondstarfer could not fix these things to fly? Shall we say
that the stone slabs of this world could not fly? Load in
whoever wants to go! We fly! We fly! We've flown on less."
And to their own amazement they began to load in.
“Wait, wait,” big Bjor called coming down to them.
"Will you not stay to the breakfast?"
"We will not stay to the breakfast,” Roadstrum said.
"You will do better today," Bjom stated. “You begin to be
giants. Today you will be able to eat a whole bull, Road-
strum.”
"I am able to, yes, Bjorn, but I do not want to eat a
whole bull. I can be the giant whenever I wish, and I am
afflicted with the heroes' disease that smites me every third
day about sundown. But we will fyl There are skies we
have not seen yet! There are whole realms still unvisited by
us. We will not be penned in even a giants' pen. We fly!"
“In that case, Roadstrum-ah-it is an embarrassing thing
to say-in that case there is one thing we must do before
you leave."
"Do it then," said Roadstrum.
"We do not want to be overrun with amateurs,” the giant
Bjor explained. “If everybody knew how much fun it was
here, then everybody would come. We want only such fino
farers as yourselves who come by high chance. You must
promise never to tell anybody how much fun it is here."
“We promise,” said Roadstrun. "We will never tell any-
body how much fun it is here."
“And there is one small thing that we must do to make
sure that you keep your promises,” Bjom
added.
And what is that?”
"CUT YOUR BLOODY TONGUES OUT!"
Two of the Laestrygonian giants grabbed each man and
threw him down; and a third, stepping on his man's throat
to force his tongue out, grabbed it and pulled it out still
further to its absolute extent, and then cut it out with a
stone knife, roots and all.
Here was the creamingest pain ever. Here was utter
frustration. Who may battle and defy and get revenge when
37
deprived of tongue and voice? And besides, they were
near dead from the loss of blood, near a more final death
than that of the night before.
But they crawled and dragged themselves in, gagging and
green, and loaded dying into their crafts, with Roadstrum
going last.
"Here is one final thing beyond the final,” said Bjom.
"-Ah, I am truly sorry to see you looking so green and
puny-one very last surety you must give before you tumble
dying into your boat. You must write on this paper that my
little boy has here, for my boy Hondstarfer, as you may not
know, can read. You will use your finger and the blood
from the roots of your tongue. You will write 'I will never
tell anyone how much fun it is in this place.
And mighty Roadstrum wrote with his finger and his
tongue's-roots blood “I will never tell anyone how much fun
it is in this place.
They took to air all bloodily and retchingly,
They made new tongues, but didn't make them fetchingly,
And flew through chartless skies where none had fled before;
Whatever came, at least they'd all been dead before.
But one thing worked, whatever else might nix the things,
That hammer-handling kid had really fixed the things.
All bloody luck they ever got away like that,
They sure did never want another day like that!
And Roadstrum shucked another layer fretfully:
One gives up giuntizing most regretfully.
Ibid
38
A
V!!
CHAPTER THREE
All lost in space, the hide-bound inner side of it,
With roaring rocks that gave them quite a ride of it-
Ah better Dobie's Hole thon such vortexicon
That stoned them all and spooked the cowboy lexicon!
They guessed wrong guess and reveled in unheedingly
(Where clashing rocks turned strange and roared stamped-
ingly),
And ate High Cow, and fell beneath the curse of it,
And bantered suns, and ended up the worse for it.
They had the horns and hump and very prime of it,
And rather lost themselves about that time of it.
Ibid
THEY CAME AMONG the clashing rocks, "the rocks wandering.”
It was a thick asteroid belt moving at a respectable speed,
and it was necessary that the hornets match its direction
and speed for safety. Besides, since they were lost, they
might as well go where the rocks were going.
The wandering rocks were mostly about the size of the
hornets themselves, rounded and not too rough. They were
thickly clustered, one every thousand meters or so. “And
we called that thick!" the men said later. They were gray
bumbling things in the gray twilight, and some of the men
got out and rode on them.
39
"They've got eyes on them,” said Crewman Oldfellow.
“Probably the mica glint,” said Captain Roadstrum.
"No, no, not like that at all. Eyes like a calf, like a
buffalo calf that I saw at a World zoo once. I look sideways
at one of them, he looks sideways at me, and we see each
others' eyes. But when I look at one of them directly, his
eyes disappear."
“Ah well, maybe your eyes disappear also,” said Roadstrum.
"You'd be the last to know."
The clashing rocks kept their distances and positions
pretty well; and yet it seemed as though they became
somehow more numerous, as though they spawned when the
men were not looking.
Roadstrum sent his men out to mark and number the one
hundred nearest rocks. And then they rode along and studied
the traveling rocks for an equivalent day.
“There are two forty-nines," Crewman Lawrence reported
then, "and we numbered only one of each number.”
"Then I have bumblers for men and they are not able
to count to one hundred," said Roadstrum angrily.
"That is not so," Crewman Bramble protested. “I made
the dies myself and I made them true. But now there are
three number nines each bearing my genuine and original
die of that number."
“There are five number sevens at least,” said Crewman
Crabgrass. “It sure does get crowded now.”
“Do you hear snorting, Roadstrum?" Captain Puckett called
from his homet. (“False tongue, false tongue,” warned the
communicator.)
"Space noises, Puckett,” Roadstrum called back. (“False
tongue,” warned the machine.) "And they become even
noisier," said Roadstrum. “But would you call it snorting?
Well yes, I guess you would. Puckett, where in glare-eyed
space are all these rocks coming from? And what is the
excitement and fear that seems to be running loose among
them?” (“False tongue,” the communicator warned again.)
The communicator always gave this waming now, when-
ever a man spoke from one homet to another. The “False
Tongue” sensor had been built into the communicator from
the beginning as guard against space things that may counter-
feit the human voice and so interfere and subvert. But now
all the crewmen had false manufactured tongues in their
heads, and their communicators warned them against them-
selves.
All except Deep John the hobo. Deep John had in
some manner escaped the attention of the Laestrygonian
40
2
giants at that time. “I was the only one able to keep a
civil tongue in my head,” Deep John liked to say.
Margaret the houri had also kept her own tongue, but the
communicator called “False tongue” at her nevertheless. The
machine read her as something not quite human, and her
tongue also.
"It is snorting, Roadstrum," Captain Puckett called again.
"It is sporting and bawling and trampling. Hear the heavy
hooves of itl” (False tongue,” said the thing.)
"We spooked them, Captain Roadstrum," Crewman
Threefountains said mysteriously. “Some of these breeds
spook easy. Man, are we ever going to have a rumblel”
"They are perverse roaring rocks,” said Crewman Bram-
ble, and I do not believe that the spherical is their real
form. And the closest one, rubbing on our very windows
there and threatening to break in, bears the number three
and five-eighths, and we made no fractional-number dies;
and yet it is a die made by my own hand; no one could
counterfeit me there."
They went another equivalent day, and the churning
rocks were like to crush them all. “Each of the pawing
rocks has a brand as well as a die number," Crewman
Trochanter said then. “It's a sun-brand, but I don't know
what sun.
“There's dust," said Roadstrum, “prairie dust, but how
could there be dust out here? And our scan-can reads that
there is a break in the thing, half an equivalent day ahead.
Well break out of this then, no matter what we break into."
"The way out of one known fusillade of rocks is Dobie's
Hole,” said Crewman Crabgrass, "and the hole is not bad.
But the way out of the other known congress of clashing
rocks is the Vortex. It apparently leads to sure death; nobody
has ever come out of it again."
"It's death here,” said Roadstrum. “We will take the side
break when we come to it. We are lost, and we will not
know whether it is Dobie's Hole or the Vortex. Hey, what
curious things are you men doing with the ropes there?”
"We don't know,” the men said. “We just found ourselves
doing it. We have a compulsion to form the ropes into such
running loops as these. There is something we must do with
them when the time comes.”
"Roadstrum," Captain Puckett called from his hornet, “the
jostling rocks have gone insanel What's the name of this
madness?" ("False tongue,” wamed the communicator.)
Deep John the hobo took the communicator and called
from Roadstrum's hornet to Puckett's:
"The name of it is stampede.”
41
.
a
"I think so too,” Puckett answered. “Roadstrum, my men
are making running loops in ropes, and they don't know
why.” (“False tongue.”)
"So are mine, Puckett," cried mighty Roadstrum.
"It will offend someone when it is done; but what is another
measure of trouble added to what we already have?” (“False
tongue,” cried the machine.)
It was as though they were coming to a great river, and
the stampeding stones were filling it up and running over
it on the backs of their bogged comrades. But at this river
in the sky (for half an equivalent day had passed), there
was a second ford breaking off hard to the left. The homets
took the branching, coming into a region where the rocks
pressed them less hardly. But now the men broke out of
the hornets and began to do things clear outside of reason.
Crewmen Crabgrass and Clamdigger went for the horas
of a little calf-rock they had selected, a rock even smaller
than a hornet, not above five times the size of a bull ele
phant. And they had the thing by the horns, but how
will a small asteroid have homs?
Then all the mad crewmen from both homets were out-
side, shouting and making ritual motions with their ropes.
They few flying loops around that calf-rock, more than
a dozen of them. They jerked it along their own new way,
both the homets dogging it. The men all gave voice to
varieties of barking and hooting, and the calf-rock was
bawling. The dust was deep and stilling and smelled of
fint sparks.
"It's a thing too tall for my reason," Roadstrum slung out,
“but I get the high excitement myself. We are pulled along
at a great rate on our new course, but we will not let the
doggie gol Onto itl Kill it! Skin itl Break it down! Devour
itl"
They were out of the concourse of rocks now, except
for the calf-rock whose neck they had broken and which
died. They had escaped from one of the known fusillades
of rocks, and their way of escape was not Dobie's Hole.
It was the Vortex.
Nevertheless, the men, working dangerously, had begun to
dismember the calf-rock, and some of them had lit space-
primus fires to roast it.
“The homs and the hooves to Captain Roadstrum, Crew-
man Threefountains roared, "and the fat of the hump to
Captain Puckett.”
"What is it all, Roadstrum, what is it?" Puckett called.
“False tongue,” warned the communicator.
“Oh shut up!” Roadstrum told the communicator. "Crew-
42
1
D
man Bramble, disassemble the bogus-intrusion safeguard. It
drives me crazy.
“All right,” said Bramble, and he quickly disassembled it.
I "I don't know what it is, Puckett," Roadstrum called then, ,
"but there's something about the aroma as they begin to
roast the meat. A space-primus fire really has no odor, so
how should it smell to me like sage-brush and buffalo-chips?
Why should the meat smell to me like buffalo meat roasting,
when I never smelled buffalo meat? The closest I ever came
to it was my grandfather telling of eating it when he was
a boy, at a rodeo on the Fourth of July at the old Hundred
and One Ranch. And how is it that the men have got
such magnificent horns and hooves off a round rough rock?"
"It's one of the sacred cattle of the sun we have killed,”
came the voice of Puckett. "We knew before we were bom
that this was forbidden. Now we must die the fiery death
for the offense. You have the lead homet, Roadstrum. Tum
into the near sun with it, and I will follow. Let us be con-
sumed by fire. There is no more hope for us.”
"You're out of your wits, Puckett. What cattle of what
sun?"
“The sun so great that it is known as the sun, Roadstrum.
It is the nearest sun to us. Let us turn into it at once and
be consumed for our sacrilegel"
"Puckett, if I had one of Hondstarfer's stone hammers
here I'd fix your head for
you.
You're
”
"What, Roadstrum? I was outside for a moment trying to
figure this thing out. Holy cow, it's an odd onel I heard you
talking as I came back in.
"Puckett, you were giving me a balleyowl about the cattle
of the sun and telling me we must tum into this nearest
sun and be consumed.”
"I was not, Roadstrumi Curse that sleazy little sunl Some-
one is trying to call us to our deaths. We'll not go into that
little sun, and we can't go back through the stampeding
rocks. It was the other sort of false tongue talking to you,
not me. We're into the Vortex for good, so let's provision
for it. Come out and feast, Roadstrum! Ten men couldn't eat
the bull-hump of this call, a hundred men couldn't eat the
loins. Bring out a few kilos of pepper and a firkin of
Ganymede hot-sauce."
"Curse that suiveling little sun, Puckett. For time out of
mind and belly I've never seen such a thing as this!"
Did they ever carve up that big young bulll They were
into the Vortex itself, going at unlawful and unnatural
speed, caught by a force that none had ever broken, but
they weren't going hungry into it.
.43
gone daftl"
a
They feasted on that big carcass that had seemed to be
a rock. They questioned nothing. They were going at a speed
where all the onrushing stars appeared violet color (“Laven-
der," said Crewman Crabgrass. "Lavender world laughs with
you,” said Crewman Trochanter), where all sequence was
destroyed, where any answers would have to come before the
questions.
The space-primus fire had become a pungent campfire.
Crewman Threefountains played on his harmonica as the
crewmen still gorged on the offworldly beef. Then they had
branding-iron coffee from somewhere, and horse whisky. They
had left the sniveling little sun and were going into a vaster
black sun that had gobbled up its own light. It was night
now, but it wasn't an ordinary night.
And then they all fell to singing old campfire songs,
whether this should be the end of them or not. They sang
such old songs as "Eight-Eyed Lucy Jane" (it's plain she
isn't plain), “I Lost My Heart on Wallenda World" (to
a woolly Woomagoo), "The Green Veronica," and "The
Grollanthropus and His Girl."
And they were rushing into the Vortex at two hundred
million kilometers a second, and there was no possible way
to break out of it.
.
They felled a flipping doggie, made a bobble-up,
And dropped to mokey sun that worked the gobble-
up.
It swallowed time and flow in loins and liver yet,
And voided all that ever gave the Giver yet.
One countered not with care or even laughter #,
It drew in whole and pulled the hole in after it.
Use but a thumb to gull the gulping glutton there!
That hammer-handling kid had put a button there!
Ibid
“I always wanted to study an involuted, massive, black-
giant sun," Crewman Bramble said. “I dreamed as a young
man how interesting it would be to have plenty of time to
study one and at close range. We will have the time of our
life for it now and a very close range. I say it all again,
but I have a false tongue in my head in two different
44
senses. Roadstnim, I never wanted so little to do a thing in
my life!"
>
>
"The equivalent-day recorder has gone crazy,” said Road-
strum. “Look at the days Aip over. Why, Bramble, there's
nine days passed while we talk here."
"That idiot kid Hondstarfer must have meddled with it
as he did with everything else on the crafts,” Bramble
guessed. "Still, it's peculiar that it should begin to mis-
function after all this time."
"Captain Puckett," Roadstrum called over the communi-
cator, "has the equivalent-day recorder gone crazy on your
craft
"Yep, gone crazy,” Pucket answered. “We've been amusing
ourselves with it. We've got to amuse ourselves with some-
thing as we drop to our deaths. Do you know, Roadstrum,
according to this thing, I've aged a year in the last base-
line hour? Hey, this would make a man old fast if he went
by it, wouldn't it?”
"It's a damned dumb thing that the equivalent-day re-
corders should go wrong on both homets at the same time,
Roadstrum growled.
"It was a damned dumb kid we had meddling with our
equipment,” Bramble complained. “But so far we've figured
out a purpose for everything he did, except the equivalent-
day recorder now, and the Dong button."
The Dong button was just that, a big green button with
the word Dong engraved on it. You pushed it, and it went
dong. Well, that was alınost too simple. Should there not
be a deeper reason for it? And the small instruction plate
over it didn't add much. It read: "Wrong prong, bong gong."
"There's no more to the button than is apparent?” Road-
strum asked Crewman Bramble.
"Yes, there is more. Everything on our hornets works by
the static-repulsion principle now, you know. And the Dong
button contains one half of a static-repulsion couple. But
wherever in wall-eyed space the nther half of that couple
is, I don't know. It isn't on the homets."
Well, they were well-fed by the spacé-calf that had mas-
queraded as a rock until they had slaughtered it. They
were well provisioned by its leavings. They were rested
and well, and they were falling to their sure deaths.
So the men busied themselves, or they did not, according
to their natures. They had fun variously. And now and again
one of them returned to one of the crazy equivalent-day
recorders.
'Look, look,” Crewman Crabgrass chortled. “I'm a month
older just while I was in the john. You guys always did
45
>
a
say I took too long there. And I'm two years older than
I was when I finished my third breakfast a while ago.
“A man could live a lifetime every two days by that thing,”
Crewman Snow laughed.
But the crewmen laughed less loudly when they discov-
ered (about the time that the equivalent-day recorder had
racked up five years since the beginning of its malfunction)
that they had all aged about five years in appearance
during those short hours.
Thereafter they whistled softly and spookily and began
to look at the recorder with something like frightened awe.
And they looked at each other furtively and did not meet
each others' eyes.
A little later, Crewman Mundmark died of heart stoppage.
He hadn't been too old a man, and he had kept in pretty
good shape. But he had lived the violent years of a space-
man, and with twenty years suddenly piled on top of that
(for it was about twenty years now) it was no great wonder
that he should die.
There were balding pates and graying heads popping
out all over the place. Crewman Ursley lost three fingers
suddenly. There was nothing happened to them. Suddenly
they were gone. A bandage bloomed briefly where the three
fingers had been, and then there was only old scar tissue.
And Ursley gazed at his changed hand in understandable
amazement.
"Whence have I this sudden, great, old scar-gash on
my cheek?" Roadstrum croaked out baffled. “When have
I lost me my fine right eye, and how is it that I find myself
carrying that eye (in pickled form) in my pocket?"
"These are all incidents of the lives we would have lived
out were we not falling into the blind black sun," Crewman
Clamdigger gave the opinion. "These are the losses and
mutilations that we would suffer in our normal lives, and
they show on us here as we come to these equivalent years
in our fall into the Vortex.”
“There was an old World movie named 'Death Train of
which I forget the plot but remember the impression,” said
Crewman Crabgrass. “And at the end of it they were in
a runaway train going into a long tunnel to their deaths.
So are we.
"It reminds me of a freight train I caught out of Waterloo,
Iowa one night about three hundred years ago,” said Deep
John the Vagabond. “Man, that train did have an eerie
mourful sound to it, and the clicking of the rails—why I
can hear the same clicking of the rails now.”
“So can we all,” said Roadstrum, “but how would there
46
-
2
be rails clicking when we are going at a thousand times
the speed of light?”
“Roadstrum,” Puckett called from his homet in a much-
aged voice, “I've turned into a bald-headed, pot-bellied,
crabby old man with no teeth and not very much vision.
I don't like it."
"I don't like my own aging, Puckett. Have any of your
men died?"
“Yes, about half. A good thing too. They're not much
good for anything when they get to that age. Roadstrum,
this will have to be goodbye. I'm too old and stove in to get
outside the sphere these last
last two years-ah-that is,
the last thirty minutes. It's happening faster now, you know."
“Myself, I will try it once more,” said Captain Roadstrum.
Roadstrum went outside the hornet sphere. He had
always liked to go outside, but now it was unpleasant and
very difficult. He could not comprehend that positive black
light nor the distortions of space. With the reversal of the
curvature, the turning inside-out of mass and moment, it
seemed that they were already inside the bulk of the black
sun, but they rushed forever faster into the deep Vortex.
Roadstrum barely made it back inside. Still, he was proud
of himself.
"I always said I'd live to be a hundred," he boasted.
"Holy Cow, am I not a ramrod straight and imposing man
at ninety-four) A Gray Eminencel Maggy, has it any effect
on you? What does that mirror you are so busy with tell
you?"
“Really, Captain Roadstrum, twenty or even twenty-one
is not a bad age. I study myself as I come to that. No,
I do not age as quickly as you do, but I age. I like me when
I'm young. I like me when I'm old. I bet I even like me
when I get to be twenty-two or even twenty-three.”
"What, all the men dead except Hobo John?”
"Yes, all the others, Roadstrum, and now it catches up to
me also. I had won a delay some centuries ago, actually
I won the delay in a gambling game with a certain Power,
but now both my basic and my extended life come to an
end,” said Deep John.
"It hasn't been a bad life, but it was rather disappointing
that the last two-thirds of it should pass away in less than
an equivalent day. Seems unfair, but we did kill that calf,
and perhaps we shouldn't have. We should have known that
such odd cattle would have belonged to someone. What,
dying, Hobo John?”
“Might as well, Roadstrum,” said Deep John the Vaga-
bond, and he died.
47
2
»
a
“Be there any living on the other hornet?" Roadstrum
called.
“None but me," came the crackling old voice of Crewman
Oldfellow. “And I'm about to turn in and die myself. It's
funny, Captain Roadstrum, they
Roadstrum, they called me Oldfellow be-
cause I was the youngest man in the crews, and the name
stuck. And somehow it never seemed to me that I'd really
get old. I got to die now, and I doubt if we'll ever meet
again. But if they do ever let you visit up our way, look
me up.
“I will, Oldfellow. Pleasant death to you.
Margaret the houri had just made a little cake.
"Happy birthday, Captain Roadstrum," she called out
cheerfully now.
"What, what Mag, what's this?”
"You just tumed a hundred, Captain. Eat it."
"I will, Mag. Say, did you ever notice that a man gives
off a pretty strong odor for about a second when he dies.
Well, they're all gone but me, and now I go. It was nice,
but shorter than I expected."
And he went into death snooze. Why not? He was a
hundred and eight at least by the time he had finished the
cake. It was going faster now.
"You are like all the others," said Margaret. "Why did
I think you might be different
"Snuff, snuff, snooze," Roadstrum breathed in his death
slumber.
"To boil a lobster, one takes first a lobster- Will not
that rouse you again, Roadstrum? 'Passed the last possible
moment,' Deep John would say, and now he is dead. Are
you dead also, Roadstrum?
“Mighty near." Roadstrum spoke out of his death sleep.
"Leave me in peace."
"What was that word, Roadstrum? Peace? It's a fine
word for the mob, but it will gag the one man in a million.
Shall I say it again, Captain Peace.”
?
"I am one man in a million," Roadstrum protested out
of his deep, old-raan sleep. “Maggy, it does gag me.
Why, I'll erupt out of the grave and stage my own ressur-
rection."
And he did manage to sit up, looking very much like
Lazarus.
"How old am I now, Mag?” he asked in his reedy voice.
"A hundred and twenty, Captain, and it goes faster."
“That's not a bad age for a real man. What went wrong?
There is a way out of everything, but somewhere we took
the wrong tuming, the wrong prong."
48
>
>
Then he looked at the Dong by his side, the button that
the boy Hondstarfer had put there. "Wrong prong, bong
gong,” said its instruction plate. Roadstrum pushed this button
as he had many times before, and it went dong as it always
did.
Then Roadstrum fell back once more into what seemed
to be his death slumber. But now there was somehow a change
in the low purt, in the costic sound.
“I had better just hop over to the other homet and push
the button there too,” Margaret said, and she did.
Yes, a fellow smells a little high for the short second just
before he comes back to life, just as he did for a short
second after he died. Margaret smuffled her nose at Crew-
man Oldfellow, and left. She went back to Roadstrum's hor-
net. It was her regular place. Everything was much as it
had been before, except that the equivalent-day recorder
had begun to run backwards as soon as the Dong button
had matched the other half of its coupler with something
in the black sun. And pretty soon Roadstrum came out of
his death slumber on the same side he had gone into it.
“Mighty rum thing, Maggy, mighty rum. You remember
what the high poet said:
The eating, aging, empty ogre got'em there;
They fell into the well that had no bottom there,
Let us expunge that couplet, Maggy, for it was writ of our-
selves, and we are entitled to edit our own epic. Perhaps
the black sun did get us, but in the time reversal thing
he did not. This is a most handy button. Now we can back
out of anything we get into, as long as we are with the hor-
nets.”
It was fun watching the men return. There was something
comic in their difficulty in accepting the thing. “You're
kidding. It couldn't really happen like that,” they all said.
They were a bunch of cranky old men, and then they
began to get younger as hope welled up in them. They
came back, every last one of them. Roadstrum had his
rogue eye back in his head, ynpickled and serene. The
scar-gash left his cheek. And Crewman Ursley had his
three fingers back on his hand.
But there is a weirdness in almost all actions done back-
wards. It wasn't as much fun regurgitating the space
calf as it had been eating it. And they did have a blue
hell of a time putting that thing back together. Roadstrum
hated to give up the magnificent homs and hooves, but
there was no way out of it. You go on that backwards jag
and you'd better expect the improbable.
.
Certain bodily functions are unusual and almost unpleas-
49
n
a
ant when done in reverse; but to get out of a hole like
they were in, you will put up with a lot.
.
They were back among the clashing rocks, “the rocks
wandering.” They were out of those rocks again on the other
side of them. They were lost in space again; but the
equivalent-day recorder was running normally now, in the
right direction and apparently at the right speed.
"Whyever did we choose that path into the clashing rocks
over al other possible paths? Roadstrum asked in amaze-
ment.
"Give a look at the other possible paths, Captain Road-
strum, as you looked before,” said Crewman Crabgrass.
"I look. I shudder," groaned Roadstrum. “I'm not sure
but what the terrible course we just backed out of is
not the best one. Horror, horrors everywhere we look.
*One thing, Roadstrum,” Captain Puckett called from his
homet. “We didn't lose any time on that side trip. We came
out at exactly the same moment that we went in.
("False voice,” wamed the communicator, “false voice.")
)
50
Tul
52
CHAPTER FOUR
He won a thousand worlds, and made the bums of them,
And mocked the Gentry for the broken thumbs of them.
He propped the Universe, but propped it jerkily,
For mighty Atlas after Georgie Berkeley.
а
He climbed the Siren-zo and made a clown of it,
And plucked the high note from the very crown of it.
Hold hard with heels and hands and crotch and cuticle
For episodes becoming epizootical.
Ibid
a
"I BELIEVE that I have found a sure way to beat the games,
Roadstrum said. And all the men groaned.
"Give it up, Captain Roadstrum,” Crewman Clamdigger
begged. “The smartest gambling med in all the worlds are
here, and a mental man you are not.
"This is a sure thing," Roadstrum insisted.
“Give it up, Captain," Crewman Trochanter pleaded.
"There are men here with luck growing out of their fingers
and toes, luck in their eyes and voices, in their minds and
in their nether-minds, in their beards and in their bowels.
And there is no man of us, even with false tongue, who can
say 'Lucky Captain Roadstrum' without laughing. A lucky
man you are not."
They were down on Roulettenwelt, the gamblers' world.
51
This was the showiest of all worlds, and it was said that
the streets there were paved with gold. Actually, only the
Concourse, the Main Mall, the Royal Row, Broadway West,
Vega, and Pitchman's Alley were paved with gold, and
these only in their central blocks, not over five thousands
of meters of roadway in all.
And crewmen went into the big houses and watched
the big gamblers; and they listened to the tall stories about
them. There was Johnny Greeneyes, who could see every
invisible marking on cards with his odd optics. There was
Pyotr Igrokovitch with the hole in his head. Pyotr was
the most persistent suicide of them all. Following heavy
losses in his youth he had shot himself through the head.
It had not killed him, but the shot had carried away great
portions of the caution and discretion lobes of his brain.
The passage through his head had remained open, with
pinkish flaps of flesh covering the holes fore and aft.
Now, whenever Pyotr suffered heavy losses, he jerked out
his pistol and shot himself through the head. It was all for
a joke; he always shot himself through the same passage;
and the 'brains” which he appeared to spew out the back
opening with the shot were in reality only phlegm that had
gathered in his head. But it was rather a weird thing when
seen by one for the first time, and Pyotr very often killed
spectators standing behind him.
There was the Asteroid Midas, a big-beaked bird of a
gambler who could do things with card and dice and markers
in his long talons that seemed unlawful. There was Sammy
the Snake, who held his “hands” in his mouth, or in his
little forked tongue darting around. The last man who
accused Sammy of cheating and who made a grab for the
hidden card lost his arm clear up to the shoulder. But the
man still insisted that Sammy did have a hidden card, that
he, the man, had succeeded in grabbing it and even then
held it in his hand, and that he would prove the thing
if Sammy would only give him back his hand and his am.
There was Willy Wuerfelsohn, Jr. Willy, as his father
had been, was a devoted gambler. The father had died of
starvation, being nineteen days and nights in a gambling
session without eating or drinking. Willy senior was a well-
liked man, and there were many people at his funeral mass.
"Requiem aeternam dona ei, Domine,” the priest said
rather near the end of it, "and now we pay special memorial
to him by the one thing he loved most.”
The priest and the pallbearers dealt out hands of hasty
poker on the coffin and bet and played. They showed, and
the winner was about to pull when a hand came up out of the
.52
a
coffin. It held, of course, a royal flush; and the hand raked
the money into the coffin with him.
-per misericordiam Dei requiescant in Pace," the priest
concluded. Then they took him out and buried him. A re
markable man, as was his son.
"I know these are all the finest gamblers from all the
worlds here," Roadstrum said. “So much the greater oppor-
tunity. This thing can't miss, can it, Crewman Bramble?”
"Of course it can miss,” Bramble protested. "We haven't
even tried it."
“No need to try it till the big money is down," Roadstrum
said plainly. He went to the table with the biggest gamblers
of them all and tried to get into the game.
“How much have you to bet, Captain?” Johnny Greeneyes
asked him. “You may be a big space captain and still
.
only a little man for money. This game is not for boys."
“I have two space homets and one million Chancels d'or
that is my mustering out pay, and ten thousand of same I
had in tip from Maybe Jones,” Roadstrum said with all the
pride of a well-heeled space captain.
“Captain,” said Johnny Greeneyes, “the lowest chip here
costs one billion Chancels d'or. It was Maybe Jones himself
who set this lower limit when he last played with us.
It has to be that way, you understand, to keep the kids
out. But there are lower tables for lower folk. There are even
some where one may buy a marker for as little as a hundred
thousand Chancels."
Roadstrum went grumbling and found a lower game. He
bet his million and ten thousand Chancels and lost.
Then he laughed, reversed it, bet them, and won.
He had in his pocket the Dong button from his homet,
and with this he could reverse any happening and run it
through again with corrected hindsight. Crewman Bramble
had completed the Dong with the other half of a floating
couple, supposed to reverse things in any really dire emer-
gency. And Captain Roadstrum, with his impassioned par-
ticipation, turned every gamble into a
into a dire emergency,
It worked again and again. Sometimes Roadstrum even
won a hand without needing the button for replay. When
he had several billion Chancels, he went to other tables
and other sorts of games, testing it and making sure before
he went to try the big boys.
The device worked again and again. At dicing, Roadstrum
sometimes had to turn it back for as many as a dozen diff-
erent throws to make his point, for he wasn't a lucky man.
It worked perfect at roulette. That was simple one-repeat
53
stuff. It worked well at roustabout poker. Roadstium had
more trouble at other poker games, the feedback of his
own gaming affecting the betting and drawing of the other
players. Sometimes he had to run it through twenty times
before he won a hand; he wasn't a very good poker player.
It would seem that all this replaying took a lot of time, but
it didn't. One goes into time, one backs out of it again,
and time is as when one started. Nor did others even notice
the dong of Roadstrum's button; all things in the sequence
were forgotten by the others and remembered only by Road-
strum the principle.
Then Roadstrum went back to the table with the big
gamblers. He convinced them that he was now a man of
substance, and they played with him. Golganger was now
in the game. Golganger was a creature of a species with
a difficult name. He was peculiar in the extreme, and
he had thirty thumbs on each hand. How that fellow
could shuffle and deal.
But Roadstrum noticed with satisfaction that all thirty
pair of Golganger's thumbs had been broken somewhere
along the way. And that Asteroid bird had had his
talons broken more than once, that was clear. Sammy the
Snake had a crook in his forked tongue that he had not
been bom with, and all the men of them, Pyotr, Johnny
Greeneyes, Willy Wuerfelsohn, had had their thumbs broken
several times in their lives. On Roulettenwelt, as on most
of the worlds, a shifty dealer will finally be spotted; he will
be dragged out by honest men, and they will break his
thumbs painfully; and he cannot be a shifty dealer for
another month or so.
"Ah, you gentry of the broken thumbs," Roadstrum
mocked, “you have been taken before, all of you, and I
will take you now. I work you like putty in the palm!”
They played, and Roadstrum won. The big gambling men
Smiled at him and played some more, and Roadstrum won
some more. Then the big men began to play seriously.
Roadstrum had to run one set through more than fifty times
to beat Johnny Greeneyes on it. Roadstrum's own thumb
was quite sore from pushing the. Dong button so many times.
And still Roadstrum won.
"You have won all the money we have with us,” Pyotr
Igrokovitch finally said, and he shot himself through the
head. "It isn't really much money, but to keep the game
going we will let it stand for a medium-sized world. All
right, does everybody bet one medium-sized world?”
"You fellows really own worlds?'' Roadstrum asked.
"Of course we do,” said Sammy the Snake. “Money is
54
>
D
>
»
only for the warm-up. The game doesn't start till the title-
tokens to worlds come onto the table. Are you nervous,
Little Captain of the Early Luck?"
“No, no, I'm not nervous. It's just that I never played for
worlds before.”
They played and Roadstrum won. He won and won. He
won big. He owned more than a hundred worlds now. He
had become a mogul in the universe. Many High-Space-
Emperors have fewer worlds. Many Confederation Chiefs
rule fewer,
“I be King Roadstrum now,” he said proudly.
"King Roadstrum, I want to have a word with you,"
said Crewman Bramble.
“Yes, what is it, Bramble?” Roadstrum asked when they
had gone apart to talk.
“I've been following the Dong button on the scope, Cap-
tain, that is, King,” Bramble said. "The pulse becomes a
little erratic. That Hondstarfer was an inventive kid, but
he wasn't really a careful worker. The button should be
worked over. There could be a failure.”
“Keep watching it, Bramble. I want to make a couple
of big grabs before I quit. If the pulse becomes too erratic,
let me know.”
Roadstrum went back to the table and continued to win.
Johnny Greeneyes got green all over. The great crest-feathers
of the Asteroid Midas wilted down as his spirits fell. Sammy
the Snake was suffering the miseries, and there is nothing
sicker than a sick snake. Pyotr shot himself through the head
six times in quick succession, banged his empty pistol down
on the table, and cursed.
"I quit,” said Willy Wuerfelsohn, Jr. sullenly. “I've only
three of four worlds left, and I'll need them to get back
in a game in the morning.'
"One thousand worlds," Roadstrum said. “I be High
Emperor Roadstrum now."
"High Emperor Roadstrun, I want a word with you,
said Crewman Bramble.
“This is it, boys," Roadstrum told the gamblers. “It has
been a pleasure, and I don't know any man who wins so
graciously as I do. –Well, Bramble, it was getting even
more erratic, was it? Well, it was a good little button.
“No, no, Roadstrum, the pulse has cleared. It's working
perfectly now. Go on with the game. Let the sky be the
limit."
“I have won skies enough this day, and my eyes are so
tired that I can hardly tell the green suits from the blue.
Here, take little Dong and put him back in the hornet.
55
n
n
>
>
>
And round up the men. We are off to visit other worlds,
perhaps even some of the one thousand.”
Crewman Bramble took the Dong button back to the
hornet and began to round up the man. And great Roadstrum
went down to the men's room as he had been meaning to do
for some time.
"Here, here," he told the attendant. "I'm no commoner.
“
I own a thousand worlds. Put tissue with the Emperor's
Crest on it into the stall for me. I can use no less."
"Put a Chancel d'or into my hand and I will,” said the
attendant.
"Double or nothing.” Roadstrum snapped
The attendant looped a coin and won. They doubled and
doubled, and the attendant won. Roadstrum flipped a coin
and still the attendant won. Roadstrum no longer had a
Dong button in his pocket to reverse his calls with.
They cut cards for it, and the attendant continued to win.
"It's a hundred thousand Chancels now and a bit more,"
the attendant said. “Do you want to go ahead?"
"Sure, double you again. This time I win,” said Roadstrum.
But the attendant won,
"It's three hundred billion Chancels now," the attendant
said; “do you want to keep on?”
“I'm about to the end of my cash,” Roadstrum said. “How
about title to a medium-sized world?"
“All right. I always wanted to own a world,” the attendant
said. The attendant won the world, then two, then four,
then eight, then sixteen, then thirty-two, then sixty-four-
“But I don't have anything to worry about," Roadstrum
said. “I only have to win once to come out of it.” But it was
the attendant who won and won and won.
“How many worlds did you say you had?" the attendant
asked after a while.
“One thousand exactly."
'You owe me a thousand and twenty-four. Give me the
titles to the one thousand, and sign this I.O.U. for twenty-
four worlds. I can trust you to supply them in a reasonable
time?"
"Yes, I'll win them, or buy them somehow, or conquer
them. I am a man of my word; I will get you your worlds.
Now please, put the Emperor's Crest tissue into the stall
for me. I've certainly paid enough for it.”
"Can't,” said the attendant. “You're not an Emperor any-
more. You've lost all your worlds. You're a commoner again.
Use plain paper.
The attendant still owns those worlds today. He is High
56
Emperor and he administers his worlds competently. He is
a man of talent,
A thing unseen is on its face unseenble;
a being, savored not nor heard, unbe-able;
and be assured there's naught at all outside of us
unless perceived by one or by a pride of us,
nor someone see it move it will not move at all,
and damn! he had a husky guy to prove it all
Ibid
They were down on Kentron-Kosmon, an insignificant
world. And yet, in the middle of Space Port there (a cow
pasture rather; it wasn't much of a spaceport) there was a
nice plaque of electrim and on it was lettered: This is the
Exact Center of the Universe.
Whether or not the plaque spoke the truth, this was the
only world that had such a plaque. And the people of
Kentron (there weren't very many of them; it wasn't a very
big world) had a sort of cockey pride over their centrality,
or over something.
But all the homet men were flush (even Roadstrum had
partly recouped his fortunes on Pieuvre World), and they
wanted to have some fun. And Kentron had one fame be
sides its central location. It is always Saturday night there,
was a proverb about the place.
"The fact is, we're so knob-headed dumb that we can't
count the days,” said a crinkly-haired young female, "so we
call them all Saturday.”
Well, you try to count them. A full day lasted about
one equivalent minute. Imagine thirty seconds of daylight
and thirty seconds of darkness! If you want to do some-
thing in the dark, you'd better do it fast, is another pro-
verb of Kentron, and it has e certain challenge to it. On
Kentron they had pace.
The men explored Kentron quickly. It was only about five
kilometers around it. It had twenty-five high class hotels
on it, and each man and one houri established himself in
one of them as king or queen for the time of the visit.
It had about five hundred blind-crows, pubs, winegardens,
or beer-cellars, and several of them seemed to be lively.
There was a lot of laughter and music going on; the people
were fair of face and figure and quite friendly; the weather
was almost perfect with its constant variety (one gets neither
57
very hot nor very cold in thirty seconds); the whole little
world seemed to be a series of continuing floor shows;
and moreover there was challenge.
Almost central to the planet and to the wiverse, was a
little camival. There was the Corn-Crib (you had heard all
the jokes before, you had met all the girls before somewhere,
and you still liked them both); there was the Big Casino
with its waming sign Dong buttons disallowed (the word
had got around); there was a Wrestle-the-Alligator Tank,
a tattoo parlor, and the Booth. The big, good-natured-look-
ing man in the booth was the Challenge, and they all felt
it.
He winked them a great wink and the twenty-four men
and one houri winked it back at him. He was a man of their
own measure.
There were signs posted variously about the big fellow's
booth. I'm the guy who keeps it all going. If I weren't here,
you wouldn't be here either. I know it all, I'm a smart-aleck.
Loan-sharking and fencing. Any time I can't see you, you've
had it. Country-style wrestling and scuffling done.
There were, moreover, dozens of telescopes stuck around
the booth, one big one pointing straight down into a hole
clear through the planet; and the big man moved his eye
rapidly from eyepiece to eyepiece, using them all. He had
three sets of earphones on his ears, and he was surrounded
by whole banks of instruments and scopes that be scanned
constantly.
"Just what is the pitch here, friend?" Roadstrum asked
the big fellow. "What is it that you do?"
"Anything and everything," said the big man. “I see them
all. I do them all. I know them all. I throw them all."
"You don't look very deep to me,” Roadstrum grunbled.
"Oh, I'm not. It isn't my profundity that makes me a
mental marvel, it's the amazing detail of my perception.
There is nobody else who can keep so many things on his
mind at once. Ask me anything, anything at all, Roadstrum.”
“Big fellow, if you know it all, then you can answer
one small question that bothers me. We are on a very small
world here; it should not have an atmosphere; it should not
have a gravity of any consequence. By rights, we ought to
be in our spacesuits now and wearing our static-grip boots.
But we move about free and easy, breathing and function-
ing, and with our usual weight and balance. We have no-
ticed that this is so on many small worlds. We appreciate
it, but we do not understand it. How can it be?"
"You men are from World," said the big fellow. "There-
58
>
fore you know of Phelan, who was also from World, and
therefore you must understand Phelan's Corollary.”
"Certainly we know it, or at least Crewman Bramble does,"
said Roadstrim. “He does much of our knowing for us.
"But I doubt that even he knows the Corollary to Phelan's
Corallary,” the big fellow said. “It states that ‘As regards
very small celestial bodies of a light-minded nature, the
law of levity is allowed to supercede the law of gravity.'
I call it the compassionate corollary. If I had to sit here
all these ages in a spacesuit, I don't believe I'd make it."
"Get out of the way, Captain Roadstrum,” Crewman
Trochanter blared. “This fellow advertises country-style scuf-
fling. Let him try great Trochanter at the wrestle. Answer
me, fat-face; who is the saltiest sky-dog of them all?"
“I am,” said the big man. So he and Crewman Trochanter
joined in the big wrestle. Trochanter put everything on the
big guy, and the big guy twisted around in it like he was
made of Rega-rubber. He was always craning his head and
neck out of a hold to glance through one of his telescopes
or scan a bank of instruments. Trochanter threw him flat
on his face, and the man twisted his head for a gawk into
the telescope that looked straight down through the planet.
“Just in time," he said. “I almost let a couple of them get
away from me that time.” Then he raised Trochanter up and
slammed him shatteringly on his back, forming a spread-eagle
indentation in the hard ground, seven feet long.
All the men looked kind of funny then. Trochanter was
as good a country scuffler as you'll find anywhere. But
spacemen can't let a tough camey keep the hop on them.
One of them would have to toss him, if they had to go through
the whole list.
"Who is the saltiest sky-dog of them all?! Crewman Clam-
digger demanded.
"I am,” said the big man. "Just a second till I scan all the
scopes again and make sure everything is spinning right.
All right, man, have at it.”
That big fellow pinned Crevoman Clamdigger so fast that
it was spooky. He was good. He knew every trick, and he
out-stronged them all. But still it was required that they
all try him. “Who is the saltiest sky-dog of them all?" a
crewman would demand. “I am,” the big fellow would an-
swer, and then the battle.
He threw them one after the other. Di Prima, Kolonymous,
Boniface, Mundmark, and after each brief set-to the big
fellow nished back to peer through the spyglasses and give
a quick listen through the earphones. Burpy, Fracas, Snow,
Bramble, he tossed those four mighty quick. Deep John
59
»
the hobo; that was an odd match. Deep John has a special
hold, “the double caboose,” and if the hig fellow hadn't
countered it with the "little-Frisco switch” he'd have gone
down to defeat there. Crabgrass, Oldfellow, Lawrence, Hum-
phrey, each one asked who was the saltiest dog of them
all, and each got his thumping answer.
The match with Margaret the houri was even odder, with
pretematural elements sprung in. She tumed herself into
a brindled wildcat and went for his throat. Got a good
piece of it too. But he got her soundly with the “cat-cracker.
And yet, after she was back in her houri foun, she was still
licking good salty blood off her chops, his not hers, and
looking more than half pleased with herself.
Eseldon, Septimus, Swinnery, Ursley, one, two, three, four,
he took them. He took Crewman Threefountains. Then he
tangled with Captain Puckett. This was a groaning, bulging,
eye-popping contest. It lasted all through a thirty-second
night, and all noticed that, when the two grappled stren-
uously and almost to the death, the stars in the the sky
dimmed and nearly went out.
"That was too close,” the big fellow breathed heavily after
he had left Captain Puckett unconscious on the ground.
"Mind if I strap on my fourteen-direction tele-goggles for
our encounter, Roadstrum, and my three pair of earphones? I
just can't allow myself to be held away from it so long." He
put the things on.
"Use anything you want to," Roadstruim shouted. "It will
avail you nothing. Who is the saltiest sky-dog of them all?"
"I am," said the big man. And they went at it.
Roadstrum was fast as well as mighty. He was stronger
than great Trochanter or great Puckett, and faster than Crab-
grass or Clamdigger. He knew the "funny-man back-off,” the
“gandy grapple,” the “mule-skinners' mangle” and the “surgi-
cal hammer.'
The big guy countered with the "three-jaw cruncher," the
'bandygo back-breaker” and the “badger-trap.” The short
days and nights flickered by, and Roadstrum was looking
better and better. He was aware to every possible trick, and
a particular awareness came into his mind now.
“This guy is carrying me, Roadstrum said to himself.
"What does he want? And he tumbled the big fellow
with the “coon-cat crotch-hold.”
"I want a favor of you, Roadstrim," the big fellow an-
swered inside Roadstrum's head. “Promise to grant me one
small favor, and I'll let you throw me.” And he smashed
Roadstrum one with the "Samoyed sledge."
"Anything to soothe my pride and save my reputation,”
60
»
n
a
Roadstrum thought back into the big fellow's head. “Let
me throw you then, and make me look real good.” And he
sent the big fellow crashing with the "down-under dingo-
trip.”
"It is a bargain,” the big fellow thought back into Road-
strum's head. And he did make it look good. He turned
green when Roadstrum clamped him with the "Ruttigan
rib-racker,” he went down in pain when the great Captain
applied the “double bull-whack," and he allowed himself
to be pinned in the "big spider.”
Roadstrim was the victor. Roadstrum was the saltiest
sky-dog of them all.
"You men go enjoy yourselves for the nonce,” said great
Roadstrum, “and take the pleasures of the planet. I have
certain soothing things to say to this glorious vanquished
man. Be you away. It becomes a private thing.
The men, their plaudits sunk now to a mild roar, trekked
off whooping and hollering and praising their Captain.
"And what is the small favor I am to do for you, big
fellow?” Roadstrum asked graciously.
"Mind the booth for me, Roadstrum, while I go to the
john. I have no relief man here."
"Why of course I will. That's a small enough favor.”
"It is more important and more intricate than it appears,"
the big man said. “Let me explain it to you.” And he ex-
plained to Roadstrum the use and importance of the tele-
scopes and earphones and instruments and instrumental
scopes.
"It is fantastic,” Roadstrum said. “And it really is of such
importance? I'll do it, of course. I'm a man of my word. But
I had no idea that so much depended on it. The responsi-
bility worries me a little. You will be right back, you say?"
“I will go to the john, Roadstrum, and I will come right
back," the big fellow said. The big fellow left. And Roadstrum
devoted himself to the business of watching the booth. It
was intricate almost beyond belief; it required a degree
of concentration that took a lot out of a man,
The down-telescope through the planet had a sixteen-way
prismatic mirror on the other end of it (where it emerged
downside planet), and integrating those sixteen sectors into
a meaningful hemisphere was a mind-straining task.
The three sets of headphones that he was wearing now
brought neither audio nor radio to the ears of Roadstrum,
but rather three families of cosmic tones. The instruments
and scopes led him to sense the various waves and fields
of the universes. But none of these was the main thing.
The main thing was the centrality of his mind that was
61
tangential to every body in the all-everything-extent. What
did not touch him in one of his senses or apperceptions was
not.
“I am holding it,” said Roadstrum. “It may be that I am
the only one holding it at the moment. And if I let it go,
if I fail, then everything fails. A few dozen or a few million
bodies cannot survive alone. Each one that drops into the
void of inattention will weaken the whole and topple the
balance.
"It pulses, it all pulses with my own effort. The balance
holds, and the lost ones are plucked out of the void each
time. But it was near that time therel I must be stronger.
And it becomes still nearer every time that the lost ones
should careen the sound ones and draw all into the void
with them.
"Why doesn't the big fellow come backl”
You see, the big fellow didn't come back right away.
Quite a few of those hasty days and nights flipped past, and
Roadstrum realized that a great part of an equivalent day
had already gone.
Roadstrum could not leave the booth until the big man
returned. Captain Puckett had offered to watch the booth
for Roadstrum. Various crewmen had offered to watch it,
but Roadstrum had to refuse. They were all good men,
but they just weren't good enough. The responsibility was
too great. Roadstrum must maintain the booth till the big
man came back. If he did not, the skies would stagger and
fall down, and it would all be gone.
Now rankling anxiety and envy rose up in him. He sworo
that he'd let the worlds fall down after all if the big fellow
didn't return soon; but he knew he'd never do that. He
would keep the thing going as long as he possibly could.
If everything ended, it would be the end of himself also.
But he'd like to be having fun, as Puckett and the crew-
men were. It was all a frolic on Kentron. This was one place
where laughter was literally heard around the world. Road-
strum was amazed and amused to hear the booming laughter
of Crewman Trochanter coming to him from every horizon.
He'd have been more amused if he could have added his
own laughter to it. There seemed also to be quite an
amount of female glee mixed in with the large lilting voices
of the crewmen. They were all on an antic, a revel. And
Roadstrum, whose present business was to sense everything
everywhere, could not help but feel it all.
"Bless the bony-headed, splayfooted bunch of them,"
Roadstrum said. "Bless the fine native folk who are enter-
62
taining them so gaily. And curse the big man if he do not
come back quickly. I'm crushed under the weight of this job.
I'm avid to be at the pleasures of this world."
But the big man did not come back right away, not for
an equivalent day, not for three of them, not for an equiva-
lent week. Roadstrum, of course, could not allow himself to
sleep, hardly to blink. The responsibility was far too great.
His eyes had become red-rimmed, and his ears were turned
into sounding brass. His mind was in such a tangle that the
far worlds reeled drunkenly, and only with the greatest
effort could Roadstrum steady them again.
"The strength, the grandeur, the majesty of that big man,
Roadstrum said in awe. “He has held it all going for years
and centuries, so he said, and I am weary after two weeks of
it? Imagine his concentration, his width and depth of mind,
his spaciousness, the power and the tide of him who could
master it all so easily, and I stumble awkwardly through
it. Imagine the serenity of that man, the peace-in-power,
the scope, the dynamism, the balancel Imagine him with
a spit run through him end to end and he roasting on it!
Why don't he come back?"
For it was a fact that the big fellow didn't come back
right away. There was a lot going on there on Kentron,
and Roadstrum was missing it. He was not missing it com-
pletely, of course, for whatever he missed completely simply
was not. He monitored Kentron as he monitored every world
everywhere. It was the personal participation in it that he
missed.
For one thing, it was now camival season on Kentron.
There had seemed a sort of camival atmosphere about the
place from the beginning, but now it was real carnival.
,
There was high roistering going on such as you do not find
everywhere every day.
"Ah, I have relief," Roadstrum said suddenly. “And from
World, of all places! He's a curious round-headed young boy,
a Living Buddha is what he is, and he holds it all in his
concentration and observation without instruments. I'm
freed for the moment. I'll go find the big fellow and see
what's been taking him so long. I will
“No, I will noti The young boy slipped beyond it. He is
tricky. He really wished to exterminate it all then, after he
had such a good hold on it. Had he lulled me and perhaps two
or three others, he'd have done it too. We barely saved it
in time. Aren't there any others now? Ah, there's a solitary
creature on Goffgorina who holds it all and lets it go
and holds it again; but he isn't a steady creature.
Now there's a mountain-strider on Pelwia who holds it all
63
a
for a while. Those fellows are all quite capable, to do it
without instruments, but none of them understands the
importance of it. At any moment there may be a dozen sus-
taining persons scattered through the universes, but they
cannot be trusted allwhere and allwhen. And what if there
comes the moment when there are none? The responsibility
is more than I can bear.
"I have to see it all in total depth all the timel" he bawled
out. “I have to see every apple tree on World, every apple
on every tree, every worm in every apple, every entrail-
parasite of every worm, every cell of every parasite,
every molecule of every cell. I have to see and understand
every nucleate particle of every heat-happy sun, I must
know every follicle of every trinominal plant on Ghar, every
awn and glume of the eimer-wheat fields of New Dakota,
every eagle of the Nine-Sky worlds, every mite in the under-
feathers of every eagle, every microbe on every mite.
"I must know in which hand Crewman Clamdigger holds
the coin in the game he plays with the girl at this moment
I must know the date and the head on that coin, and the
flaw-stamping in the obverse lower scroll. I must know the
man who made the slightly-flawed die that stamped that
coin. I must know his niece. I must know the fellow she went
out with three years ago once only. I must know the little
kernel growing on his adrenal and beginning to give him
trouble. And I must know the million rogue cells in that ker-
nel that will be ten million tomorrow. I must know every ob-
ject everywhere in many powers deeper depth.
"The spyglasses, the scopes, the instruments are but
mnemonics and guides. At every moment I must see and
feel the totality of it and all the ultimate detail in this great
mind of mine. I stagger under the load of it.
“WHY DON'T THAT GUY COME BACK?"
The big fellow, you remember, had not come back right
away, and now several equivalent months had gone by.
Camival season was over now, though there was still a lot
of whooping and hollering, on Kentron. Now it was the
cloud-catcher season. The fleet went out, and the crewmen
took the two homets along with it (they told Roadstrum
they'd be back for him bye and bye). The fleet spread its
webs of spidery silver and silver nitrate, and caught and
formed clouds in the nets. They dragged their catch back
to Kentron with them and forced it to rain and lighten on
the little world. So it was another festival-time, the Light-
ning-Lupercal that out-camivaled the carnival.
Then it was hunting season on Kentron, then field-sports
64
2)
a
season, then social-sports season. All the men were having
howlers, except Roadstrum.
“If I have to see every atom in the universes, why can't
I see the big fellow and know what's delaying him?" Road-
strum asked himself. “Why? Because he's a Subjective,
that's why. He's a Subjective, just as I unhappily also am
at the moment. I wish the big fellow would come back.
The big fellow came back.
"Thanks, Roadstrun,” he said, “I'U take the booth over
again."
Roadstrum tore the equipment off himself and collapsed
to the ground from the steep weariness of it all.
"Where were you?” he moaned. “You were gone six equiva-
lent months."
"Roadstrum, I'd been tied to that booth for a couple
hundred years. Now I'm ready to go for another long spell.
But a man does need a break sometimes."
"I had no idea it was so difficult or that so much was
involved in it."
"I tried to tell you, but words will not convey it. One
has to be inside it to comprehend the magnitude."
“How did such a thing begin?"
“Don't you understand? It was the beginning. It's the
only thing there is. But it was haphazard for so many aeons
that it spooks me to think about it. There were always three
or four maintaining it, but there was no one person shoul-
dering the responsibility. 'Somewhere there must be one per-
son strong enough to take it all over,' I said to myself in
a direful moment, but the strongest person I could think of
was myself. I've been doing it ever since. A few centuries
ago Berkeley gave it a philosophical basis, but could I get
him to shoulder the thing itself? Yes, for a year or so.
And then the flannel-mouthed Irishman talked his way out
of it and I had it again. Well, it's a job.”
"Is it really so important in every detail?"
"Yes. You are a detail, Roadstrum. If I put you out of
my mind for a moment, then you are not. By my attention
I hold it all in being. Nothing exists unless it is perceived.
If perception fails for a moment, then that thing fails
forever.'
"Suppose you neglected but one aspect of a faraway
thing for but one moment?
"Sometimes I do. On several of the worlds there are
beautiful roses that have no odor. It is because I forgot
to smell them for one brief instant. There are several curious
bobtailed little animals in various systems. It is because, for
an instant, I forgot to think of the ends of their tails.
65
Here you will find a blind or deaf or halt creature; it is
because I did not give them my full attention in one moment.
"Well, you are certainly a sturdy man to stand up under
it.”
"Yes, but I hate to be misjudged. They say that I bear
it all on my shoulders, as though I were a stud or a balk.
It is not my great shoulders, it is the amazing head on my
great shoulders that maintains it all."
The crewmen were ready to go. They heard of a world
that made all others seem trivial. Now that Roadstrum was
freed from watching the booth, they said to come along,
Captain, and let's be with it.
So they readied the hornets.
"I never did know your name, big fellow," Roadstrum said
in parting:
“Atlas.
What thing they were and what an architecture yet,
What song they sang is not beyond conjecture yet.
Where heroes' bones for ages strewed the shore about!
A murdering song that men can say no more about/
They came in cresting waves and boldly tried for it,
And broke and blanched and balked and burned and died
for it.
A tune that must ensorcel them and not them all!
The missing note was really what had got them all.
Ibid
2
They came to Sireneca. “There is something the matter
with the spelling of that,” Roadstrum said. “It doesn't look
right.” This was the world of the Siren-Zo, the Siren-Animal,
which is either a creature or a musical mountain or a mani-
festation or a group of very peculiar folks.
"I really wasn't ready for another truculent world,” Road-
strum said. “We've had it so pleasant at all our stops since
leaving Kentron Planet."
They had been to Nine Worlds; they had taken over
Nine Worlds. They had been involved in the work and re-
creation for which they were best fitted, and it had really
been quite a pleasant interlude,
There had been leagues and anti-leagues on Nine Worlds,
there had been conspiracy and war and revolution, there
66
had been crude butchery, and there had been really fine
weaponry. The twenty-plus men from the hornets made them-
selves at home in the situation. They were wonderful fight-
ing men, the least competent of them able to command
armies. They took command of troops on opposite sides of
the broil (at one time there were five different sides to the
battles), and they connived and gained.
Roadstrum himself was probably the finest fighting man
in the universe, and now he discovered that he was also
a master diplomat. At the time when they had had to make
new tongues for themselves (after that little embarrassment
on Lamos of the Giants), Roadstrum had made a forked
tongue for himself. He was now as polished and pleasant
a liar as you would ever want to meet, and he took all
those folks in every conference.
The trouble on Nine Worlds was that things had been
a little too loose. Now the hornet men came out on top,
and they tightened things up a little. They brought in
nine world-managers from Guild, and they laid down rules
to be followed. For now Roadstrum was absolute owner
of Nine Worlds.
“I know that none of you men wish to be burdened with
property,” he said, “or I'd give you a world each, as long
as they lasted. But since none of you have any such desire-
"I have,” said Crewman Snow. "I want a world."
They hadn't known before that Snow was a grasping
greedy man. It was hard to understand how a hornet crew-
man (they were a free and easy lot) could want to be
burdened with ownership of a world and the income of
billions of billions of Chancels every quarter, but there
is someone like that in every crowd.
Roadstrum gave Crewman Snow title to one of the worlds
with very bad grace. He sent the titles to the other eight
worlds by dispatch to the men's room attendant on Roulet-
tenwelt, reducing his debt somewhat.
So the Nine Worlds affair had been pleasant easy business,
and now they had come to another tough world. They
were already hooked on Sireneca, and they hadn't intended
to be. They had joked about it coming in, but they had
known that it had its hook-in them already, that they would
have to kill it or be killed by it.
“Will you pour hot wax in our ears as was done the first
time, Captain Roadstrim?"" Crewman Clamdigger jibed. “And
tie yourself to the mast? But we don't have a mast."
“I will pour hot lead into your throats to still your chatter,"
Roadstrum said. "We are fools to be into this thing but
we cannot back off. It isn't as good a tune as that. When
67
>
we find the lost note and fit it in we will probably dis-
cover that it is a very ordinary tune."
"We haven't heard it yet," Crewman Threefountains said.
"In our modern times we always hear a thing before
we have heard it,” Roadstrum maintained. "Our instruments
have already recorded it and broken it down. Crewman
Bramble reads the score and is entranced by it, up to a
point. He is the most intelligent of us and he enjoys music
in the most intelligent way, reading the score without the
noise to distract. The others of us, for our insufficiency, are
doomed to listen vulgarly.
"But we all know that there is something wrong with
that tune, even before we come to it. Our instruments are
experiencing frustration, and so are we. 'Something missing,
something missing.' they transmit. 'Imperative that the miss-
ing element be found. Not very good tune anyhow. Yes,
there's the final high note missing in the tune, and we must
find it or we will never sleep again. Many brave men have
given their lives for this and failed. I say that we will not
fail! We will force the missing note from the thing. And
then we will kill it so it will no more be a hazard to farers."
Sireneca was mostly ocean, mean ocean with steely choppy
waves following a strange harmonic. They did not have
free flow, nor real crest, nor tide. Something was missing
from the ocean waves. Their tune was the tune of the planet,
and it was an incomplete tune.
There was but one small continent or island on Sireneca,
and in the middle of it was the animal, or the mountain,
or the folk. The homets had set down on the flanks of
this thing, and the crewmen made ready to solve it.
"Let us tackle this as a strategic problem,” said great
Captain Puckett. "You had better let me handle this,
Roadstrum. A strategic man you are not. Formulate the
problem, Crewman Bramble."
“The problem is to force the missing note from the
creature or creatures so that our apprehensions and frus-
trations may be quieted and our sanity restored. The an-
cillary of the problem is that we do this without ourselves
perishing, as all other farers here have perished.”
"And what is the nature of the opponent, Crewman
Bramble?”
"That we do not know, Captain Puckett, nor whether it is
a single or plural thing. In earliest mythology it was re-
ferred to as the Siren-Zo or the Siren-Animal, as being
one. But in appearance it is many, as we now see it, in the
form of various well-bodied, golden-haired, singing women
68
n
>
on the numerous outcroppings of the musical mountain. In
what manner they kill all who try to come up to reach them
is not known. Our only procedure seems to be that true
one-trial and error. I suggest that the most useless man of
us begin the climb now, and we will see how he dies."
"Crewman Nonvalevole, start climbing," Captain Puckett
ordered. “Make for the nearest of the goldie-blondes there.
“All right,” said Crewman Nonvalevole, and he began to
climb the musical mountain up to the nearest siren. There
was an odd thing about his climbing. Often the rocks of
the mountain shivered under his feet as if to throw him
down.
“The mountain itself is the creature,” said Captain Road-
strum. “The scree and the boulders are part of its hide, and
it shivers its hide like a World horse. The whole thing is
alive. The blonde maidens are but tentacles of the thing.
“May I tangle with such a tentaclel” said Crewman Crab-
grass,
"We must find the mortal center of the creature and attack
it there," Roadstrum continued. "We will not kill it by scratch-
ing its hide. But when we do find its mortal center and kill
it there, then, I believe, in its moment of death agony, we
will hear the missing note. That is my conjecture.
"Oh be quiet, great Captain Roadstrum,” all the men
said. “A conjecture man you are not."
Crewman Nonvalevole had now climbed nearly to the
nearest blondie siren. She rolled limpid blue eyes at him
and sang in wonderful brass. It was a green-country foot-
shuffling tune with a touch of boogie and a touch of ballad,
none of your fancy things. It was the sort of tuine that faring
men themselves sing, but incomparably better, and with a
rich beat and swing. The homet instruments had been wrong
to call it "Not very good tune anyhow," for it was good. It
rose to the high stunning happy pitch-and then nothing.
The climax note was missing and it drove them all crazy,
And then it began once more. Again and again it rose,
and left the gaping silence at its apex. Men would perish
of hunger and thirst yearning for that missing note. It
had to be found.
Crewman Nonvalevole was up to the shimmering blondie
now. Singingly she smiled at him and patted her golden
knees. The crewman sat on her blonde lap and enfolded
her in passionate amms.
There was lightning without thunder. The blondie brushed
ashes and cinders out of her lap, ashes and cinders that were
all the mortal remains of Crewman Nonvalevole,
69
n
"That was sudden and consuming,” said Captain Puckelt.
"Did
you get a reading on it, Crewman Brambleja
"Twelve thousand amps, nine million volts, a little over
One million cycles. A pretty good jolt. She never missed
a note either, except the missing note itself. And I am sure
that I heard a hint of that too, right at the frying moment.
It didn't sound, but it was near to becoming a sound."
"The almost-sound was from Crewman Nonvalevole, not
from Siren-sis,” said Captain Roadstrum. 'In his moment
he did come near to voicing the note. I believe that I am
on the right course. I have this intuition that we must go for
the interior vitals. The outer hide of the thing is dangerous.
“Be quiet, Captain Roadstrum,” said Captain Buckett.
"An intuitive man you are not. It's a pretty good electric
chair they have though.'
"It isn't new; it's been done before,” Crewman Crabgrass
cut in. “They have them on Womboggle World, electric
chairs in the form of beautiful women so the condemned can
die happy."
"Who is the next most worthless man?" Captain Puckett
asked. “That would be Crewman Stumble, I believe.
"Ill not go up!" swore Crewman Stumble. “I am not
worthless to me. Send a dummy man up.
"That's what you are,” said the relentless Captain Puckett.
"You will go up. and you will trail a ground wire behind
you like a tail. We will see if this one crisps you as thor-
oughly as that one fried Crewman Nonvalevole. We will
get several of these fryings and we may be able to establish
a pattem as to the way they work."
"Well, all right, but I don't like it,” Crewman Stumble
grumbled. Crewman Bramble attached a ground wire to
Stumble like a tail, and Stumble began to climb the moun-
tain toward the swishing blondie on a low left ledge. She
ground out the ballad, fluting brass and a touch of fiddle
music, in her buxom voice. Crewman Stumble became live-
lier the nearer he came to her, and she sang him up to her
with an ever heftier voice, all the foot-stomping ascending
notes, except the final que. The top of the tune was still
missing.
Crewman Stumble finished his up-jaunt with a wild surge
to the blondie's outstretched arms, leaped aboard her spa-
cious frame, and locked around her with arms and legs.
She intruded a laughing note into the ballad, but not the
note itself. Then she gave him a smooch that was one of the
great things.
Once more there was lightning without thunder. Then
the blondie was brushing the ashes and embers of Crew-
70
.
man Stumble off her breast. And the damnable song rose
and fell again and again, and the top of it was always
missing.
“Did you get a reading that time, Crewman Bramble?"
Captain Puckett asked.
“Yes. I believe it is the beginning of success,” Crewman
Bramble stated. “The ground wire made a difference. It
vaporized, of course, and the reaction killed three other crew-
man near this end of it, but we do show progress. We be-
gin to establish a pattem. It was only eleven thousand and
fifty amps that time, eight and a quarter million volts, and
the frequency remained the same. This time we'll use a
heavier ground wire . hell, we'll use two of them!”
"Who is the next most useless man?” Captain Puckett
asked, looking around.
“Enough!” Captain Roadstrum announced ponderously.
"I am taking command once more.'
“But, Roadstrum, we are proceeding according to scienti-
fic testing methods,” Puckett protested. “Please don't inter-
fere. A scientific man you are not."
“An excess of science will leave none of us alive, Puckett.
Scouting patrol, see how we may find entrance to the
thing itself! We itch in its hide, and it scratches us to kill.
But it cannot scratch us if we are inside it. I have old
folk memory of ascending the thing inside. We will find the
passage.
The scouters scouted. They went on homet instruments
when bankrupt of other ideas. The instruments told them
that the mountain-animal was indeed hollow, or at least
had an open anal-oral passage, and that the entrance could
be found, very deep and under water. The instruments
indicated just where that passage was, but shuddered
when asked whether there were dangers involved.
"As the finest diver and the finest all-man, I will go
first,” Captain Roadstrum announced. “Do you all follow
me like close tails. If we drown and die, remember that
one death is as good as another."
“No it is not,” said Crewman Mundmark. “I'd rather die
crisped by one of those blondies than drown in black
water.”
Captain Roadstrum dived a great dive down into the black
water, in under the shelf of the continent that was also the
mountain and the creature; and all the men followed him.
He dove till it seemed that his lungs would burst. They
did burst a little, bye and bye, and this gave him some
relief. It also left a dark red trail that the men could follow.
Then they all broke surface in a black cavity very deep
71
1
>
n
.
under the thing. The only light was a garish dark red one
far above them.
"It goes five hundred meters up and is a tricky climb," said
Captain Puckett.
"We are tricky men; we can climb it,” said Captain Road-
strum. “Do you see it now, men, do you see the form of
the creature? It is a big rambling spider-form inside here,
and the mountain is a living shell it has built for itself,
for it's a mixed creature. The tune has a deeper tone inside
here, and one can make out the words, but what do they
mean. “Da luan, da mort,' over and over again. 'Da luan,
da mort,' what does that mean, over and over again, Crew-
man Bramble?"
"It's the treadmill song out of an Irish cycle," said Bramble.
‘Monday and Tuesday and Monday and Tuesday and
Monday and Tuesday, so the poor slaves had to sing at
their labor for the puca. And finally a great savior came
and broke the charm. 'And Wednesday too,' he said, and
then it was all over with.”
"Roadstrum is the great savior who breaks the charm,“
Roadstrum announced. “I will set a Wednesday-term to the
monster. But there are other elements in this. Is not the
climbing up of the giant spider and the slaying of it an
Arabian-cycle thing? And did not Hans Schultz, in the
green-island cycle, have a dream of the same thing? Upward,
men; we are onto a great killl"
Hawsers, cables a meter thick they climbed-and these
were but the fine silks of the giant spider. The hairs on its
toes were even thicker, and the men blasted them, beginning
the attack. A note of alarm crept into the mountainous
singing now. The creature knew that it was invaded but did
not know how or by what. The creature sent tremors through
its webs that threatened to dash the men down to their
deaths.
"We must go inside the creature and kill it interiorly,"
Roadstrum announced when they had ascended a hundred
meters. So they all entered the vulgar cavity of the thing
and continued to climb upward.
There was still light,, more so than before. It was more
garish, redder, more threatening than it had been. That
first light had been but the reflection of this. The mountainous
interior spider had nine outside eyes and one great glowing
interior eye by which he liked to contemplate himself. This
was the spookiest light ever seen; and was the spookiest
place, but one, in all the universes.
"The big red interior eye like a beacon is the mortal
center of the creature," Roadstrun announced. “We will
72
(
>
kill it there and it will die. And we will get our missing
note then, or we will die too, from deprivation. It goes into
a frenzy now as we close in on it. Who is the scareder,
we or it?"
"We are, we are,” the men cried. "We're the scaredest
men ever.”
The singing mountain had become hysterical with fright
of the small things climbing up its maw. The song was
really a racy one now, a lot of good fever in it, a black-
blood beat that was solid. It rose and moaned, and only
the top of it was missing. But it had outlined itself now,
and the final note, when it came, would be worth it all.
It was now seen that the entire mountain-creature was one
single instrument, and the whole planet was its sounding
box. The blondie-orifices were but small reeds of this amazing
organ, the giant web-threads were quivering strings.
Now the music-mountain was frantic, and so were the
men. "Somebody dies pretty quick now," gasped Crewman
“
Cutshark, “either we or he, and I don't much care which
so long as it is swift."
“Mind those quivering stalks there, Cutshark,” Roadstrum
warned. “I believe that they emit a very strong digestive
juice.”
"Touch one, Crewman Cutshark, Captain Puckett ordered.
"Observe the data, Crewman Bramble."
Crewman Cutshark touched one of the stalks, and he
dissolved. The Aesh was whisked away from him like vapor.
He was only rather dirty white bones, and then the bones
also dissolved.
"What did you get, Crewman Bramble?" Captain Puckett
asked.
“Eleven million dissolution units at a base of_"
“Leave off the science stuff or I'll clamp you all in irons,”
Roadstrum warned. “Upward, men, to the big kill. It's but
ffty meters above us, and death licking at us every spot
of the way. Hey, listen to the way it's beginning to scream
now! That really jazzes up the tune.”
"That's me screaming, Captain Roadstrum, and I don't
figure on stopping for quite a while,” Crewman Threefount-
ains screamed.
Ah, the baleful red-glowing inner eye of the monster,
which was also its soul and its mortal center. It blazed with
red and black fire, and crackled and stunk. The tune began
a new ascension, many times more powerful than it had
been before, hysterical with honor, giddy and gibbering,
hate-hopping, and yet quite the best thing of its sort
ever done. All it needed was the top of the tune, and that
73
moment drew very near. The whole mountain was lashing
out frantically, flinging thousand-ton boulders out of its
quivering hide, moaning and bursting asunder.
"Now, men, now!" great Roadstrum cried, and he dove
upward into the giant living eye. And all dove into it, rending
it, killing the thing.
The note. The missing note sounded. It was worth it. It
was fulfillment. It was water after deserts. It was the top
of the tune. They all heard it. And nobody would ever
hear it again.
It sounded the note in its last agony. Then the whole
mountain died.
Roadstrum kicked the mountain open and they all went
outside. The mountain was sin aller than it had been, and it
shrunk down still smaller as though the air were being let
out of it.
The tune was gone and forever. Its missing note would
no more be a hazard to that sector of space. All the crewmen
felt deep satisfaction. They had heard the dying note of the
Siren-Zo and their thirst was quenched. The blondie append-
ages had become broken dolls.
All loaded into the homets for further adventures. It
was early Wednesday morning.
74
CHAPTER FIVE
On Polyphem, e sneaking, staking mood they found,
And something odd about the tasty food they found.
They gazed to see the passive sheep and lombs about,
Nor guessed themselves to be the woolly rams about.
The leader, he a sullen stormy blokey there,
Defiled the bord and put them in the pokey there.
And one became so gross they couldn't carry him,
And one so queer and cold they had to bury him.
But some got out olive from it, and well they did,
And lived for worsa, but none knows how the hell they did.
Ibid
THE KID HONDSTANFER, back on Lamos that was Valhalla,
had told them that one of che homets would break down
after a little while. He said that he had made a lot of
mistakes on one of them. But they had worked perfectly
since that time, and the Captains and crewmen had for-
gotten that advice.
Now the hornet of Puckett broke down. Or it broke, and
it had to come down somewhere or perish into pieces. Puckett
told Roadstrum to go on and leave him. Puckett had a way
of putting it on pretty thick, sort of a wheedling way, sort
75
2
2
of a "but of course one space captain would never leave
another in distress” way of presenting such things. Roadstrum
felt a strange body twinge which he mistook for the call
of duty. He said he would never leave a mate in distress.
“I believe a little creative mutiny is called for here,
Crewmen Trochanter and Crabgrass and Clamdigger told
Captain Roadstrum. “We are a little tired of caring for the
boys in Boat B, and we're not too happy about yourself.”
Roadstrum had a way of putting it on pretty thick him-
self.
“Be there man among you who doubts my demesne or
destiny, then I have fared in vain," he said. “I bare my throat
to the treacherous steel"
“All right, all right," the three tough crewmen capitulated.
"We're with you, all the way and in everything. Only spare
us the 'act.'
“It's Polyphemia or nothing," Roadstrum called to Puckett
over the communicator. "There's not another world we could
possibly reach.”
"You said the same thing about Lamos of the Giants,"
Puckett protested. “Roadstrum, there's got to be another
world."
“Oh, that wasn't really so bad, Puckett. Thinking back
on it, it was sort of fun with the giants. There really isn't
another world we can reach if you're coming apart. Poly-
phemia is better than nothing."
("False tongue,” voiced the communicator.)
“Oh all right, Roadstrum, we'll go down then."
But the communicator was right. Roadstrum did speak
with false tongue unwittingly. Polyphemia was incomparably
worse than nothing.
But it looked wonderful enough coming into it. Great
green grass! but it did look wonderful! It was a pastoral
world, said the manual. The Polyphemians were simple
shepherds. They raised sheep and goats, made a little cheese
and whey, drank sweet milk, ate fine lamb and kid, per-
haps wove a little wool, the manual said, lived in Aleece
or hair tents, and supposedly played pastoral airs on wooden
flutes.
“It cloys, it cloys,” said Crewman Clamdigger. 'Let's
think a little more about that mutiny, men.'
"Ah well, maybe there'll be shepherdesses,” Roadstrum
told them.
"Combing wool and chuming butter, not for us,” said
Crewman Trochanter.
They landed badly. The facilities on Polyphemia were the
worst in the universe. They felt eyes watching them, wolfish
76
a
eyes, not sheep eves. But the only one who shuffled up to
meet them was a Jank, dour shepherd. They supposed he
was a shepherd, but he wasn't combing wool.
"A happy day to you,” Captain Roadstrum boomed. “I
suppose it isn't every day that fine, cheerful, interesting
strangers come to visit you.
"We hate strangers,” said the Polyphemian. “And we hate
spacecraft. We hate just about everything.
He shriveled them with a look, and he spat green.
"But we are in dire distress. One of our crafts is crippled.
We will need time to repair it, and perhaps we will need
your help,” said Roadstrum.
"We are tone-deaf to the call of help,” said the sour
shepherd. “We are deaf to almost everything. There is only
one sound we hear a little. We call it the green whisper."
Roadstrum gave it to him: the soft sound of an educated
thumb ruffled over the edges of high-denomination bills. The
shepherd heard it. It is a dangerous double-bladed sound.
It has got a lot of people in trouble. But the hornet-men were
confident of their ability to handle anything.
The shepherd gave a grunt that was perhaps assent. He
gaped his face in what might have been a grin. And he was
suddenly joined by quite a number of his fellows.
"Just what is it you want, strangers?” asked one of the
new shepherds, who seemed to rank a little higher than the
first one.
>
"Why, if not hospitality, at least a hospice,” said Road-
strum. “We are space-weary. We would rest. We would
eat and drink. And then we would examine the facilities
here."
“There is only Drovers' Cottage,” said the leading shepherd.
"You can rest there now. You can eat with us in the hall
this evening. And there are no facilities on Polyphemia.”
"How is the foocl here?" asked Crewman Trochanter.
"Monotonous, mostly,” said the shepherd. “There is one
particular food that sets us up, and we have not had it in
months. We get pretty tired of plain mutton."
Well, the shepherds guided the crewmen to Drovers'
Cottage through rich meadows and pastures populated with
herds of sheep.
Sheep? Are you sure they are sheep?
The lodgings were bad. Drovers' Cottage was not a
palace. But heat was not needed, and there were tallow
candles provided for when they should be needed. They were
fed a little, though the sun was still high in the sky. It
may have been mutton, but most curious tasting mutton.
Then porridge, perhaps, that may have been weavily. They
77
even were served perry from the runted fruit of the land,
and became one-tenth happy on it.
But the sheep worried Roadstrum, and he looked out at
them and puzzled about them.
“I'm not a farm boy, but there's something the matter
with those sheep,” he maintained.
“It is my considered opinion that they're woolly enough
and dirty enough to be sheep,” said Captain Puckett. “Is
some third thing required? Why, Roadstrum, you must admit
that they're sheepish enough to be sheep. Therefore they
are sheep."
"Crewman Bramble, are they sheep?" Captain Roadstrum
asked.
“The only thing about sheep I ever studied was sheep's
liver flukes parasites, or it may have been sheep's fukes
liver parasites. Let me see their parasites and I'll tell you
quickly enough whether they're sheep. But I never studied
sheep as such, and I doubt if anyone else did. There was
no such course at Cram College.”
"They walk on two legs when they're not down eating,
Roadstrum said. "Is that right? Do you think it right they
should walk about on two legs, Crewman Clamdigger?"
"I never studied sheep either, Captain. I say, according
to the principle of subsidiarity, and no local law counterven-
ing, let them walk on two legs if they want to. Is it our bus
iness how the sheep of Polyphemia walk?"
"Well, there is something peculiar about them as sheep,"
Roadstrum held out stubbornly, “and sooner or later I'll
think what it is. I believe I'll just go out and have a talk
with those fellows."
Many of the sheep were still eating in the meadow, and
they ate awkwardly, as though it were a leamed thing for
them to eat that way. And others of the sheep were gathered
in a low tavern. Roadstrum went into this with some mis-
givings. He had not heard of sheep as congregating in tavems.
“And yet I suppose that they should be classified as social
animals,” he said; “why should they not meet in taverns?"
It was a shabby sort or tavem they had there. The bar
was of rough unfinished wood that had never known polish,
the stools and benches were badiy made and wobbly, very
poor things. “They look as though they had been made by
sheep,” said Roadstrum, "and I suppose they were.”
I
Roadstrum hardly knew how to begin. He had never
talked with sheep before, nor associated with them at all.
"Are you a sheep?” he asked one of them finally.
“Why, yes, I'm a sheep. What else would I be?”
"You look alınost as if you were a very shaggy man.
78
a
"Ah well, I wouldn't say that. I suppose I'm a sheep. I
have always been a sheep."
"Well then, what would you say is the difference between
a sheep and a man?"
"A man will eat a sheep. But did you ever hear of a
sheep eating a man?
"Don't believe I ever did,” said Captain Roadstrum.
There was something sorrowful about the sheep. They ate
and drank dully from a vat that contained foul vegetables,
leeks and ramps and strong gross turnips, and rank things
that were very earthy but not of old Earth. They were fat,
whether men or sheep, and they smelled like sheep.
But there was no real merriment, as there should be in a
tavem. They drank a potion that seemed to be potato
beer. Roadstrum took a bowl of it out of curiosity. It was
mildly alcoholic, and it should have enlivened the tavern.
"Do you ever have music?” Roadstrum asked. “Anything
to liven up the place?"
"We sing a little sometimes,” said the sheep he had been
talking to. “We do not sing well."
“Let's try it,” cried Roadstrum. “Come on, fellows; let me
hear one of your rousing songs! I am a stranger with a
great curiosity about you. Some of you start with a few
bars, and I will lend my own wonderful voice to the melody.
Sing, singl"
"Well, all right," some of the bolder sheep said.
They sang flatly, but they sang:
"The docker-man e-drawing rear,
"he don't appear at all appall us.
"He whets a knife and sheds a tear.
“We haven't any tails at all us."
"We haven't any tails at all us," Roadstrum gave them the
last line back in hearty chorus. It wasn't a bad little tune,
but the words gave Roadstrum a tim.
"Why, you fellows haven't tails at all, have you? Not even
docked stubs. I thought sheep always had tails unless they
were chopped off.”
“Not on Polyphemia,” said the sheep Roadstrum had been
talking to. "That must be some other kind of sheep some-
where else."
“Come on, lads; give us another verse,” Roadstrum cried
encouragingly.
"All right,” said the sheep, "if we must.” They sang flatly
>
once more.
“For greeny grass to graze and grout
"we.couldn't eat the stuff or store it.
79
2)
"They took our gimpy gullet out
"and gave us seven stoniachs for it."
"And gave us seven stomachs for it," Roadstrum bawled
out in melodic response. "Ah, I believe there is a bit of
folklore or ovine-lore hidden in that stanza,” he said shrewdly.
"You were not naturally ruminants? And you have been
made into such? This becomes one of the most curious things
I ever ran into. I suspect that you are not sheep at all."
“We have to be sheep," the sheep said. “Who else would
have us?"
"Well, no need to be sheepish sheep," Roadstrum en-
couraged. “Let us have one more stanza and be glad of
our respective states. You think it is all possum and red-
eyed gravy being a man? Sing, hearties, sing.
And flatly they sang once more:
“Ah Jennie was a gambol lamh,
"a lamb no more is gambol Jennie.
"Subducted by a Sweedish ram!
"We all got yen for yeaning Yennie.”
"We all got yen for yeaning Yennie,” Roadstrun roared out
in raucous chorus. "Why, fellows, you have wonderful songs
and you are wonderful singers! No? You don't think so?
I guess you're right. In no other company in the universe
would I be the finest singer present.”
A man came in. A man and not a sheep. A villainous
looking man. He passed out little slips of parclument to some
of the sheep, and then he left again.
And the sheep seemed even more depressed than they
had been.
"Your call?" the sheep-bartender asked Roadsbrum's friend.
“Yes. For tomorrow," the sheep said sadly.
"We all have to go. That's what we're here for."
“I know. But I hate to leave Agnes and the children."
The sheep was very fat and very sorrowful. Roadstrum
was very interested in the sheep as being his friend, and
was especially curious about the parchments.
"What is it?" he asked the sheep. “What does your slip
say?"
"It says my name," said the sheep, and it says tomorrow.
Respecting the sheep's reserve, Roadstrum did not pursue
the matter, but he felt that something was very wrong.
Oh well, the sheep got a little happier as the afternoon
progressed. They sang some more, and they did a little
better when they weren't urged to it too strongly.
They passed the cup that impels, and their fat faces
began to glow. They even told stories. There is a whimsy
to sheep stories that is like nothing else; hunble and bashful,
80
and yet with a real cud of humor. And shaggy sheep stories
are a special form. But do sheep, in fact, have stories and
humor and song?
Roadstrum had always believed that he had troubles
enough of his own. He seldom borrowed trouble, and never
at usurious terms. He knew it as a solid thing that sheep
do not gather in tavems and drink beer, not even potato
beer; that they do not sing, not even badly; that they do
not tell stories. But a stranger can easily make trouble for
himself on a strange world by challenging local customs.
“But I am the great Roadstrum,” he said, suddenly and
loudly. “I am a great one for winning justice for the lowly,
and I do not scare easily. I threw the great Atlas at the
wrestle, and who else can say as much? I suffer from the
heroic sickness every third day about nightfall, and I am
I
not sure whether this is the third day or not. I say you are
men and not sheep. I say: Arise, and be men indeed!”
"It has been tried before," said Roadstrum's friend the
sheep, “and it didn't work.”
"You have tried a revolt, and it failed?"
a
“No, no, another man tried to incite us to revolt, and
failed."
"Tell me about it, sheep."
“Another man, another traveler talked to us as you have
done. 'Early in the moming you must revolt,' he said. You
must refuse to go where they herd you; you must refuse
to be butchered. You must take up stones and clubs in your
hands, and beat down the men who would take you to
slaughter.' That's what the man told us.”
And that is what I tell you,” said Roadstrum.
"Ah well, it was the shortest revolt on record,” the sheep
said. “In the morning, some of us did take up sticks and
stones in our hands. And then the whistle blew as it does
every morning. Those who had received their notices for that
day threw away their sticks and stones and broke rank and
went, jostling each other, to their slaughter. You don't think
we'd want them to have to blow that whistle at us the
second time, do you? And who ever heard of sheep picking
up sticks and stones and going to battle. It just isn't in
our nature to revolt."
There was the gonging of a great bell that signaled it was
time for the animals to go to their cotes. It was just sun-
down, and the sheep should be snug in the fold by dark.
They all said good night, and shuffled out very sheep-like
And so it was sundown, and it was time for Roadstrum
and the other homet men to go dine with the high Poly-
phemians in their hall.
81
»
"Did you find out anything about those fellows, Road-
strum?" Captain Puckett asked him as he joined the others.
"Puckett, they do not look like sheep, and they do not
act enough like men. There is something the matter with
the whole business."
“I would not worry about it,” said Puckett “Remember
the homet-men's code: Never incite a local populace unless
there is something in it for you.
Well, they were set down at quite a big table with all
the big Polyphemians, and the Cacique of Polyphemia was
at the head of the table.
"Are you not afraid to come unarmed into our hall, little
men?" the big Cacique asked. “Do you trust our hospitality?"
"We trust all hospitality everywhere,” said steady Road-
strum. “We have been on a hundred worlds, and nowhere
has the bord been defiled We trust the hospitality of all
men when we break bread with them. We have eaten
giants' bread on Lamos and cotton candy on Kentron World,
and we have not met treachery Treachery, where it comes,
does not touch the silent oath of the bord. This is respected
on all worlds."
"Eat hearty, eat hearty!" said the Cacique. "How do you
like our food?"
"The double oath of the bord does not require that we
lie,” growled Crewman Trochanter. "It is insipid You must
know that yourselves."
"It is not our best food, but it is the best we have to
offer at present. For ourselves more than for you we regret
this; nobody loves fine food so much as do we. We expect
a finer food shortly, but for topological reasons you will not
be able to partake of it. But we will bless you in that hour
when again we eat our fine food.”
"I have a complaint, a very serious complaint,” said just
Roadstrum.
“Strangers may not lodge complaints till they have been
in residence here for ninety days,” the Cacique said, “and
no stranger has ever reiſained with us that long.
“My complaint won't hold for ninety days. I accuse you
people of eating men.”
"You could not have heard of-but no, their arrival was
not logged, any more than yours was. If you are given
another life, good Roadstrum, you should leam to post your
arrivals more carefully; let people know where you are But
that is another matter. What is it you are speaking of? Get
to the point."
82
>
"I will. You are slaughtering some of them in that building
now."
D)
»
»
“Oh, you mean the sheep? For a moment I thought that
you meant-"
"They are men, and you know it.”
“I know it, and you know it. But the sheep don't know
it, and the documentation does not know it. We are logged
as a pastoral planet, given over almost entirely to the raising
of sheep. Will you argue with the Gazeteer itself? I can
show you the pedigrees of all these creatures, and they are
sheep pedigrees. They are good eating, but there is better.
Do you know what it is?"
“I do not. But this I will not eat,” said mighty Roadstrum,
and he overtumed the great bowl of spicy goulash. “Sheep this
is not.'
“You could have waited till we had finished,” grumbled
Crewman Clamdigger. “The stuff is good. And you said
yourself that the sheep did not act
quite like men.”
“We are insulted," said the Cacique. "You have defiled
the bord. On all worlds one eats what one is given, and one
praises it.”
“All praise to this fleshl” howled Roadstrum. “Flesh of our
own flesh! We eat not our own kindredi On your feet, men!
It's a rumblel Awkl”
And not a single brave man came to his feet. They were
manacled in their chairs where they sat. Trapped chairs
They had fallen into the most childish trap of them all.
They shook the hall with their fury, but their bonds were
strong and so was the hall. And all the great Polyphemians
were laughing.
“We told you that there was a finer food," the Cacique of
Polyphemia chortled, "and that there were reasons why
you could not partake of it. But we will partake, and we
will begin to do so tomorrow. We have it so seldom. Tame
servile sheep is tame food indeed. You were right to call it
insipid, but it is the best we have for our daily fare. But
there is a better, Roadstrum, a better."
"What, you toothy androphage, wilat could be more vile,
or better in your view the furious enchained Roadstrum
demanded.
"Yourselves, woolly Roadstrum, rampant ram! It is every-
thing that tame sheep is not. It is the finest of fine foods
for our own fine selves. We will have to arrange to have
it oftener. Ah, rage, Roadstrum, and all your fine men!
Rage and grow fat in your rage. In our own way we love
you, and we'll waste not a gout of you.”
So Roadstrum and Puckett and all their furious men from
83
"
the homet crews were dragged, amid sky-splitting noise by
all concerned, into a dungeon to be fatted for the kill.
Margaret, of course, was not with them. She had made
her own arrangements with the high Polyphemians. There
were the two great Captains, Deep John the Vagabond, and
either seventeen or eighteen crewmen. There is a point of
issue here.
Twenty of them had been dragged in, counted, and certi-
fied. But a little while later there were twenty-one of them.
The big Polyphemians told the counter that he had made
a mistake, and that he would go in the pot for it. The counter
maintained that he had not made a mistake, that he had
counted correctly, and there had been only twenty. The
counter was correct in this, but he went into the pot never-
theless.
How the twenty-first man happened to be there, why he
was not there at first and where he came from, and how he
differed from the rest of them are things of great moment.
A Polyphemian pokey is much like a pokey anywhere. Deep
John asserted that this was so, and he had been in more
pokies than all of them together. And yet there was some-
thing special about this one, and it had to do with their
special purpose of being there. They were fed lavishly. And
they were mocked. “Rage, and grow fat in your rage," the
Cacique had told them. Well, they did rage, and they ate,
and they raged again. There was little else to do.
It was rank fare, but there was an abundance of it. Crew-
man Starkhead would not eat at all. Crewman Burpy ate
to excess. The rest of them attempted to practice modera-
tion, but they were hooked into eating more and more. With
the rank leeks and ramps were also habit-forming mushrooms
of an intoxicating sort, compelling them to eat more and yet
more, and to rage and rave. Their moderation became more
and more immoderate, and they came somewhat to like the
low food. Worried and restricted men will eat to ease their
worry, and they grew fat in spite of themselves. Except
Crewman Starkhead.
Margaret the houri visited them, but not often. She had
been consorting with the high Polyphemians, and Roadstrum
accused her of being faithless.
"But of course I am faithless, great Roadstrum,” she said.
"It is our nature to be."
"Haven't you any loyalty at all,” he asked in his sorrow-
ful voice, putting on the act a little.
“I don't think so. We weren't constituted with any,” she
said.
84
n
“But I am
sure you would work for us against the
Polyphemians.
“Work against those fellows and get put in the pot? Not
me. And they're not bad at all. They're so blamed mean
that it's fun. There come times when we like our fellows
real mean," she said.
“We will remember that when we are out again and you
with us," threatened Crewman Trochanter. "Mean, Margaret,
real mean. And you won't like it.”
“Oh, but you're not going to get out. You're in it for good,
and they're going to eat you up every one."
But Roadstrum used his special wheedle on her then,
talking to her privately in a low voice through the grille.
What words he used we do not know; but remembering that
he now had a forked tongue, and that he had become
something of a diplomat on Nine-worlds, we know that he
found apt words.
Margaret did agree to work for them and spy for them.
She still wanted to go to Earth with them. She had
heard that the men there were willing.
>
2
It was on the following morning, their second day on
Polyphemia, that Di Prima was taken. He had always been
the fattest of them. He went with a joke on his lips about
his name and he being the first of them taken, but in spirt
he was uneasy. And the other men all raged at the idea
of one of their companions being taken and being roasted
and stewed and then eaten. They roared and ranted, and
the Polyphemians mocked them to still greater fury. And
they ate in their wrath and put on a sheath of hasty angry
fat.
Late that night one of the Polyphemians came to them
and told them that Di Prima hadn't been very good.
“Fat enough, but not rampant enough,” he said. "But
we expect much more of all of you. Rampant ramsl Rage
and growl Oh you will be prime stuff!"
And they were all driven almost insane by the angry
mushrooms in their broth. But Margaret came to them a little
later and told them that the mocking Polyphemian had lied.
“Yes he was good! I always liked Crewman Di Prima,
but I never liked him so much as at the banquet. He was
the best man ever. Really!"
“You ate? You ate part of him?" Captain Roadstrum asked,
and he was aghast.
“What else would I eat? He was the banquet. And he
was good good good!”
Thereafter they all thought of her a little differently, now
85
that she had fensted with the high Polyphemians and had
eaten one of them. And she also thought of them in a
different way and looked at them with odd anticipation.
Crewmen Fracas, Snow, Bramble, and Crabgrass went to
be eaten, one each day. Bangtree went. Oldfellow and
Lawrence went. Each went a little less gallantly than had
his predecessor, and now the jokes on their lips were of a
strained quality. They were still the brave crewmen, but
it does rag you this being taken out and eaten one at a time.
"We can't go on like this," Roadstrum moaned. “We have
to play our ace to survive. Why, oh why, won't they take
our ace? Another day and we'll go clear mad and eat him
?
ourselves. How can they resist him?"
Their ace was the twenty-first man who had appeared
among them after the correct count had been twenty. The
secret about him was that he was not a man at all but a
kit. He was a kit, and the men had each one of them
carried a part of that kit strapped to his belly to be as-
sembled when a real emergency arrived. Their situation in
the Polyphemian dungeon was such an emergency, and
they had assembled the kit.
His name was Esolog-9-Ex and he was a build-it-your-
self pseudanthropus kit. You never know when you are going
to need such an automaton, and many homet-men had
fomed the habit of carrying such portions of one.
The men had had fun with Esolog-9 in the past, par-
ticularly in the happy days of the war. You remember the
time they had constructed him into a cardshark? Into a
hillbillya 'Into a peddler? One of the best had been when
they constructed him into a crackpot general. This pseudo-
general issued a series of the weirdest and most asinine
orders ever heard. They resulted in more than ten thousand
men going to their deaths needlessly. It was excessive, but it
was funny.
On Bandicoot the natives had found parts of such a kit
on dead soldiers of the baek-drift of the war, had assembled
bim into a ruler, and he s!ill rules Bandicoot today. For
these kits could be built to be anything in man foim.
And in the Polyphemian dungeon the crewmen had built
Esolog-9 into a fat man. He was not an ordinary fat
man. He was made to rant and rave more than any of them.
And another element was set into him, a sialagogue that
tantalized the men, that set up such a flow of juice in
them all that they almost drowned in their own slaver.
They'd have stuck a fork in him if they had one. The
wonder is that they did not eat him themselves. And the
86
high wonder of it all is that the Polyphemians bad left
him so long.
Day after day the Polyphemians selected other men, fat,
but not so fat as Esolog; succulent, but not so succulent
as he; ravening, but not with his own special rage.
“Why do they not take him?" Roadstrum moaned
again. “We go to our deaths, and it seems as if they will
leave the finest one of us till last."
And the point is that the Ace-in-the-Hole, Esolog-9-Ex,
was booby-trapped. To eat him was to suffer the swelling
death, the exploding death. One would swell and swell
and swell, to three times one's size, to nine times one's size,
to a thousand times one's size. One would explode and
completely destroy oneself and everything around.
"Why don't they take him, and we be released from our
misery?” all the men groaned.
Then, one afternoon, Margaret told them that the Poly-
phemians would take Esolog-9 that very night. They knew, ,
of course, that Esolog was the best of them all, and they
had been saving him for a very special occasion. That
special occasion had arrived. Some cousins of the Poly-
phemians from another place had come to visit them. That
night would be the finest of all banquets, and Esolog-9-
Ex would be the crown of the feast.
"He will destroy them all,” said Roadstrum. Then you
will bring us the keys to the dungeon, Margaret, and we
will escape. But see that you are at a safe distance from
it, and most especially see that you do not eat any of him.
“I say I will not, and I say I will not,” said Margaret,
“but can I be sure that I will not? Oh oh ob, he will be
good! How can I say I will not eat a little bit?"
“Margaret, Margaret, it would be your destruction," Road-
strum wamed. “You must be very shrewd in this. Do not
eat any of him. And be far distant when the Polyphemians
have eaten fully.”
"I say I will not, and I say I will not, but can I be
sure I will not?""
m
The Polyphemians came for Esolog-9 in the early
evening. He went to his death as dapper a dog as ever went,
and his joking was genuine. He was cool; he hadn't a
nerve in him. You had to admire him, even if he was no
man at all, but an assembled kit. And he raved and ranted
as was expected of him when in the hands of the Polyphemi-
ans. He was perfect.
The men waited the news, and Margaret brought them
hourly bulletins. She reported that the Polyphemians had
87
begun on him. She reported a second time that the Poly-
phemians had devoured him all except for a few pieces
hardly to be seen. And finally she reported to them that
the Polyphemians had begun to swell and swell and swell.
"You know where the keys are, Margaret? You will be
able to find them in the wreckage
"I know where they are. I will bring them to you as soon
as the show is over."
"And don't get too near, Margaret."
"No, no, I'll stay well clear of it.”
And Margaret did not have to report to them when the
big thing came. It was a rumble like walls going down; it
was a sound like a distant dam bursting. Then it was an
explosion that shook all Polyphemia to its deepest roots.
By the time their ears were functioning again, Margaret
brought them the keys and let them out. Starkhead did not
come out. He had eaten nothing since they entered. He
was peculiarly inert and cold to the touch and offensive
to the nose. One never admits that a homet-man is dead,
it is against the code, but they buried him there in the floor
of the dungeon.
And they could not budge Crewman Burpy. He had
grown grosser and fatter than any of them, fatter even then
Esolog-9, but the Polyphemians had passed him up. He
.
was too placid; they had such sheep of their own; there
was nothing rampant about him. He had grown so heavy
that he could no longer stand on his own legs, and they
left him without a lot of regret.
Freedom from the dungeon, and now the freedom of the
skies. No need now to repair the crippled homet. There
were men left to man one craft only, and it would be a
little crowded, so large had they grown.
Deep John looked at himself. “Men, men, it was hobo
heaven," he said, "and out of it alive. Whoever saw a genuine
hobo with such a pot on him.'
So they enskied. They were in high space. And in time
they would regain their fine lines and their wonderful
tempers. Freedom freedom)
"Boys, I don't feel well," said Margaret the houri.
"You shouldn't, you female cannibal,” Roadstrum growled.
"You saved us in the end, but you didn't treat us at all well
in the middle."
“Boy, I feel terrible,” she said.
"It is a wonder you do not die of remorse,” said Captain
Puckett.
"Remorse this is not. I'm going to burst."
"Look out, look out,” Crewman Clamdigger wamed. “Mag-
88
a
>>
>
>
gy was fat, but not that fat. She's three times the size she
was when we loaded in the hornet."
You ate, you ate part of himl" Roadstrum howled furi-
ously.
"Only a little sliver. I don't care. It was worth it. Boys,
I'm going to burst.”
And she had already taken up three-quarters of the homet
and crowded all the men, gasping and straited, into a tight
comer. She had begun to rumble, and she would go any
minute, and all with her.
"She'll blow! She'll blowl" howled the frightened men.
"She'll blow, and she'll blow up the ship and all of us with
ber.” And there came the still deeper rumble that one hears
just before the sundering explosion.
Perils! And there would be more of them. And they were
still
years
from home.
The Chantey pleads a lapse and leaves a doubt of it.
We don't know how the hearty crew got out of it!
What tales you hear with renson may you doubt them all.
They could not be! And yet the men got out them all.
Remember not the jokes they made to bluff it off,
What ghastly thing they suffered, and to sluft it off.
lot.
Withhold the question where such brave men cry
Remember also hornet-crewmen lie a lot.
а
Ibid
89
مشا
20
CHAPTER SIX
A feckless fate had foiled their path and ditched them there.
A lady with a lilty way hod witched them there.
She thought to light a scorchy flame at least in them,
And had to settle for the risen beast in them.
Fell dangers from the charmer and the hair of her,
Beware of her! Beware of her! Beware of her!-
As deft and devious as Ancient Niccolo-
Now sing her song, strum harp, and pip the piccolo.
Ibid
IT WAS scramble on all their data. Their direction and
course were gone. They found themselves in the mysterious
realm of middle space, which has no real bearings. But
there are shoals and obstacles there.
"What is here, you confabulating canister?' Roadstrum
demanded of the data log. "What things are these drifting
in the space about us?"
“Here there are warlocks and mandragoras and witches,"
the navigation data log issued.
“When your machines start to go droll on you you're in
trouble,” Roadstrum growled. “I can get wise answers from
my men. I don't need a machine for that.”
“He thinks he is men,
Crewman Bramble explained.
“He has been with men always and does not know other
machines.”
90
M
Fix the idiot thing, Bramble. Fix it," Roadstrum ordered.
So Crewman Bramble fiddled with the data log a while
and then announced that it was fixed. "Bad connection," he
said. "That's what I always say, isn't it?”
"All right, Log, now give a straight answer," Roadstrum
ordered. "Where are we, and what are these drifting things
about us?”
"Here there are warlocks and mandragoras and witches,"
the log issued once more. “Kill me, torture me, I can say
nothing else."
"Who has been feeding nonsense to this machine?" Road-
strun demanded.
They had narrow misses of collisions with things that
apparently weren't there at all. The things seemed solid
till very near approach, and then they faded to mist. It
was illusion space they were in.
"Ram them, ram them,” Roadstrum roared every time an
object loomed up. “If we pass through them without har
we will know that they aren't really there."
"All right,” issued the data log, and they rammed through
several objects that had seemed quite solid, jagged, rocky,
quite large bodies.
"What if we don't pass through them without harm,
Roadstrump" Captain Puckelt asked.
"Don't know. I suppose that will mean they are real, if
we have a real collision.'
"And it may mean that we aren't real any longer,” said
Crewman Clamdigger. “We could get unreal awful easy
smashing into one of those things that was really there."
There was another one of them looming up, a round little
world of gold and green. It was overdone. It was too arty
to be real. Whoever had thought it up may have had a
certain feeling for art, but none at all for planetary dynamics.
"That's the phoniest one yet,” Roadstrum laughed. “Ram
it, Log, ram it. I can see into the mind that made it up.
"So can Il” cried Margaret furiously. “It is Aeaea, the
Aeaea mind. I hate her! Ram it, canny can, ram it!”
And the navigation log sqared the homet into ram it,
and then somehow slackened off a little. They came in at
too low a speed for a real ramming job, and the world took
on further reality from their hesitation.
"You fumbling idiot,” Roadstrum fumed. “You half ac-
cepted it on its own terms, so now it is half there. Too
close to it to veer now, and it's getting too solid to take
a chance going right through. Slow it and land. What
happened to you anyhow?
Lost my nerve," the navigation data log issued.
"
91
>
"Oh, that damned Aeaea!” Margaret exploded again. "I've
run into it and her a hundred different times in different
parts of the universe. She and that silly planet of hers! She
doesn't have a regular place. She hangs it anywhere. And
now we've got to land on it. I hate her!"
They landed on Aeaea. They made a bad landing. They
first buried themselves in the soft surface that was like
smoke. Then they had to back out and let it solidify. They
got out and walked, and it was tricky. Aeaea hadn't made
her world very thoroughly. For the place was not charted
and not generally believed in. The surface was full of nothing-
holes. But it firmed, it finned, it became a workable theory,
it became a fact.
"Aeaeal" Roadstrum hooted. "We all know that it
shouldn't be here. Whoever heard of coming onto a myth
in actuality. I'd say annihilate all myths and be done with
it."
“Easy, easy, fine Roadstrum," Margaret cautioned. “What
do you think I am
I ?!
"Oh, but this breaks it, Maggie! It would hardly startle
"
me to hear the lady sing."
"No, no, Roadstrum. Give her an ear and she'll take it
all. She's worse than the Siren-Zo, and she has a more
hideous song. Let's zoom away from this place; it becomes
.
too solid.”
But it did startle Roadstrum when he heard the lady
sing. It startled them all when they heard it. It was high
and clear, and not far away. There was an artiness about
that singing that is beyond art. It would have been better
if it were not quite as good, but it was remarkable singing.
They were in the center of the singing, and they were
all trapped. Then they were in the center of a new silence,
in a world inside the song. And there was a nice enough
lady there, but could she be Aeaea herself?
“We are strangers, lost and bemused,” Roadstrum said
to the lady. “We landed here by accident. We are looking
for the lady who was singing, the lady who (according to
silly myth) is identical with the planet and who sang the
planet into being."
“And now we have found you," Margaret interrupted
rudely. “Scat, you wood pussy, down on your four legs
and skat!”
"The Margaret be mute!" the lady ordered, and the Mar-
garet was frozen into an angry crouching statue. Fire in her
eyes and slaver on her mouth, but she could not move
or speak.
“I am the lady," the lady said then, "and there is no
92
lady here except myself. I am Aeaea. To my notion there
is no other lady anywhere. And I resent your calling
this a silly myth. I made the myth and it is not silly; charm-
ing rather. Well, come along, come along! You are my
things now, and you will come when I call you.
They all followed her like children-they did not know
where.
They came to fine quarters, or perhaps it was that the
fine quarters came to them. These things seemed to form
about them, and there was no real distance traversed.
"A dish, a doll, a droll, a dream,” Crewman Clamdigger
breathed.
"A girl, a grig, a gleam, a glom,” Crewman Trochanter
gobbled.
And Margaret hissed. She would never remain entirely
mute, that one. She was still unable to move, yet she was
still with them in their quarters. There was something the
matter with these quarters. They seemed not to be designed
for people at all. For something, but not for people.
“Be you all at ease," said the lady Aeaea in her musical
voice. "When you have rested and eaten there will be time
to admire me. The Margaret may eat from the bowl
on the floor, and the rest of you in your fine stalls-ah
cubicles. The mighty Road-Storm will come and talk with
me."
"A larkin, a limpet, a lass!" admired Captain Puckett
They liked the lady.
D
"All right, girl," Roadstrim said when they were alone.
"I have a few questions. They will be to the point, and I
want answers.
"I doubt that you could understand the answers, Aeaea
wamed. “I see now that you are a common simpleminded
man, and we maintain a very high intellectual average
here. It will be difficult to communicate."
"Who is the 'we' that maintains so high an average,
girl?"
"Only myself now. My father has been dead these last
several centuries."
"It should be easy to maintain a high average with only
one entity."
"It is. I am mistress of all the sciences. I go so far beyond
all else that my work is called magic. I manipulate noumena,
regarding monads as points of entry tangential to hylomor-
phism. As to the paradox of Primary Essence being con-
tained in Quiddity, the larger in the smaller, I have my
93
own solution. The difficulty is always in not confusing
Contingency with Accidence. Do you understand me?"
?
"Sure. You're a witch.”
"Exactly, but I frown on the name. Very unscientific.
But I am no ordinary witch. I studied in Salamanca the
hidden.”
“Salamanca, the underground witchcraft school? But that
was on World, in the Indias, in the New Latin Lands.”
“There are entrances to it on World, Road-Storm, but do
you not know that the underground lands are shared by
many worlds? It is all one underground, a vast place, and
it is but a trick on which globe one will surface on coming
out. This is the reason that the inside of every world is so
much vaster than the outside. You are fooled by the shape
of these little balls on which things live and crawl; you see
the universe inside-out; you see the orbs as containing and
not contained. I will teach you to see it right if you please
me.”
“On with it, witch, on with it."
"I am the consumate scientist, Road-Storm. Science has
suffered in having her name applied to mechanics, an ugly
stepchild of hers. Matter itself is a humiliation to the
serious. We cannot make it vanish forever, but can make it
seem to. For my purpose that is even better. All matter can
be modified as long as it is kept subjective. Let us keep it so.
“Yes. Let's do that, Aeaea.
“Those who fail to understand my science may call it
magic or hypnotism or deception. But it is only my projec-
tion of total subjectivity. I will bring one of my creatures
and
you will see what I mean.”
“Bring it on, gay girl! Hey, I feel as lively as a monkey
here,” Roadstrum laughed.
Aeaea left him then, and her singing filled the halls
when she was gone. They were fine halls of marble, pol-
ished travertine. No crack or grain at all in their walls.
But if one took a total subjective view and wished them to
be less perfect? Yes, they were not really travertine, but
an inferior marble; not marble really, but ordinary limestone;
not that either, but adobe, mud really. Roadstrum kicked
holes in the walls, and a great part of them fell down.
"Why hokey!” he said. “I can make marble halls myself. I
wonder how many others know how? A thing like that could
come in handy."
Then he formed them to travertine marble again, being
very subjective about it. He heard Aeaea coming again,
hier wonderful singing drawing nearer, and he was a little
94
was
leery of her. She would know many tricks, and he had
only partly learned one of them.
She came singing, and she brought a pet raccoon with
her. Roadstrum guffawed to see the thing. This was real
art! You would practice a long time before you made a
thing as comic and clownish as that, and yet at the same
time calling out all compassion and sympathy. A coon would
no more be only a coon to Roadstrum; this one
really a person. A burlesque, of course, a caricature and
a perfect one, a simulacrum with a soul. It was a solid
cartoon of a little animal made by a real master.
"It's good, Aeaea," Roadstrum said heartily. "I never
saw anything better even in the Natural Arts Museum on
Camiroi. Has he seen it? You really take him off with that?"
"Has who seen it, Road-Storm? Of whom does it remind
you?"
Roadstrum chuckled with real amusement. "It looks just
like Puckett. I might almost say that it is Puckett. What
other animal but a coon would he look like? Was it live
to begin with, Aeaea? Did it really look like that, or have
you only made it look like that?"
"I have explained to you, Road-Stom, that there is no
difference between appearing and being, so long as we
keep matter subjective. You have not paid attention.”
Ah, the angry and at the same time pathetic eyes on that
coon!
"Just like Puckett himself, Aeaea," Roadstrum mused.
"Even the tail is the sort of tail he'd have if he had one.
This is a new art that surpasses anything. You are a genius,
Aeaea.”
"I have always thought so, Road-Stomm. He is so sweet,
the little raccoon, but if he bites me one more time I'll
break out every cute tooth he has."
"Let's get Puckett here to look at this. Will he recognize
himself in caricature?"
"Mighty Road-Storm, do you not understand yet?”
-
”
"Understand what? Would Puckett be offended?”
"Of course he is offended. That is why he bites me.”
"What? What? I don't believe it. This is not Puckett."
"It is. There is no Puckett anywhere except here. This
is High-Captain Puckett, commander of homets. This is
your friend and companion in his new form. You see him
like this, I see him like this, he sees himself like this, and
therefore,”
"Oh shut up, witch! I don't believe you. I'll find him.”
Roadstrum went roaring through the halls to find High-
Captain Puckett. Aeaea sang behind him and all around
95
2
m
and laughed as she sang. Roadstrum found Crewman Hum-
phrey.
“When did you last see Puckett, Humph?” he demanded
of him.
“I don't know,” Humphrey fluttered oddly from his upper
lip. “He went with the lady, I think. He looked kind of
funny.”
“Puckett looked funny! Look at yourself, you straddling
kaymol What's happened to you?
"I don't know," Humphrey fluttered with that rubbery
lip. Humphrey did look funny. Humphrey had always looked
funny, but this was different. Roadstrum would think of the
difference in a minute.
“There goes Puckett now," Crewman Eseldon brayed sud-
denly. “See him there climbing up that plant.”
"You ass, that's a coon!” Roadstrun roared. “Was there
ever such an ass?"
There never was. The horrible truth swept over Roadstrum
in waves while the weird singing of Aeaea rose and fell.
It had happened to all those men. The likeness had been so
good, and he himself so upset, that Roadstrum bad not
noticed it happening.
Humphrey had looked funnier than usual. Humphrey
had turned into a camel. That's enough to make anyone
look funny. “But what right has she to tum my men into
camels and coons?" Roadstrum asked angrily. “They are
persons inviolate and should not be subverted to animals.
Aeaea, Aeaea, come here and give an accounting!"
Crewman Eseldon was now an ass. He had always been
one, but now he was one physically. The change seemed to
have got all the men. "Hollering won't do it,” Roadstrum
hollered. “It's time I did some rapid and dynamic thinking
about this thing. Come you together here, men, creatures,
animals, pseudomorphs, companions of my bosom. Come
together here and we will hold congress on this affair."
They came, they came. Was this only group hypnosis? Or
had they actually changed? Aeaea said that seeming and
being were the same thing. Rcadstrum attempted to fight
her on her own ground. He became very subjective about
it all. He had been able to turn travertine marble to clay-
mud and back to marble, but he could not turn these
things back to man-form.
Crewman Septimus was now a rabbit. With that cleft
upper lip and those pink eyes he could not say anything
else. Crewman Swinnert was a hog, a good solid hog, the
kind you'd like to be if you had to be one. Ursley was a
bear. Margaret the houri was an alley cat (that was the
96
first mistake that Aeaea made; it was not a metamorphosis
for Margaret to become an alley cat, that was her true
form).
Crewmen Clamdigger and Threefountains and Trochanter,
three tall stags, great homy wild stags. Those boys had al-
ways had a lot of spring to them, and now they were rang-
ing and leaping wildly. Deep John was a polecat. "I al-
ways did like folks to treat me with a certain decent reserve,
he said. Crewman Bramble was a fox. He had always been
the smartest of them, but if he was so smart how come he
was taken in this?
"If
any
of you have any ideas, tell them to me,” Roadstrum
begged. "Fortunately for you all, the lady Aeaea has an im-
perfect idea of animals. I believe that she has led a secluded
life, that she has never seen real animals. She leaves you
with the powers of human speech, for an instance, and that
is rare in animals. But I at least have remained a man,
and out of my great mind I will fabricate some device
to free you from all this.”
And they laughed at him. They who had been captain
and crewmen and hobo and houri laughed at the Captain
Roadstrum, laughed foolish giggly gobbly animal laughs.
And he was furious.
"Ah, she left you your men's voices, but she took away
your men's brains. Foolish gibbering things hardly worth
saving. But for the great love I bear you in your real forms
I will find a way to save you yet. I am a man yet, and I
will find the way to lead you back to the man context."
They laughed and giggled yet. You have heard stags
laughing? You have heard donkeys and polecats laughing?
Yes, but have you ever heard a kinkajou laughing? It runs
down your spine like an idiot, that laughing. That was
Crewman Lawrence in his new form.
“There has to be a converse to all this," Roadstrum main-
tained, but he was full of doubt now. "I'll break the spell
or the science of her singing yet. As the only man left
it devolves to me to do it."
There was high laughter in the singing now, and
Aeaea came to them assembled there. They all gathered
around her, except Margaret, and were completely charmed
by her. Animals! Animals!
But Roadstrum was more than surprised when Aeaea
swung him up under her arm and set him astride her
shoulders. It was pleasant but puzzling. Either she had
become very large or he had become very small.
The reflection in the polished wall gave him the answer.
97
Mighty Roadstrum had become a very small ape. Angrily
he leaped down. He didn't like it.
"Many men have become the pet apes of beautiful
women,” he gibbered in monkey voice, “but I will not have
it happen to me literally. And I was small ape all the time
that I trumpeted I was the only man left? No wonder that
the animals laughed.”
But it had happened; it had happened to all of them.
How does one accustom himself to being an animal? Road-
strum refused, and held apart. But Aeaea became the center
of the lives of the rest of them, and in a day or two she had
them hooked.
They were her animals. She maintained their jealousies,
fondling one and then the other, keeping them subservient
to her. They were her creatures, and she gloried in them.
It would seem that she must be injured or crashed or
slashed to death or ground to death, and Aeaea did not
seem the durable type. Half a ton of camel in her lap was
no great thing, perhaps, but when she went into her fro-
licking wrestle with Ursley the bear it was a fearful thing.
When she went for canters with Eseldon the ass she bore
him on her back as often as he bore her on his, and he was
quite a big donkey, yet they seemed to have a gay, gallop-
ing time of it. The coon and the kinkajou slashed her with
teeth, the three great homy stags leaped all over her.
.
Stag-man Trochanter leamed to balance with all four feet
on her shoulders, and lie was big as a horse.
"It is all in being subjective, Apie Road-Storm,” she ex-
plained. “But of course I am slashed and I bleed, and I am
crushed and ground down and broken. I want to be. I
have a passion for these things. It is the animal in myself.
And yet all these things are in my mind only. They are
private fantasies of mine, as are you, most wonderful of apes.
You all love me, you know. If you did not, I would make new
fantasies."
All loved her except Margaret the alley cat. And Margaret
was a violation of Aeaca's thesis. It was axiomatic that all
her creatures should love her, said Aeaea; therefore the
alley cat loved her also. But Margaret had hateful ways
of showing her love.
But Roadstrum still plotted for freedom. He plotted with
Margaret the alley cat, with Deep John the polecat, with
Puckett the raccoon, and with Bramble the fox.
But had not Bramble died and been eaten by the Poly-
phemians? No, he had not, it only seemed that he had.
He was always too much of a fox to be taken and eaten,
98
but the trick by which he evaded it will not be given here.
Something was working in Roadstrum's little ape head.
When he had been a man he had always known when it
was time for action; particularly he had always known the
last moment when action was still possible. He knew now
that that moment was come very near. He was sinking deeper
in his animalness every hour.
Puckett the coon resisted, but with entirely too much
deference. “We should let the lady know that we do not
always wish to remain animals,” he said. “We must present
this protest firmly to the lady. We must take the bull by the
tail, as the ancient adage has it, and tell the lady that we
are not entirely pleased with our state.
Then a blinding light burst on Roadstrum, and he saw
the truth of the situation. Many things Roadstrum was not,
and it was sometimes wondered why he was the natural
leader of all the men. He was their leader because he was
on whom the blinding light sometimes descended.
“I've got it, I've got it,” he shouted. He gibbered it like
an ape? No, he shouted it like a man. He had his man's voice
back again. "I've got it, guys, I've got it! We have been
taking the bull by the wrong organ. The witch has played
a semantic trick on us. We were already pretty salty animals
when we came here! It is toy animals she has turned us
into. We have been working against ourselves, trying to be
men again, but to be her idea of men, since we live in her
context. But she does not know real animals, or men.
"Listen, listen; what we must do now is become more
animal, and not less animal. Assemble, assemble all.
"Toy creatures, puppets, tame things!" he thundered. "Be
real animals! Raise it up in you! Show the witch what
real animals are. Resurrect the old beast!”
“No, no," they twittered. "Aeaea has already turned us
into animals with her singing. Someday, but not today or
tomorrow, we will become men again for a little while, if she
will permit it. But we are animals now, Ape. Your words
are mixed."
“Hear my man words, hear my animal words!" Roadstrum
bellowed. “Be you not toys any longer! Stir up the wild
business in you. You have to be real animals before you can
be men. How could Roadstrum be the tame ape of any
woman? Puckett, be you a real boar coon while you are
a coon! Humphrey, be you a cob camel at least! Ye three
great stags, be rampant and musky stars! Ursley, let out
the great growl, be a bear and not a toy bearl Septimus!
Swinnert! Eseldonl Alll Raise it up in you!"
99
22
The arty singing of Aeaea tumed into a scream, but a
sincere one. Reality, raw murderous reality broke into her
contrived world. Terror had come to the planet Aeaea, and
it would never be the same again. The lady Aeaea had
become a sniffling screaming old lady now, and only Eseldon
the ass remained with her. An ass is all she deserved.
No, no, it cannot be given here! The blood would be all
over you, on your hands and in your heart, and you would
never be able to get rid of it. It was horrifying, animal,
hunan slaughter, the brutish murder of a concept and a
person. It would sear your eyes to watch it.
Of what did the great revolt consist? Some say that
it was a cosmic gang-shag that left the lady near dead and
in terror for the rest of her life, never again to dabble in toy
animals. But most agree that she was left dead indeed,
though perhaps not from her own viewpoint. And some say
that it was an elemental surge, so much more horrifying than
a mere attack that it cannot safely be put into words.
Margaret, of course, was in the middle of it. Nobody had
ever doubted her animality.
"I'll shred that lark; ill shred her yet," she had swom.
And Margaret grew to be a larger and larger cat. “I see
myself as a very large cat, you all see me as a very large
cat, she will see me as one, and therefore I will be one.'
Margaret had become bobcat sized, leopard sized. Her tail
twitched and her whiskers vibrated. She'd have that song-
bird; for Aeaea, in her terror, had begun to look very like
a bird. Ape and cat and coon and fox had been practicing
at seeing her as a bird, and it worked.
Margaret went for Aeaea, and they all went for her.
She was tom open in throat and breast, she was rent apart,
she was ground down, she was trampled and stomped, she
was bitten and clawed, she was defaced (that Margaret
took the face clear off of her with a final sweep of her
tigress claws), she was annihilated. She was dead.
Dead, dead, nothing left, except the song that had turned
into a scream that still hung in the air. And the bloody pulp
that had almost no resemblance to a body. She was stubbom,
though, that Aeaea, and she had her own philosophy.
"I am as I have always been,” said Aeaea. “You can all
"
see that there is no blood on me." Well, there was quite
a bit of blood around, much of it on the cat Margaret. She
reveled in the feathers and blood on her paws and face,
quite a bit of blood.
"I see myself as unhurt,” Aeaea continued (there was the
broken remnant of a body on the ground, and there was the
voice in the air). "Surely you all see me as unhurt. Therefore
100
D
I am unhurt even though (as it happens) I have just died
horribly. Now you had better all be gone. I hate sticky
farewells, and what is left of me has become very sticky.
"Aeaea, whichever is you, the voice in the air, or the bloody
thing on the ground, there is a flaw in your philosophy. You
really are dead, you know. You begin to fade away, and
so does your world. Hey, we'd better get off this thing
while there's still something left to get off!” Roadstrum trun-
peted.
“Would you sing for us once more," asked Humphrey
the apprehensive camel, who was becoming uncameled.
“Yes, do,” said Margaret. She was back in her human
or houri form now. "How about ‘Mouth Full of Feathers'?
That's a good boogie song. Or the ‘Dying Canary.' I always
did like the ‘Dying Canary. Margaret was a little cruel.
“I can sing no more," said Aeaea. "I fade, I fade. But do I
not carry it all off well?
She did, she did. But now the murder howl had gone
over the space-ways, and they were all outlaws to be hunted.
And decent people would no more give them haven.
She sought with song to make the tousle toys of them,
She hadn't recked the ruddy reckless boys of them.
She sold her reputation for a song she did,
And paid a reparation for the wrong she did.
The “Songstress Murder" made the space-ways gape to hear,
The stunning scandal, murder, wreck, and rape to hear,
A killer clan! The avid law is chilled for it,
And deems that they be hunted down and killed for tt.
And Roadstrum cast a youngish pelt aside of him,
And came down near the tough essential hide of him.
Ibid
101
HR
CHAPTER SEVEN
The cream of Horneteers, the high elite of them!
And sky-wolves snapping at the bloody feet of them)
In Guimbarde town, it rudel it rawl ramshackle it!
They sought the crushing, crashing way to tackle it.
For noble lies and every royal whopper there
They'd kill the kerl who couldn't tell a topper there.
Inside the Club itself, the most exclusive yet,
Came snuffling death:—and they be more elusive yet!
From flying hooscgow, sudden-swift, the ratter
Who cut all trails and read the Gypsy patteran.
He blew the blast! And they be hustled well and gone.
And after that they went a while to Hell and gone.
Ibid
1
IT WAS the niost exclusive club in the world, in all the
worlds, and this is a mighty pale statement to make about
it. Let us emphasize that it was hard to get into.
It was a hundred and thirteen stories up by one count,
a hundred and nineteen by another, and nobody was sure
how close either might be. Naturally the Club did not have
a room or suite number, no more than did any other thing
in those buildings.
102
It was in one of those weird, wooden buildings of Guim-
barde Town, and the buildings of Guimbarde Town have
neither elevators nor zoom-rooms. How could they have?
?
There is no corridor nor shaft in any of them straight
enough for such contrived transportation.
It was in one of those thousand-odd steep wooden build-
ings that crown Blind-Raven hill, tall shanties, most of them
over a hundred stories (there is no exact count in any of these
buildings) that the Club is found. These buildings lean
together and prop each other up; and when one of them
topples and falls (and it happens quite often) several others
will usually fall with it.
The building no longer had a name, or at least no Dame
that applied to all of it: there were local names that applied
to various parts of it. Long ago it had been the Ramshackle
Hotel, but the lower nine stories of it had sunk into the mud
(they used no foundations in Guimbarde Town) and various
tribes and peoples still lived subterraneously there. At a little
later time, a dozen upper stories had fallen from the
building onto the Greenglanders Building and had been
incorporated into that; and very many of the middle stories
had bumed. But to make up for what it had lost, in simple
justice it had received thirteen stories fallen from the old
Potters' Steeple, dropping from the sky, as it were. These
were conjoined crookedly to the old basic (these segments
never do fall straight), and all the higher stories later added
to the building were crooked.
Well, how do you get up even a hundred and thirteen
or a hundred and nineteen stories to arrive at the Club?
You go up those old outside stairways, and they sure are
dangerous! There will sometimes be five or nine stories
missing from the stairway, and there you must scramble.
There are places where you must pay toll or fight your
way through. There are cliff-dweller Indians in the mid-
sixties who drink out of the skulls of those who thought it
a safe thing to go up that stairway.
All this, you must know, is ree finest section of Guimbarde
Town, not the meanest; and Guinbarde Town is the fin-
est city on Yellow Dog. Yeilow Dog itself has lost its world
license, is now a proscribed world, and is inhabited mostly
by shiftless and shifty persons.
So it is seen that the Club is not an easy place to get
into. Why not come down to it from above, you say, in
gracious copter or in sky car? They don't use them there.
The skies over Guimbarde Town, and indeed over the whole
of Yellow Dog, are infested by Megagaster birds that can
take all but the largest craft in a single gobble. And yet Road-
103
strum and his brave outlaws did come down into the Club
from above.
"How can we land? How can we land?'' Roadstrum had
fretted at the top of his voice.
"Leave it to Bramble,” said Captain Puckett. “He'll think
of something."
"Leave it to me,” said Bramble. "I'll think of something.
“
Hey, you know those nineteen cases of Mumuckey mustard
that we have carried for so long a time? Often we've had
little room for food or water, and have been forced to sleep
three deep. Some of you bave howled that we should throw
the mustard out so there would be room for ourselves. 'Let
us keep them,' I said every time; 'we will find something
they are good for. Now we have found it. We will foil the
Megagaster birds with our mustard, and we will land on
this planet."
Willing crewmen got out and, working dangerously, coated
the entire hornet craft half a meter thick with Mumuckey
mustard. Then they came into the dangerous sky of Yellow
Dog.
What happened to them? What happens to every craft
that enters that dangerous sky? They were gobbled up in
one bite by a Megagaster bird.
One account is that they went right through that bird
like yellow flame. Another is that it bounced them around
nine times in its maw and then spat them out with a cry
of disgust and horror. They crashed down through the top
dozen flimsy floors of a building and came to rest in the
Club. They got out of the homet craft and looked around.
It was dark there. The more exclusive a club is, the darker
it always is. There was no light there at all except the lumines-
cent eyes of some of the creatures present. This, however,
was light enough, once they got accustomed to it.
"This is the Improbable Club," said the President-Emeritus
in a heavy muffled voice, and you things have made an
improbable entry. Many unqualified persons have attempted
to crash this Club, but you have done it literally. Whether
you will be able to qualify for our high membership is
another thing. It will not matter. We accept, for a brief
moment at least, all who come here as members. We will
quickly measure you one way or another. We have no living
ex-members. Sit you down, all, and unwind your ears. Re-
member, each topper must be topped.”
"If not?” Roadstrum asked boldly, not understanding
this jabber at all.
"The stopper,” said the President-Emeritus. This worthy
104
>
.
1
seemed hardly human, but he was a genial person, in a hard-
eyed sort of way.
"What's the fellow talking about?” Roadstrum asked Crew-
man Bramble. “What is this improbable Club that we have
fallen into?"
"I'm not sure, Captain Roadstrum,” said Bramble. “The
"
name is, perhaps, an euphemism. There is a crest on the
old weapons-rack in the corner, and it reads "Club Menitros.'
Is this the Club Itself whose very location is unknown, the
club for membership in which Emperors might give their
right galactic segment, the club so exclusive that for a full
century it had no members at all? Is this the High Liars
Club itself?”
Roadstrum and all the crewmen bowed their heads.
"If it be so, we will all try to be worthy of it,” they mur-
mured.
The half-dozen members were drinking loopers, the green-
lightning drink, and now a liveried waiter brought them
to the crewmen also.
Margaret the houri, who had been larking around in other
parts of the building, came in to them now.
“I met a fast-talking fellow and I'm going to World with
him," she said. “I'd go with you, but the word is that
you're not going there.
“But yes, we will go in our homet as soon as we are sure
we have given the slip to the sky-police,” Roadstrum said.
"Three families have already moved into your hornet,
Margaret said. “You couldn't get them evicted in a month.
Besides, the word is out that you're not going anywhere in
that hornet, ever. I guess I'll just go to World with this
fast-talking fellow.
"Our fellowship begins to break up,” said Roadstrum sad-
ly. "Goodbye, Margaret, you'll miss us.
Deep John the Vagabond, who had likewise been making
connections, came back.
"I'm going to hook a night freight to World, fellows,”
he said. “I'd go with you, but the word is out that you're not
going to World. And where you are going, I don't want to
go.
“The word is not out until we put it out,” Roadstrum said.
"I myself intend to go to World very soon.”
But Deep John had left them.
"One of the members there reminds me of someone,
Roadstrum whispered to Puckett. "The fellow with the
green scarf."
"He looks familiar to me also, Roadstrum,” said Puckett.
"I'm on the verge of thinking whom he reminds me of."
”
105
>
2
a
a
And there was another fellow there who seemed to be,
like the homet-men, on trial membership. He was
curious creature with a knot in the middle of his forehead,
with one red eye, and with the other eye covered by a patcb.
"You may begin, Probationary,” the President-Emeritus
said. “Be not nervous. In a very little while you will either
be a member, or you will not be.”
But the red-eye began nervously for all that.
“I come from a very poor planet. We have no exports
except our own citizens, going to better ourselves in other
places. We have no talent, can perform few tasks, and have
no trade on alien worlds except one. We work as traffic
lights."
"As traffic lights?" Roadstrum asked, though he was not
sure that a probationary member should be asking questions.
"How as traffic lights?"
"All on our world are bom with one red eye and one
green eye,” the creature said. “Our eyes shine brightly, as
you see that my red eye shines brightly here now. We offer
our services, we stand on corners in fair weather and foul,
and we blink first one eye and then the other. The pay is
everywhere miserable, the conditions are hard, but it is a
livelihood.”
The President-Emeritus motioned to three ushers, and they
approached grimly.
“Why is the one eye bandaged, and what is the lanot in
the middle of your forehead?”
“If one wished to work on a good comer anywhere, and
have a little better conditions, he had to have an amber eye
also, the creature said, very nervously. “The amber eye
is not natural to us, so I have had an implant but it is not
yet completely formed. It will grow, and it will break open,
I believe, by springtime. In the meanwhile my green eye
is inflamed. It's the messages I have to flash on it that have
done it in. The 'walks' and the don't walks' I can manage
easily enough. It's the special things, the 'No left turns
except on Sunday or before eight a.m.,' things like that bave
inflamed it. It isn't easy to flash a variety of messages.”
.
“Enough of that," said the President-Emeritus. "I believe
you hardly qualify, and if you continue with your jabber it
will get worse. Why can folks not understand that this Club
is not for amateurs?”
The ushers slit the fellow's throat, opened a trapdoor in
the floor, and dropped him through. He fell three hundred
and fifty meters, the building having a lean there and this
part of the story being out over empty air.
“I understand what be meant, Roadstrum whispered
106
»
2
to Puckett, "when he said, 'In a very little while you will
either be a member, or you will not be.' I am not sure that
all our men will be able to quality. They are good ordinary
liars, but the extraordinary is expected here."
"That fellow with the green scarf bothers me more and
more," Puckettt whispered. “He reminds me very much of
someone we have met in our travels, something about the
brow, something about his grin.”
And it was to the fellow with the green scarf that the
President-Emeritus turned now. "Give us one of yours, Hor-
ace,” the P-E said, “anything to get the taste of the late
ineptitude out of our ears.
Sammy the Snakel” Roadstrum said suddenly and loudly.
"Pardon me, sir, but are you any kindred of Sammy the
Snake, the gambler on Roulettenwelt?"
"My cousin," said the fellow with the green scarf. “I am
Horace the Snake. Fellows, these travelers know Sammy.”
All the crewmen could see the resemblance now. It was
something about the brow, of course, and something about
the grin. It was also the flickering forked tongue and the
thirty-meter long torso. Cousins! they could almost have
been brothers!
"Ah, I'll tell you about the time I used to be a baseball
player," Horace began. “I had natural disabilities for this
sport, for it had been originally a human game not de-
signed for snakes. And, after humans, it was the giant frogs
who played it best, especially at my chosen position, short-
stop. Those fellows could really get the hop on a ball. And
I, a poor earth-crawler, had to make my way by diligence
and persistency.
"In my apprentice years I had a mighty sore mouth from
catching that ball, and I never could throw it at all. But
I could reach it. With my tail anchored around second base,
I could flop my head all the way to third, or first, instantly.
In my ninety years on the diamond (we snakes are long-
lived) I had fifty thousand double plays and ten thousand
triple plays, all unassisted. This, I believe, is a record.”
"How would you bat, Horace Roadstrum asked, en-
tranced, for he had never heard Horace's stories before.
"Couldn't very well, Roadstrum. Had to take the bat
"
Crossways in my mouth and bunt. I'm telling you I really
had a sore snout in my apprentice years. But I stayed with
it and I learned. You've heard pitchers say they'll jam a
ball down a fellow's throat. They did to me. I've swallowed
more baseballs than any ball player who ever lived. The
worst thing is, they passed a special ruling that I was out
whenever I swallowed a pitched ball. I never did believe
107
»
they should have charged me more than a strike for it."
“Still, if you could lay down a bunt, any sort of bunt"
Roadstrum saw the possibilities.
"I could and I did, Roadstrum. I got where I could lay
them down, and they didn't have to be very good. I could
stretch my length and have my head on first base before
anyone could blink. And once I was on first, I was as good
as around. I hold every base-stealing record in baseball.
When the bases are ninety feet apart, and a fellow is a
hundred and five feet long, how are you going to tag him
out?”
“I believe I know a way to stop that stealing." Crewman
Trochanter grinned evily.
“I think I know what you mean, Trochanter." Horace the
Snake smiled. "Horse-Hoof Harry tried it once when he
was playing first base for the All-Star All Stars. Weighed
nine tons, that fellow, and what hooves he did have on him!
I still wake up screaming when I remember how he tromped
on my tail just as I went into my stretch.”
Crewman Trochanter chortled,
“But it was the last tail he ever tromped on, Trochanter,
said Horace the Snake. “It was just about the last thing
of any sort he ever did. I felt kind of sorry when his widow
came around to see me that evening; but, as she said, it's all
in the game."
Another person, perhaps human, had come into the Club.
He was talking in a low voice with the President-Emeritus
and with others. There was cursing, and the phrase "bird-
killers” was heard.
"We had a bat-boy named Bennie," Horace the Snake
continued. "He was a bat-boy literally, too small to handle
the bats, but he flitted around merrily in the air."
"And how he could catch flies!" said Crewman Bramble.
"I hate a guy who's heard them all," said Horace the
Snake.
One of the Club members, a florid colonel type, who
dressed in the human style, was telling a steep tale of witty
warfare and cunning conquest. The high hero of this was
a great leader named Alley-Sally. It was a racy tale, and it
it
excited Roadstrum.
"Puckett, Puckett,” he whispered avidly, "just listen to
“
this great stuff. Listen how it goes. What I would not give to
be in on a campaign like that onel What I would not give
to meet such a leader.
“Roadstrum, Roadstrum," Puckett chided. “It is yourself
and ourselves he talks about; our own epic. Alley-Sally
is yourself, Road-Storm. You remember that bit he's telling
108
>
)
-
now, the six-day war in Wamtangle? Sure, that was a
passing smart trick you devised there, Roadstrum. It's
part of our own story he tells.”
"Oh, I know that, Puckett. But he tells it so much better
than it happened! Listen how they did it, Puckett! Listen
to how smart their leader was! Oh, if I could only have been
there!"
There was a lot of boy still left in Captain Roadstrum.
"One of the hornet-men will now tell a tale," said the
President-Emeritus. “A slander against the hornet-men has
been brought into this Club within the last several minutes.
I do not believe this slander, but I say it is time the horne-
teers were tested. If they fail the test, then they be not
members of the Club, and it will not matter if the slander
is true. We will make it quick. Let one bometeer tell a col-
ossal lie, and all be judged by it.”
"Let me,” said Captain Puckett. “A raconting man you are
not, Roadstrum.'
And this is the high tale that Captain Puckett told:
"When I was quite a young man and filled with the
spirit of adventure and space-faring, I went out to the
Daedalian Chersonese and visited a world known as Deme-
trio Four. Being an undisciplined youth (I speak of that
time now in sorrow, having become a moral man in my
maturity) I fell into a liaison with a local girl, one Miseremos.
She was the light of my life and I was completely impas-
sioned by her. Our affair went along charmingly, until one
day her four brothers came and seized me. They examined
me very carefully, and in a way that I could not understand.
They said that, things being the way they were, Miseremos
and myself must marry. I was not adverse to this, loving
the girl mightily, though I resented somewhat the manner
and compulsion of it.
"And marry we did, though I was quite puzzled by some
of the accompanying rites. Then followed the weeks of
deep enjoyment, though I was more and more puzzled.
I felt strange and uncertain, and my wife, apparently, did
not. Your brothers spoke of Things being the way they are,
Miseremos,' I told her one day. And I look at you and
wonder. How are things, Miseremos
"Do you not understand, dear Puckett? she asked me.
'Oh, surely you understandi With us on Demetrio Four it
is not the same as with folk elsewhere. We maintain our
own most peculiar custom in this.'
"I hadn't known of that custom at all, but I was caught
by it. On Demetrio Four it was not as it is elsewhere. I had
heard the vaunt, “The men of Demetrio accomplish what
109
>
n
n
no man else has ever done, but I had not understood it.
With my dear Miseremos on Demetrio Four, it was I who
had become pregnant."
“It reminds me of the young wife,” said Horace the Snake,
"who complained to her mother, 'My Robert is the most
wonderful man in the world, but he simply can't bear
children.'
“My period was an easy one,” said Captain Puckett, "and
at length I gave birth by the natural method. It was a beauti-
ful baby boy. Our joy was almost complete, and I had no
suspicion that my time of shameful failure was at band.
Ah, better I had died in childbirth than have endured such
shame!"
“What was it, good Captain Puckett?" asked the President-
Emeritus. "In what did you fail shamefully?"
"Couldn't lactate,” said Puckett. “My wife's brother bad
to nurse the child."
The Club members conferred among themselves. Puckett
and Roadstrum and all the crewmen were being weighed
in the balance. Was it good enough? Would the hasty tale
of Puckett get them into the Club before the crisis (which
they all felt but none of them understood) broke?
“Puckett, I didn't know you were ever on Demetrio Four
or in the Daedalian Chersonese at all. It isn't in your re-
cord,” Roadstrum whispered. “And the custom isn't men-
tioned in Fisher's Customs of the Nineteenth Sector. And,
come to think of it, there are Demetrios One, Two, and
Three, but there isn't any Demetrio Four.”
“Be a little less of a boy for the moment, Roadstrum,
whispered Puckett. "If we fail the Club, we have our
throats slit. If we get into it, there is still a threat mounted
here against our lives and liberties, but I believe we can
claim asylum as members of the rarest club of them all.”
“For one crime there is no asylum even in the Club,”
whispered Horace the Snake, who had sharp ears for whisp-
ering. “For all other crimes we give asylum, but for the
most heinous crime in the universe we give no asylum.”
"What is the most beinous crime in the universe?" Road-
strum asked.
“Killing a songbird.”
The President himself came in dressed in the robes of
his office. He conferred with the President-Emeritus and with
the others. They were being very grim about the matter,
“I believe I understand it now," Crewman Bramble whis-
pered to the Captains. “The arrival of a little while ago,
he who looks at us so balefully, is not a man but a sherlocker.
We are tracked down."
110
n
Yes, they could all see it now. The thing was a sherlocker,
a sky-dick, a snuffling hound. It was a ratter, and they were
the rats tracked down. The pipe and the deer-stalker hat
were not adjuncts, but parts of its contrived head. It was a
burlesque of an old architypical human head, the Baker
Street prototype, but the thing was a hound and it went
on four legs (which they had not noticed before).
The President of the Club spoke now.
"In great sorrow I speak. All you the crewmen are ac-
cepted as members and are duly inscribed. But that mem-
bers of the highest Club of all should be gwlty of the most
heinous crime in the universel We will meet no more for
one year, and we will deck our halls in mourning for a
nine year period. Your accuser will speak now, and we
share your contempt for him. But as for yourselves-how the
shining ones have fallen!"
The thing, the dog, the sherlocker, the sky-dick, the ratter
cleared his throat and began.
"I am the latest model of sherlocker, the finest tracker
in the universe. Here I had no real starting place since the
site of the crime was a contingent one, having no regular
location in real space. I had only the smell of a toy that the
Roadstrum had played with when he was three years old,
some knowledge of the thought pattems of the Bramble,
and the information that Margaret the houri had no heart-
beat and no heart.
"With great good fortune I first cut the trail after cruising
nine megaparsecs at random. A little later I spied a bent
clump of grass in empty space, and still later three twigs
that pointed. Here and there I noticed that the hydrogen
atoms were all bent in a certain direction. Shrewdly I no-
ticed variations in the cosmic flux; something had passed
to alter it. Then I cut the trail for the second time and had
my direction.
"I am the snufflingest tracker ever, and I can read any
patteran ever laid; one of my ancestors was a Gypsy dog.
As I closed in on them I deducted a multitude of details.
I was able to deduce the middle name of Crewman Trochan-
ter's maternal grandfather (from the asphyxan in the wake
of the hornet), the secret fantasies of Crewman Ursley (from
a muted resonance in the Hondstarfer stone-drive), the
scalp-itch of Captain Puckett (he is allergic to the Stoimenof
salt in the galley of the hornet). It is all down in my notes.
I tracked them here. There they sit confoundedl Arrest
the criminals!”
"Slit his throat!” Roadstrum howled, coming to his feet
in the grip of what seemed to be a good idea. “He has told
111
a
the truth at a meeting of the High Liars. Kill himl Kill him!”
“Of course we'll kill him," said the sad President. "We'll
slit his throat, and we'll drop him through the trap like
the dog he is. But not before he's blown the whistle on you.'
The sherlocker blew an old-style police whistle. Three
hundred coppers boiled into the room, manacled the brave
hornet-men, and dragged them away to the terrible place
from which, it is said, there is no returning.
The place itself, and ne'er a good word spoke of it,
You shiver when you even make a joke of it.
Though some go cocky, gaily in hand-basket there,
The most fare sadly in a clemmy casket there,
Where Dante doled "Porrible soperchio
Del puzzo-e gran pietre in cerchio."
Undying pain and gaping loss, no doubt of it.
A wide way leading in and no way out of it!
But none have told the blackest horror shrouded there--
Tall teeming terror-but it sure is crowded therel
Ibid
They were taken as prisoners to Hellpepper Planet. They
were up in court there before Tiresias, the blind Theban pro-
phet, who had considerable to say about the workings of this
place. Tiresias was not really blind; but he had weak eyes
and he wore blue glasses. His underlings called him Blinky.
“You are up for the rape and murder of the person and
planet of Aeaea,” said Blinky. “I assure you all that a shudder
ran through Hell itself here at the news of your crime.
Have any of you regrets?"
“Regrets?" Roadstrum asked in a hollow voice. “My only
regret is that I didn't get to hear that fellow tell more of
his story at the Club There were these space warriors,
you see, Blinky, and there was their noble and heroic
leader, and they-"
“Roadstrum, Roadstrum,” Puckett protested. “It was our
old story that he told. 'Twas of ourselves.”
“I know that, but he told it so much better than it
happened. How can I be happy in Hell with my ears itching
for more of it?"
“A little order here,” Tiresias requested severely. “Some-
112
thing is wrong. This babbling fool cannot be Roadstrum him-
self?"
“Something is indeed wrong, Blinky,” Roadstrum said
evenly. “This
silly place cannot be Hell itself?”
"I own a certain disappointment in both,” said one of
Tiresias' lieutenants, “but it is, and apparently you are.
If you have come with high expectations of anything,
you have come to the wrong place."
"Have you any defense for your damnable crime?" Tire
sias asked sharply.
“Do you want a lawyer?" the lieutenant asked. "There
are plenty of them to be had here."
“We'll be wanting no lawyers,” said big Roadstrum. “We've
made our pan, so we'll fry in it. Is that the way the say-
ing goes? Let's just take a look at the accomodations here,
fellows."
"You are not free men to be making examinations," said
Tiresias. "You show signs of levity, and that is the one
thing not permitted here. This place is for serious persons
only. If you are not serious now, by hell you'll get serious
pretty quickl Hear it! You are sentenced to durance forever.
Process them, minions."
“Hold it!” Roadstrum roared. "Hell, this isn't Helll Crew-
man Bramble, you're the nearest thing to an intelligent man
we have in our party. Can this hayseed place with that pa-
thetic ineptitude on the bench be Hell itself?”
‘They order things so damnably in Hell,' as the philoso-
pher said. I don't know, Captain; I just don't know. It might
be.
“Puckett, go that way," Roadstrum ordered. “Trochanter,
go the other. Blinky, shut up. Report back to me within
the hour on the size of this place and the torture facilities
here. Now then, Blinky, while they're about it, ru just
have a look at that register of yours there and see who is
signed into this place. Kstganglfoofng! It's hot!” (Roadstrum
sometimes used high-Shelta swear words, as did many sky-
men.)
“Of course it's hot, Roads!rum. Everything is hot here,"
said Blinky Tiresias, and you won't get used to it.”
"That's all right; that makes it a little more like the real
thing. A man'd have to have asbestos hands to handle that
register, but why are the names in it writ so small?"
“Everything is writ small here, Roadstrum. There's such
a lot to be crowded in.”
“But you do torture, you do rend and tear, and break and
burn?”
“Certainly, certainly, Roadstrum.”
113
You have all the monsters and stenches, all the white-
hot rocks, all the pits of flame, all the soul-burning regret,
all the horror and shrieking without end?"
"We have it all, Roadstrum. You will bave your surfeit
of it."
“But it bedevils me, Blinky, where you have room for it.
This is a small place."
"We haven't room for it. It's awfully crowded. Millions
and millions, you know."
Looking generally bedraggled and with their feet smoking,
Puckett and Trochanter were back from their explorations.
"I believe it's a fake, Roadstrum,” said Puckett with deep
disappointment. “This isn't the Hell I believed in. It's as
though we looked at it all through the wrong end of the
glass. Oh, there's torture enough, crude and raw, and there
are the millions of sufferers. But it's all too small, too small."
"It isn't a hundred meters across," declared Trochanter.
"And the tortures are repetitious. No real imagination in them.
Not what you'd like. I think we'd better shop around for a
better Hell before we commit ourselves here."
"You can't," said Tiresias. "You're already committed here.
This is all the Hell there is.”
"Be reasonable, Blinky,” said Roadstrum. What reason
have we to believe you? It seems inadequate to my men
and it seems inadequate to me. This petty place cannot be-
“This petty place cannot be Hell, Roadstrum? Ah, but it
is, my friend. That, you see, is the hell of it. Minions, min-
ions, we waste time. Prepare them.”
"Blinky, where are the towering flames?" Roadstrum de-
manded.
"It's all high-frequency cookers, Roadstrum. No smoke,
no flame, no mess.
"But it's too small. There is not even room for all the
old-time horse-thieves."
"It is crowded, yes, but we make room. Get with it,
minions. First you will mintatarize them.” "
"Miniaturizelll” howled Roadstrum. "Miniaturizelll” howled
they all.
"Nobody will ever miniaturize mel” Roadstrum roared.
And then he broke loose with an inexcusable display of
shouting and bad manners:
"It stifles, it shrinks! Where are great fires and the bottom-
less pits? Where is the howling of the triply-damned, and
the clanking of monsters? I'd go to Hell in black glory if
it fell to my lot, but I will not abide in this placel It's a
rumble, men; rise in your wrathl Break out of itl”
"It's a rumble," they roared like cresting waves, great
114
.
Puckett and Trochanter and Clamdigger and Threefountains
and all.
Man-a-bleeding, but they broke out of that placel You say
it can't be done, but they did it. Their expectations bad
been too high, and no second-rate Hell could hold them.
In a way, this was their greatest feat. No one else had
ever broken out of there before. But they were still in sad
straits, without craft, lost and in great pain, mired in the
boiling swamps a little to the south of Hell. How, how would
they ever get off of Hellpepper Planet? Was it possible that
any of them should live through this thing?
115
CHAPTER EIGHT
More gory episodes omit we ken of them;
The Chantey sings ten years filled up with ten of them.
Of crewmen dead we weep, and what a row they had!
And some had gotten home but none knows how they had.
All high adventures, twined as vermicellio,
Through carpers carp “the thing's distinctly paleo.”
Great Road-Storm wished he'd never seen the first of it,
He didn't guess the last would be the worst of it.
Penultimate we give with wry apology
This mitherinenic of a new mythology.
Aliunde
ROADSTRUM always said that he walked home from Mars,
the last lap of his journey. This may not have been true.
He had fallen into habits of untruth somewhere along the
way. But he came home, home to Big Tulsa the marvelous,
the Capital of World.
He arrived alone, in evil case, to find troubles in his
house. He was broke and bewhiskered and tired to the
marrow of his bones. And yet he was a man of means,
so he made a short visit to replenish those means.
The bank had been modernized. It was a transparent
young lady who waited on him. It wouldn't have startled
116
a
-
him on one of the other worlds, but it did at bome.
"I am unsure,” he said. “Are you people?”
"I also am unsure,” said the young lady, "since our po
sition is presently under litigation. Actually we are the new-
est thing in people. Soon there will be none produced in
the old manner. You will have to admit that it was a very
grotesque arrangement. Here is your account, Mr. Road-
strum, supplementary name Great Road-Storm."
"Ah, it shocks me to see how it has shrunken.” Roadstrum
studied it. "It may yet be enough for a modest life, but
something has gone amiss with it."
“There have been some fabulous withdrawals, sir. Not
many fortunes would have survived such. Is this all you
wish to withdraw now, sir?"
"That is enough for now. And block the account.
"Block the account? Penny will be furious.“
"I hope so. Thank you, young, er-lady."
Roadstrum went to his house. Little Tele-Max was play-
ing out front. Tele-Max was still little. Roadstrum had been
gone for twenty years, what with one thing and another.
The kid was a runt or he'd have grown bigger than that
"Hello, Papa," Tele-Max said.
"Hello, Tele-Max. How did you know me?"
"From your pictures. You have become a legend; but
that was several years ago; you're pretty much on the
shelf now. There is nothing older than yesterday's legends.”
"I know it. But what is that hellish racket, Tele-Max?
You'd think even the trees would drop dead from that
terrible noise.
"Oh, that's Mama and the suitors, and the song they
always play. The trees did die from the noise. These are
artificial brees.
“Suitors? What are they doing, having a party?
“Papa, they've been having a party for twenty years.
"What do the neighbors say?"
“I don't remember any neighbors. I guess they all left
a long time ago.
“That song is like salt in an open wound, Tele-Mar. Did
not your mother used to play it to excess many years ago?
Did I not once destroy the tape of it?"
“So family tradition has it, Father. But they have wom
out more than five hundred tapes of it since. That is the
latest version they are playing now, by the Chowder Heads.
You could hardly have heard it before."
“All thanks for small favors. I've been made a monkey out
of by singing that was singing, and should I fall to this? I
tell you what, Tele-Max, your mother has not seen me for
117
>
twenty years. Another couple of hours will not matter. I
will have to find the strength to face this. I wonder what
I did about the suitors the first time. Wasn't there a first
time?'
"The first time, Papa? The story is that you impressed
them by shooting an arrow through twelve holes in a row.
Later you killed them.”
"What is an arrow, Tele-Max?"
"I don't know either, Papa.
2
There is one place where all the important persons of
World come at least once a day, the Plugged Nickel Bar;
and Roadstrum's old mates were all, in their own way, im-
portant persons. Roadstrum entered the portal (it had only
a single narrow door) and the only one of his old friends he
saw was Margaret the houri.
"Are you ship, shape?” he asked her.
"I am always ship,” said Margaret. "I remember you a
little. Were you not a pet monkey that I once had."
"I was a pet monkey, but you didn't have me,” he said.
"Want to tie one on, Maggy?"
"Maggy? I, sir, am Charisse, or perhaps I am Chiara.
I have been trying on roles. This time I shall assume a very
arty role. Everything has become very arty on World."
“Ah well, Charisse or whoever, want to swing a gantrypus
"What an antiquated expression! No, I do not. No offense,
but not with you. You are a space-ace. Don't you know
that they're dead?"
"Most of them are.'
"Oh, they're finished. The swish boys are all the thing
again. I will get me a very delicate one, a limp limpet. It
is all the thing to be very delicate and a little w .”
"I'm a little weary, but not that way. Sorry to have
Seen you Charisse, or should I say Chiara?"
“Melisand. I just believe that I will be Melisand.”
"Hey, Cap'n,” a huge stack-faced man called to Roadstrum.
"Come bust a bottle with me. I think I used to know you
before I got muddled in the head.”
"And after the holocaust, Cod made green grass again!"
Roadstrum roared happily. “Trochanter! Spleen of my spleen
and aorta of my aorta! Trochanter!”
"Easy on the sloppy stuff, Cap'n. I like you too. Let me
poke you one to see if you're real. A lot of them aren't.
Hey, you are real."
"Of course I'm real!" Roadstrum swore, picking himself
up from the floor (Trochanter poked hard). “Did any of the
other men survive? Have you seen any of the others?”
118
3
a
2
1
"I talk to Cutshark and Crabgrass quite a bit."
"Trochanter, Crewman Cutshark died in the maw of the
Siren-Zo, and Crewman Crabgrass was eaten by the Poly-
phemians. They're dead."
“I didn't say they weren't dead, Cap'n. I just said I
talked to them quite a bit. I'm addled in my wits now,
I've told you.
Trochanter, the crewman without peer! He was as rough
a fellow as Crewmen Birdsong and Fairfeather, who had
remained on Lamos to become giants. He was a homier
stag than even Crewmen Clamdigger and Threefountains.
An incandescent, heavy, tall man. But some of the light
had gone out of him now. He was still heavy, but not so-
"You aren't as tall as you used to be, are you, Tro-
chanter?" Roadstrum asked him.
“Nope, bumed the bottom half-meter of my feet and legs
off on Hellpepper Planet. You remember that ruckus, Cap'n.
Hottest ground I ever saw there! Say, I talk to Crewman
Clamdigger sometimes too. I think he's alive. He seems
solider than Cutshark and Crabgrass."
"Ah, several of us have survived, then.'
*Cap'n, anytime you want to go again, I'll be here.
You can't tell. You just might want to go again sometime."
“I will remember,” said Roadstrum. “It is very unlikely,
but if I ever go again I will certainly take you along, Troch-
anter."
"Captain," called the nameless houri, “if you really want
to go again, I'll forget the Charisse and Chiara and Melisand
bit and go along. And Crewman Clamdigger is alive. He
bought the shell of a junk homet with his last Chancel. It
hasn't
any drive in it, it won't go at all, it's not worth a thing,
but he lives in it and broods. If you do go again, we have
the beginnings of a crew.
“It is very unlikely, but I will remember it, Margaret
the shape, and great Trochanter the crewman without peer!"
Roadstrom left the Plugged Nickel Bar with mixed feel-
ings. He had regained part of the strength he needed to
face things at home. He strode along with resolute step,
and suddenly he discovered that his resolute steps were
not reaching the pavement.
He had been grabbed by the hair of his head, lifted
up by a great hand, and was pulled into a second-story win-
dow. There was booming laughter that reminded him of
that of Bjom on Lamos. But it was Bjorn's little boy, Hond-
starfer.
“What on the wall-eyed world are you doing on World!"
Roadstrum howled. “Hondstarfer, you are ungent for my
119
>
sore sclerotics! Hey, did you ever get back far enough to be
an old-time railroad hobo?"
“I got back there, Roadstnum. That's why I came to World
in the first place. But the other hoboes wouldn't accept me.
They were afraid of me. They said I was a railroad bull.
What's a railroad bull, Roadstrum?"
"Don't know exactly, Hondstarfer. I didn't even know
the old vehicles were sexed. What are you doing now, you
old hammer-handler?”
"I'm a design engineer for the IRSQEVWRKILOPNIX-
TUR-"
"Yes, I know the bunch. They're a good outfit.”
"-MURFWQENERTUSSOKOLUV-"
"I know the bunch, Hondstarfer. This is their building
here, is it not?”
"-SHOKKULPOYYOCSHTOLUNYYOK-"
"Dammit, Hondstarfer, I said I knew the bunch. No
use giving me the entire initials of the agency. How are
you doing with them?"
-TWUKKYOLUVRIKONNIC-that isn't the entire initials
of the agency, Roadstrum; that's the short form. Oh, I'm
doing pretty good. I'm a seminal genius, they say, and
I have the most sophisticated tools ever devised to work
with. And I do build some good things for them. I'm
quite successful. I'll tell you something, though. In the
daytime, with all those sophisticated tools, and particularly
if someone's watching me, I just stall around. But at night"
"Ah, at night! What do you do then, Hondstarfer?"
"Put away those damned sophisticated tools and get
out my stone hammers. That's when I build the good
stuff. Don't give me away, though, Roadstrum."
"No, I won't give you away. Hondstarfer, poor addled
Crewman Clamdigger has purchased the shell of an old
junk homet, and"
"I've seen it, Roadstrum.”
"Of course it wouldn't be possible to put it in flying
“
condition."
“I could do it in about an hour, Roadstrum. I'm
good on those hornets. You going to fly again? I want to
go along."
"No. I don't think there's a chance in a thousand that
I'll ever fly again, Hondstarfer. It is just that my mind
dwells on the old days."
Roadstrum left Hondstarfer and the MURFWQENERETC
Building then. He had regained the strength he needed to
face things at home.
That song was still going on, and it was still the
120
>
Chowder Heads singing it. Roadstrum groaned within him-
self.
Then he went in and killed the suitors. It seemed to be
what was expected of him. It was fun while it lasted. You
know how those things are.
So he had everything now. He had dear Penny again.
He had come back home in his deep maturity, home to
green World, the world of his youth. He was still a man of
means (there were many accounts that Penny didn't even
know about) and he had the ability to multiply those means.
He still owed titles to several worlds to the men's-room
attendant on Roulettenwelt, but he saw that by shrewd
management he would be able to pay the remainder of this
debt.
He had honor, he had respect, he was a high hero. He
still had his health, despite the deep inroads made by events.
He had sloughed off all the outer layers of him and became
the essential onion, pungent and powerful and of an immedi-
acy that sometimes brought him close to tears.
He had, you may have forgotten this part, one eye in his
head and the other eye in his pocket. He took the other
eye in his hand when they wished to discuss matters, and now
he talked to it straight.
"Eye, my eye, everything is wonderful with us. We are
home in peace. We have wonderful Penny again. We have
the world of our youth. We are honored and respected and
one other word which I forget. We have come to the
peaceful end of our joumey. Why does that sound less
exciting every time I say it.?”
The eye in his hand winked at him dourly. Eye was a
tough old gump, not much given to easy enthusiasms. Road-
strum put it back in his pocket and once more contemplated
his good fortune.
He would stick it out at least a week, he had promised
himself. He had already stuck it out for three days, and
that's nearly half a week. He didn't hang around the house
much anymore. The Intimate people were doing a series on
Penny, and there were aluay's half a dozen of their fellows
there getting down her poignant memories of her dead
suitors, the more than a hundred of them.
"There was Thwocky,” she had said. “Shall the first
installment be my memories of Thwocky? He was the one
you killed first; you remember, Roadsty? Drove the spindle
of the player right through his head. Now, of the per-
missive-motivation of Thwocky, in the impulse patterns and
lassitude-conjointment, there are nine salient aspects which
I shall discuss as I build up the foundation of our intimacy.
121
This can best be understood in the nimbus of the empholeuon
motif, which,
Penny had always talked like that, but sometimes he
hadn't listened. Now he found it harder and harder to
seal off his ear. But it was still worderful, all wonderful.
He had honor and respect and another word which he
had forgotten. He was home from his life journey, he had
peace and benignity and benevolence and all good things
and happy.
But there was one word in this setup that didn't sound
right to his ear. Ear, not ears, he now had but one. Which
word? What was wrong with a word? What was there
of trickery about a word?
He thought of it while the afternoon deepened into eve
ning. He thought of it while the artificial locusts began to
chatter and hammer in the artificial trees. He went home
and locked himself in his soundproof room, while Penny was
telling revealing things about her suitors.
All things possessed in perfect peace for the rest of his
lifel And one word was wrong there? What word was
wrong?
"Eye, my eye,” he said as he took it into his hand. “All
things are wonderful, and can you say that anything is
wrong?"
But the eye closed on him in disgust.
Honor, respect, enjoyment, peace, conjugal love, ease,
peace, benignity, peace, perfection, honor, peace. What was
wrong with one of the words?
Peace. How does that sound again? Peace.
It exploded inside of Roadstrum. He erupted out of the
building in a place where there had never been a door,
strewing sheets and beams of the building after him.
"Peace?? For me?? Roadstrum, man, it is yourself you
are talking about. Let you not hang it around your own
neck! I am great Road-Storml Peace is for those of the
other sort!
He found his for, forked tongue, and the roots of a
deeper tongue that had been tom out, and gave great
voice.
“I will be double-damned to a better Hell than Hell-
pepper Planet if I will have my endine here in peacel Peace
be not the end of my epic! An epic has already failed
if it have an ending. I don't care how it ended the first
time it will not end the same now!
“I break out of itl Nobody will sing the last lines of mel
A crew! A craftl"
His great voice reached all the way to the Plugged
122
Nickel Bar and to the MURFWQENERETC Building. The
great voice set up echos in old addle-brained crewmen,
in a heartless houri, in an overgrown kid from Stone World.
Roadstrum ran away from the bloodless buildings and
stood in the open. He took again from his pocket his off
eye, his last companion.
"Eye, my eye,” he trumpeted. “Look at me! There are
places we have never been! There is blood we have not
spilled yet! Shall we let them restrict us to a handful of
worlds. Eye, my eye, are you with me?"
And the eye came alive and gave a really joyous wink.
A hammer-handling kid was already at work on the junk
homet. The lights turned on in dim-witted crewmen who be-
came incandescent again. And others of their kind gathered
to them.
"Men! Animals! Rise you up!" Roadstrum roared. "To
come to the end of a journey is to die. We go again!"
Roadstrum got a craft and a crew. He went away once
more.
Alos, we have the terminal report of him!
The coded chatter gives the sighted mort of him,
How out beyond the orb of Di Carissimus
His sundered ship became a novanissimus.
His soaring vaunt escapes the blooming ears of us,
He's gone, he's dead, he's dirt, he disappears from us!
Be this the death of highest thrust of human all?
The flaming end of bright and shining crewmen all?
Destroyed? His road is tun? It's but a bend of it;
Make no mistake, this only seems
the end of it.
.
123
